The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Vol. 3
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/the-international-standard-bible-encyclopedia-volume-4_202608>. Public domain.

Cornell University


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.


There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924095207126


CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY


NT


924 095 207 126


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


THE
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


_ JAMES ORR, M.A., D.D., Generat Eprror


JOHN L. NUELSEN, D.D., LL.D.
EDGAR Y. MULLINS, D.D., LL.D.


ASSISTANT EDITORS


MORRIS O. EVANS, D.D., Pu.D., Manacine Eprror


VOLUME III
HERESY— NAARAH


CHICAGO
THE HOWARD-SEVERANCE COMPANY
1915


Hermon
Herod


On the other hand there is no evidence that there
ever was a time when “all they which are in Asia”
(AV) turned away from obedience


3. Unlike- to Paul. Whatever may have been
lihood of It the disloyalty and disobedience of
Being in individuals—and this certainly existed;
Ephesus see, e.g., Acts 20 29f—yet, certainly


the NT does not show that all that
were in Asia, the Christian community as a whole,
in Ephesus and Miletus and Laodicea and Hiera-
polis and Colossae and other places, repudiated
his apostolic authority. If the words


4, Proba- ‘all they which are in Asia” refer to
bility of It all the Christians from the procon-
Being in sular province of Asia, who happened
Rome to be in Rome at the time of Paul’s


second imprisonment there, it can
easily be understood that they should turn away
from him at that testing time. It is impossible to
say exactly what form their desertion of the apostle
assumed. Their turning away would likely be
caused by fear, lest if it were known that they were
friends of the prisoner in the Mamertine, they would
be involved in the same imprisonment as had over-
taken him, and probably also in the same death
penalty. :


It is altogether in favor of a reference to Rome,


that what is said about Phygellus and Hermogenes
and their turning away from Paul is immediately
followed by a reference to Onesiphorus, and to the
great kindness which he showed, when he sought
the apostle out very diligently in Rome. On the
whole, therefore, a reference to Rome and to the
manner in which these persons, named and un-
named, from Asia, had deserted Paul, seems most
probable. See Poycettus. Joun Ruruerrurp


HERMON, hir’mon (JT4°, hermon; B, ‘Aep-
pov, Haermén): The name of the majestic moun-
tain in which the Anti-Lebanon range
1. Descrip- terminates to the 8. (Dt 3 8, etc).
tion It reaches a height of 9,200 ft. above
the sea, and extends some 16 to 20
miles from N. to §. It was called Sirion by the
Sidonians (Dt 3 9; cf Ps 29 6), and Senir by the
Amorites (Dt 3 9). It is also identified with Sion
(Dt 4 48). See Srrton; Senter; Sion. Some-
times it is called “Mt. Hermon” (Dt 3 8; Josh 11
17; 1 Ch 5 23, etc); at other times
2. The simply “Hermon” (Josh 11 3; Ps
Hermons 89 12, etc). . Once it is called ‘“Her-
mons’ (0°72, herménim). AV
mistakenly renders this “the Hermonites” (Ps 42
6). It must be a reference to the triple summits of
the mountain. There are three distinct heads,
rising near the middle of the mass, the two higher
being toward the E. The eastern declivities are
steep and bare; the western slopes are more grad-
ual; and while the upper reaches are barren, the
lower are well wooded; and as one descends he
passes through fruitful vineyards and orchards,
finally entering the rich fields below, in Wady et-
Teim. The Aleppo pine, the oak, and the poplar
are plentiful. The wolf and the leopard are still to
be found on the mountain; and it is the last resort
of the brown, or Syrian, bear. Snow lies long on
the summits and shoulders of the mountain; and
in some of the deeper hollows, esp. to the N., it
may be seen through most of the year.

Mt. Hermon is the source of many blessings to
the land over which it so proudly lifts its splendid
form. Refreshing breezes blow from its cold
heights. Its snows are carried to Damascus and
to the towns on the seaboard, where, mingled with
the shardb, “drink,” they mitigate the heat of the
Syrian summer. Great reservoirs in the depths of
the mountain, fed by the melting snows, find outlet


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1378


in the magnificent springs at Hasbetyeh, Tell el-
Kady, and Banids, while the dew-clouds of Hermon
bring a benediction wherever they are carried (Ps
133 3).

rs marked the northern limit of Joshua’s
victorious campaigns (Josh 12 1, etc). It was part
of the dominion of Og (ver 5), and
with the fall of that monarch, it would
naturally come under Israelitish influ-
ence. Its remote and solitary heights
must have attracted worshippers from the earliest
times; and we cannot doubt that it was a famous
sanctuary in far antiquity. Under the highest
peak are the ruins of Kasr ‘Antar, which may have
been an ancient sanctuary of Baal. Onom speaks
of a temple on the summit much frequented by the
surrounding peoples; and the remains of many
temples of the Rom period have been found on the
sides and at the base of the mountain. The sacred-
ness of Hermon may be inferred from the allusion
in Ps 89 12 (cf En 6 6; and see also Baan HER-
MON).

sae have thought that the scene of the Trans-
figuration should be sought here; see, however,
TRANSFIGURATION, Mount oF.

The modern name of Hermon is Jebel eth-Thilj,
“mount of snow,” or Jebel esh-sheikh, ‘mount of the
elder,” or “of the chief.” ;

Little Hermon, the name now often applied to
the hill between Tabor and Gilboa, possibly the
Hill of Moreh, on which is the sanctuary of Neby
Dahy, has no Bib. authority, and dates only from
the Middle Ages. W. Ewina


HERMONITES, hir’mon-its: In Ps 42 6 AV,
where RV reads ‘‘Hermons.” See Hermon.


3. Sanctu-
aries


HEROD, her’ud:

The name Herod (Hp#éys, Hérédés) is a.
familiar one in the history of the Jews and
of the early Christian church. The name itself
signifies “‘heroic,’’ a name not wholly applicable
to the family, which was characterized by craft
and knavery rather than by heroism. The for-
tunes of the Herodian family are inseparably con-
nected with the last flickerings of the flame of
Judaism, as a national power, before it was forever
extinguished in the great Jewish war of rebellion,
70 AD. The history of the Herodian family is not
lacking in elements of greatness, but whatever these
elements were and in whomsoever found, they were
in every case dimmed by the insufferable egotism
which disfigured the family, root and branch. Some
of the Herodian princes were undeniably talented;
but these talents, wrongly used, left né marks for
the good of the people of Israel. Of nearly all the
kings of the house of Herod it may truly be said
that at their death “they went without being de-
sired,” unmissed, unmourned. The entire family
history is one of incessant brawls, suspicion, in-
trigue and shocking immorality. In the baleful
and waning light of the rule of the Herodians, Christ
lived and died, and under it the foundations of the
Christian church were laid.

The Herodians were not of Jewish stock. Herod
the Great encouraged the circulation of the legend

of the family descent from an illus-


i. The trious Bab Jew (Ant, XIV, i, 3), but
Family it has no historic basis. It is true the
Descent Idumaeans were at that time nominal


_ Jews, since they were subdued by John
Hyrcanus in 125 BC, and embodied in the Asmionein
kingdom through an enforced circumcision, but
the old national antagonism remained (Gen 27 41).
The Herodian family sprang from Antipas (d. 78
BC), who was appointed governor of Idumaca by
Alexander Jannaeus. His son Antipater, who suc-


1379


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hermon
Herod


ceeded him, possessed all the cunning, resourceful-
ness and unbridled ambition of his son Herod the
Great. He had an open eye for two things—the un-
conquerable strength of the Rom power and the
_ Pitiable weakness of the decadent Asmonean house,
and on these two factors he built the house of his
hopes. He craftily chose the side of Hyrcanus II
in his internecine war with Aristobulus his brother
(69 BC), and induced him to seek the aid of the
Romans. Together they supported the claims of
Pompey and, after the latter’s defeat, they availed
themselves of the magnanimity of Caesar to submit
to him, after the crushing defeat of Pompey at
Pharsalus (48 BC). Asa reward, Antipater re-
ceived the procuratorship of Judaea (47 BC), while
his innocent dupe Hyrcanus had to satisfy himsclf
with the high-priesthood. Antipater died by the
hand of an assassin (43 BC) and left four sons,
Phasael, Herod the Great, Joseph, Pheroras, and a
daughter Salome. The second of these sons raised
the family to its highest pinnacle of power and


in raising the always welcome tribute-money for
the Rom government, gained for him additional
power at court. His advance became rapid.
Antony appointed him “‘tetrarch” of Judaea in 41
BC, and although he was forced by circumstances
temporarily to leave his domain in the hands of the
Parthians and of Antigonus, this, in the end, proved
a, blessing in disguise. In this final spasm of the
dying Asmoncan house, Antigonus took Jerus by
storm, and Phasael, Herod’s oldest brother, fell
into his hands. The latter was governor of the
city, and foreseeing his fate, he committed suicide
by dashing out his brains against the walls of his
prison. Antigonus incapacitated his brother Hyr-
canus, who was captured at the same time, from
ever holding the holy office again by cropping off
his ears (Ant, XIV, xiii, 10). Meanwhile, Herod
was at Rome, and through the favor of Antony and
Augustus he obtained the crown of Judaca in 37
BC. The fond ambition of his heart was now at-
tained, although he had literally to carve out his


THE HERODIAN FAMILY TREE


{ By Doris


{Herod Agrippa
(king of Calchis)
d. 100 AD


( Herod (king of Cal-
chis) d. 48 AD


Antipater (exec.
4 BO)


By Mariamne


Aristobulus Herod Agrippa ’
(murdered 7 BC) (king of Judaeca)
Alexander d. 44 AD
(murdered 7 BC)
Drusilla


Herodias
U (MK 6)


{ By Mariamne
Phasael daughter of
Simou
Herod Philip
Herod the Great (Mk 6 17)
(king of Judaea
37 BC-4 AD) By Malihace
Antipas Autipas, d. 39 AD
d. 78 BC (tetr. of Gal.)
Antipater Joseph Archelaus
(Proc. Judaea (ethn. of Judaea
47-43 BC) 4 BC-6 AD)
Pheroras
By Cleopatra
Herod Philip (tetr.
Salome of E. Jord. terri-


tory 4 BC-34 AD)


Bernice
(Acts 25 23)


Ll (Acts 24 24)


Herod had, besides, five other wives (Ani, XVII,i, 3; BJ, I, xviii, 4) and seven other children, who died early,


or at least do not figure in history.


glory. Pheroras was nominally his co-regent and,
possessed of his father’s cunning, maintained him-


self to the end, surviving his cruel brother, but he’


cuts a smallfigurein the family history. He, as well
as his sister Salome, proved an endless source of
trouble to Herod by the endless family brawls which
they occasioned.

With a different environment and with a differ-
ent character, Herod the Great might have been

worthy of the surname which he now
2. Herod bears only asa tribute of inane flattery.
the Great What we know of him, we owe, in the

main, to the exhaustive treatment of
the subject by Jos in his Antiquities and Jewish
War, and from Strabo and Dio Cassius among the
classics. We may subsume our little sketch of
Herod’s life under the heads of (1) political activity,
(2) evidences of talent, and (3) character and
domestic life.

(1) Political activity—Antipater bad great am-
bitions for his son. Herod was only a young man
when he began his career as governor of Galilee.
Jos’ statement, however, that he was only “fifteen
years old” (Ani, XIV, ix, 2) is evidently the mistake
of some trauscriber, because we are told ( XVII, viii,
1) that “he continued his life till a very old age.”
That was 42 years later,so that Herod at this time
must have been at least 25 years old. His activity
and success in ridding his dominion of dangerous
bands of freebooters, and his still greater success


own empire with the sword. He made quick work
of the task, cut his way back into Judaea and took
Jerus by storm in 37 BC.

The first act of his reign was the extermination
of the Asmonean house, to which Herod himself
was related through his marriage with Mariamne,
the grandchild of Hyrcanus. Antigonus was slain
and with him 45 of his chief adherents. Hyrcanus
was recalled from Babylon, to which he had been
banished by Antigonus, but the high-priesthood was
bestowed on Aristobulus, Herod’s brother-in-law,
who, however, soon fell a victim to the suspicion
and fear of the king (Ant, XV, iii, 3). These out-
rages against the purest blood in Judaea turned the
love of Mariamne, once cherished for Herod, into
a bitter hatred. The Jews, loyal to the dynasty
of the Maccabees, accused Herod before the Rom
court, but he was summarily acquitted by Antony.
Hyrcanus, mutilated and helpless as he was, soon
followed Aristobulus in the way of death, 31 BC
(Ant, XV, vi, 1). When Antony, who had ever
befriended Herod, was conquered by Augustus at
Actium (31 BC), Herod quickly turned to the
powers that were, and, by subtle flattery and timely
support, won the imperial favor. The boundaries
of his kingdom were now extended by Rome. And
Herod proved equal to the greater task. By a
decisive victory over the Arabians, he showed, as
he had done in his earlier Galilean government,
what manner of man he was, when aroused to action.


Herod


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1380


The Arabians were wholly crushed, and submitted
themselves unconditionally under the power of
Herod (Ant, XV, v, 5). Afraid to leave a rem-
nant of the Asmonean power alive, he sacrificed
Mariamne his wife, the only human being he ever
seems to have loved (28 BC), his mother-in-law
Alexandra (Ant, XV, vii, 8), and ultimately, shortly
before his death, even his own sons by Mariamne,
Alexander and Aristobulus 7 BC (Ant, XVI, xi, 7).
In his emulation of the habits and views of life
of the Romans, he continually offended and defied
his Jewish subjects, by the introduction of Rom
sports and heathen temples in his dominion. His
influence on the younger Jews in this regard was
baneful, and slowly a distinct party arose, partly
political, partly religious, which called itself the
Herodian party, Jews in outward religious forms
but Gentiles in their dress and in their whole view
of life. They were a bitter offence to the rest of
the nation, but were associated with the Pharisees
and Sadducees in their opposition to Christ (Mt
22.16; Mk 36; 12 13). In vain Herod tried
to win over the Jews, by roya) charity in time of
famine, and by yielding, wherever possible, to their
bitter prejudices. They saw in him only a usurper
of the throne of David, maintained by the strong
arm of the hated Rom oppressor. Innumerable
plots were made against his life, but, with almost
superhuman cunning, Herod defeated them all
(Ant, XV, viii). He robbed his own people that
he might give munificent gifts to the Romans; he
did not even spare the grave of King David, which
was held in almost idolatrous reverence by the people,
but. robbed it of its treasures (Ant, XVI, vii, 1).
The last days of Herod were embittered by endless
court intrigues and conspiracies, by an almost in-
sane suspicion on the part of the aged king, and by
increasing indications of the restlessness of the
nation. Like Augustus himself, Herod was the
victim of an incurable and loathsome disease. His
temper became more irritable, as the malady made
progress, and he made both himself and his court
unutterably miserable. The picture drawn by
Jos (Ant, XVII) is lifelike and tragic in its vivid-
ness. In his last will and testament, he remained
true to his life-long fawning upon the Rom power
(Ant, XVII, vi, 1). So great became his suffering
toward the last that he made a fruitless attempt at
suicide. But, true to his character, one of the last
acts of his life was an order to execute his son Anti-
pater, who had instigated the murder of his half-
brothers, Alexander and Aristobulus, and another
order to slay, after his death, a number of nobles,
who were guilty of a small outbreak at Jerus and
who were confined in the hippodrome (Ant, XVI, vi,
5). He died in the 37th year of his reign, 34 years
after he had captured Jerns and slain Antigonus.
Jos writes this epitaph: ‘‘A man he was of great
barbarity toward all men equally, and a slave to his
passions, but above the consideration of what was
right. Yet was he favored by fortune as much as
any man ever was, for from a private man he became
a king, and though he were encompassed by ten
thousand dangers, he got clear of them all and con-
tinued his life to a very old age” (Ant, XVII, viii, 1).

(2) Evidences of talent—The life of Herod the
Great was not a fortuitous chain of favorable acci-
dents. He was unquestionably a man of talent.
In a family like that of Antipas and Antipater, talent
must necessarily be hereditary, and Herod inherited
it more largely than any of his brothers. His whole
life exhibits in no small degree statecraft, power of
organization, shrewdness. He knew men and he
knew how to use them. He won the warmest
friendship of Rom emperors, and had a faculty of
convincing the Romans of the righteousness of his
cause, in every contingency. In his own dominions


he was like Ishmael, his hand against all, and the
hands of all against him, and yet he maintained
himself in the government for a whole generation.
His Galilean governorship showed what manner of
man he was, a man with iron determination and |
great generalship. His Judaean conquest proved
the same thing, as did his Arabian war. Herod was
a born leader of men. Under a different environ-
ment he might have developed into a truly great
man, and had his character been coérdinate with
his gifts, he might have done great things for the
Jewish people. But by far the greatest talent of
Herod was his singular architectural taste and
ability. Here he reminds one of the. old Egyp
Pharaohs. Against the laws of Judaism, which
he pretended to obey, he built at Jerus a magnificent
theater and an amphitheater, of which the ruins
remain. The one was within the city, the other
outside the walls. Thus he introduced into the
ascetic sphere of the Jewish life the frivolous spirit
of the Greeks and the Romans. To offset this
cruel infraction of all the maxims of orthodox Juda-
ism, he tried to placate the nation by rebuilding the
temple of Zerubbabel and making it more magnifi-
cent than even Solomon’s temple had been. This
work was accomplished somewhere between 19 BC
and 11 or 9 BC, although the entire work was not
finished till the procuratorship of Albinus, 62-64
AD (Ant, XV, xi, 5, 6; XX, ix, 7; Jn 2 20). It
was so transcendently beautiful that it ranked
among the world’s wonders, and Jos does not tire
of describing its glories (BJ, V, v). Even Titus
sought to spare the building im the final attack on
the city (BJ, VI, iv, 3). Besides this, Herod rebuilt
and beautified Strato’s Tower, which he called after
the emperor, Caesarea. He spent 12 years in this
gigantic work, building a theater and amphitheater,
and above allin achieving the apparently impossible
by creating a harbor where there was none before.
This was accomplished by constructing a gigantic
mole far out into the sea, and so enduring was the
work that the remains of it are seen today. The
Romans were so appreciative of the work done by
Herod that they made Caesarea the capital of the
new régime, after the passing away of the Herodian
power. Besides this, Herod rebuilt Samaria, to the


Ruins of One of Herod's Temples in Samaria.


utter disgust of the Jews, calling it Sebaste. In
Jerus itself he built the three great towers, Antonia,
Phasaelus and Mariamne, which survived even the
catastrophe of the year 70 AD. All over Herod’s
dominion were found the evidences of this con-
structive passion. Antipatris was built by him,
on the site of the ancient Kapharsaba, as well as
the stronghold Phasaelus near Jericho, where he was
destined to see so much suffering arid ultimately
to die. He even reached beyond his own domain
to satisfy this building mania at Ascalon, Damascus,
Tyre and Sidon, Tripoli, Ptolemais, nay even at
Athens and Lacedaemon. But the universal char-
acter of these operations itself occasioned the bitter-


1381


est hatred against him on the part of the narrow-
minded Jews.

(3) Characteristics and domestic life-—The per-
sonality of Herod was impressive, and he was pos-
sessed of great physical strength. His intellectual
powers were far beyond the ordinary; his will was
indomitable; he was possessed of great tact, when
he saw fit to employ it; in the great crises of his
life he was never at a loss what to do; and no one
has ever accused Herod the Great of cowardice.
There were in him two distinct individualities, as
was the case with Nero. Two powers struggled
in him for the mastery, and the lower one at last
gained complete control. During the first part of
his reign there were evidences of large-heartedness,
of great possibilities in the man. But the bitter
experiences of his life, the endless whisperings and
warnings of his court, the irreconcilable spirit of
the Jews, as well as the consciousness of his own
wrongdoing, changed him into a Jewish Nero: a
tyrant, who bathed his own house and his own
people in blood. The demons of Herod's life were
Jealousy of power, and suspicion, its necessary
companion.

He was the incarnation of brute lust, which in
turn became the burden of the lives of his children.
History tells of few more immoral families than the
house of Herod, which by intermarriage of its mem-
bers so entangled the genealogical tree as to make
it a veritable puzzle. As these marriages were
nearly all within the line of forbidden consanguinity,
under the Jewish law, they still further embittered
the people of Israel against the Herodian family.
When Herod came to the throne of Judaea, Phasael
was dead. Joseph his younger brother had fallen
in battle (Ant, XIV, xv, 10), and only Pheroras and
Salome survived. The first, as we have seen, nomi-
nally shared the government with Herod, but was of
little consequence and only proved a thorn in the
king’s flesh by his endless interference and plotting.
To -him were allotted the revenues of the East
Jordanic territory. Salome, his sister, was ever
neck-deep in the intrigues of the Herodian family,
but had the cunning of a fox and succeeded in
making Herod believe in her unchangeable loyalty,
although the king had killed her own son-in-law
and her nephew, Aristobulus, his own son. The
will of Herod, made shortly before his death, is a
convincing proof of his regard for his sister (Ant,
XVII, vin, 1). ‘

His domestic relations were very unhappy. Of
his marriage with Doris and of her son, Antipater,
he reaped only misery, the son, as stated above,
ultimately falling a victim to his father’s wrath,
when the crown, for which he plotted, was prac-
tically within his grasp. Herod appears to have
been deeply in love with Mariamne, the grandchild
of Hyrecanus, in so far as he was capable of such a
feeling, but his attitude to the entire Asmonean
family and his fixed determination to make an end
of it changed whatever love Mariamne had for him
into hatred. Ultimately she, as well as her two
sons, fell victims to Herod’s insane jealousy of
power. Like Nero, however, in a similar situation,
Herod felt the keenest remorse after her death.
As his sons grew up, the family tragedy thickened,
and the court of Herod became a veritable hotbed
of mutual recriminations, intrigues and catastro-
phes. The trials and executions of his own con-
spiring sons were conducted with the acquiescence
of the Rom power, for Herod was shrewd enough
not to make a move without it. Yetso thoroughly
was the condition of the Jewish court understood at
Rome, that Augustus, after the death of Mariamne’s
sons (7 BC), is said to have exclaimed: “I would
rather be Herod’s hog than his son.”’ At the time
-of his death, the remaining sons were these: Herod,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Herod


son of Mariamne, Simon’s daughter; Archelaus
and Antipas, sons of Malthace, and Herod Philip,
son of Cleopatra of Jerus. Alexander and Aristo-
bulus were killed, through the persistent intrigues
of Antipater, the oldest son and heir presumptive
to the crown, and he himself fell into the grave he
had dug for his brothers.

By the final testament of Herod, as ratified by
Rome, the kingdom was divided as follows: Arche-
laus received one-half of the kingdom, with the
title of king, really “ethnarch,”’ governing Judaea,
Samaria and Idumaea; Antipas was appointed
“tetrarch”’ of Galilee and Peraea; Philip; “tetrarch”’
of Trachonitis, Gaulonitis and Paneas. To Sa-
lome, his intriguing sister, he bequeathed Jamnia,
Ashdod and Phasaeclus, together with 500,000
drachmas of coined silver. All his kindred were
liberally provided for in his will, ‘‘so as to leave
them all in a wealthy condition” (Ant, XVII,
viii, 1). In his death he had been better to his
family than in his life. He died unmourned and
unbeloved by his own people, to pass into history
as a name soiled by violence and blood. As the
waters of Callirhoe were unable to cleanse his cor-
rupting body, those of time were unable to wash
away the stains of atyrant’s name. The only time
he is mentioned in the NT is in Mt 2 and Lk 1.
In Mt he is associated with the wise men of the
East, who came to investigate the birth of the
“king of the Jews.’’ Learning their secret, Herod
found out from the ‘priests and scribes of the people”
where the Christ was to be born and ordered the
“massacre of the innocents,’ with which his name
is perhaps more generally associated than with any
other act of his life. As Herod died in 4 BC and
some time elapsed between the massacre and his
death (Mt 2 19), we have here a clue to the ap-
proximate fixing of the true date of Christ’s birth.
Another, in this same connection, is an eclipse of
the moon, the only one mentioned by Jos (Ani,
XVII, vi, 4; text and note), which was seen shortly
before Herod’s death. This eclipse occurred on
March 13, in the year of the Julian Period, 4710,
therefore 4 BC.

Herod Antipas was the son of Herod the Great
and Malthace, a Samaritan woman. Half Idu-
maean, half Samaritan, he had there-
fore not a drop of Jewish blood in his
veins, and “Galilee of the Gentiles”
seemed a fit dominion for such a prince.
He ruled as “‘tetrarch”’ of Galilee and Peraea (Lk
3 1) from 4 BC till 89 AD. The gospel picture we
have of him is far from prepossessing. He is super-
stitious (Mt 14 1f), foxlike in his cunning (Lk 13
31f) and wholly immoral. John the Baptist was
brought into his life through an open rebuke of
his gross immorality and defiance of the laws of
Moses (Lev 18 16), and paid for his courage with
his life (Mt 14 10; Ant, XVIII, v, 2).

On the death of his father, although he was
younger than his brother Archelaus (Ant, XVII,
ix, 4f; BJ, II, ii, 3), he contested the will of Herod,
who had given to the other the major part of the
dominion. Rome, however, sustained the will
and assigned to him the ‘“‘tetrarchy”’ of Galilee
and Peraea, as it had been set apart for him by
Herod (Ant, XVII, xi, 4). Educated at Rome
with Archelaus and Philip, his half-brother, son
of Mariamne, daughter of Simon, he imbibed
many of the tastes and graces and far more of the
vices of the Romans. His first wife was a
daughter of Aretas, king of Arabia. But he sent
her back to her father at Petra, for the sake of
Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, whom he
had met and seduced at Rome. Since the latter
was the daughter of Aristobulus, his half-brother,
and therefore his niece, and at the same time the


3. Herod
Antipas


Herod
Herodias


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1382


wife of another half-brother, the union between
her and Antipas was doubly sinful. Aretas repaid
this insult to his daughter by a destructive war
(Ant, XVIII, v, 1). Herodias had a baneful influ-
ence over him and wholly dominated his life (Mt
14 3-10). He emulated the example of his father
in a mania for erecting buildings and beautifying
cities. Thus he built the wall of Sepphoris and
made the place his capital. He elevated Bethsaida
to the rank of a city and gave it the name “Julia,”
after the daughter of Tiberius. Another example
of this inherited or cultivated building-mania was
the work he did at Betharamphtha, which he called
“Julias’” (Ant, XVIII, ii, 1). His influence on his
subjects was morally bad (Mk 8 15). [If his life
was less marked by enormities than his father’s, it
was only so by reason of its inevitable restrictions.
The last glimpse the Gospels afford of him shows
him to us in the final tragedy of the life of Christ.
He is then at Jerus. Pilate in his perplexity had
sent the Saviour bound to Herod, and the utter
inefficiency and flippancy of the man is revealed
in the account the Gospels give us of the incident
(Lk 23 7-12; Acts 4 27). It served, however, to
bridge the chasm of the enmity between Herod
and Pilate (Lk 23 12), both of whom were to be
stripped of their power and to die in shameful exile.
When Caius Caligula had become emperor and
when his scheming favorite Herod Agrippa I,
the bitter enemy of Antipas, had been made king
in 87 AD, Herodias prevailed on Herod Antipas
to accompany her to Rome to demand a similar
favor. The machinations of Agrippa and the ac-
cusation of high treason preferred against him,
however, proved his undoing, and he was banished
to Lyons in Gaul, where he died in great misery
(Ant, XVIII, vii, 2; BJ, UI, ix, 6).
Herod Philip was the son of Herod the Great and
Cleopatra of Jerus. At the death of his father he
inherited Gaulonitis, Trachonitis and
4. Herod Paneas (Ant, XVII, viii, 1). He was
Philip apparently utterly unlike the rest of
the Herodian family, retiring, digni-
fied, moderate and just. He was also wholly free
from the intriguing spirit of his brothers, and it is
but fair to suppose that he inherited this totally
un-Herodian character and disposition from his
mother. He died in the year 34 AD, and his
territory was given three years later to Agrippa I,
his nephew and the son of Aristobulus, together
with the tetrarchy of Lysanias (Ant, XVIII, iv, 6;
XIX, v, 1).
Herod Archelaus was the oldest son of Herod the
Great by Malthace, the Samaritan. He was a man
of violent temper, reminding one a great
6. Herod deal of his father. Educated like all
Archelaus the Herodian princes at Rome, he was
fully familiar with the life and arbi-
trariness of the Rom court. In the last days of his
father’s life, Antipater, who evidently aimed at the
extermination of all the heirs to the throne, accused
him and Philip, his half-brother, of treason. Both
were acquitted (Ani, XVI, iv, 4; XVII, vii, 1).
By the will of his father, the greater part of the
Herodian kingdom fell to his share, with the title
of “ethnarch.” The will was contested by his
brother Antipas before the Rom court. While
the matter was in abeyance, Archelaus incurred
the hatred of the Jews by the forcible repression of
a rebellion, in which some 3,000 people were slain.
They therefore opposed his claims at Rome, but
Archelaus, in the face of all this opposition, received
the Rom support (Ani, XVII, xi, 4). It is very
ingeniously suggested that this episode may be
the foundation of the parable of Christ, found in
Lk 19 12-27. Archelaus, once invested with the
government of Judaea, ruled with a hard hand, so


that Judaea and Samaria were both soon in a chronic
state of unrest. The two nations, bitterly as they
hated each other, became friends in this common
crisis, and sent an embassy to Rome to complain
of the conduct of Archelaus, and this time they were
successful. Archelaus was warned by a dream of
the coming disaster, whereupon he went at once to
Rome to defend himself, but wholly in vain. His
government was taken from him, his possessions
were all confiscated by the Rom power and he him-
self was banished to Viennain Gaul (Ant, XVII, xii,
2,3). He, too, displayed some of his father’s taste
for architecture, in the building of a royal palace
at Jericho and of a village, named after himself,
Archelais. He was married first to Mariamne, and
after his divorce from her to Glaphyra, who had
been the wife of his half-brother Alexander (Ant,
XVI, xiii). The only mention made of him in
the Gospels is found in Mt 2 22. ’

Of Herod, son of Herod the Great and Mariamne,
Simon’s daughter, we know nothing except that
he married Herodias, the daughter of his dead half-
brother Aristobulus. He is called Philip in the NT
(Mt 14 3), and it was from him that Antipas lured
Herodias away. His later history is wholly un-
known, as well as that of Herod, the brother of
Philip the tetrarch, and the oldest son of Herod the
Great and Cleopatra of Jerus.

Two members of the Herodian family are named


Agrippa. They are of the line of Aristobulus, who

through Mariamne,_ granddaughter
6. Herod of Hyrcanus, carried down the line of
AgrippaI the Asmoneanblood. Anditis worthy


of note that in this line, nearly extin-
guished by Herod through his mad jealousy and
fear of the Maccabean power, the kingdom of Herod
came to its greatest glory again.

Herod Agrippa I, called Agrippa by Jos, was the
son of Aristobulus and Bernice and the grandson
of Herod the Great and Mariamne. Educated at
Rome with Claudius (Ant, XVIII, vi, 1, 4), he was
possessed of great shrewdness and tact. Returning
to Judaea for a little while, he came back to Rome
in 37 AD. He hated his uncle Antipas and left
no stone unturned to hurt his cause. His mind
was far-seeing, and he cultivated, as his grandfather
had done, every means that might lead to his own
promotion. He, therefore, made fast friends with
Caius Caligula, heir presumptive to the Rom
throne, and his rather outspoken advocacy of the
latter’s claims led to his imprisonment by Tiberius.
This proved the making of his fortune, for Caligula
did not forget him, but immediately on his accession
to the throne, liberated Agrippa and bestowed on
him, who up to that time had been merely a private
citizen, the ‘“tetrarchies” of Philip, his uncle, and
of Lysanias, with the title of king, although he
‘did not come into the possession of the latter till
two more years had gone by (Ant, XVIII, vi, 10).
The foolish ambition of Herod Antipas Jed to his
undoing, and the emperor, who had heeded the
accusation of Agrippa against his uncle, bestowed
on him the additional territory of Galilee and Peraea
in 39 AD. Agrippa kept in close touch with the
imperial government, and when, on the assassina-
tion of Caligula, the imperial crown was offered to
the indifferent Claudius, it fell to the lot of Agrippa
to lead the latter to accept the proffered honor.
This led to further imperial favors and further ex-
tension of his territory, Judaea and Samaria being
added to his domain, 40 AD. The fondest dreams
of Agrippa had now been realized, his father’s fate
was avenged and the old Herodian power had been
restored to its original extent. He ruled with great
munificence and was very tactful in his contact
with the Jews. With this end in view, several
years before, he had moved Caligula to recall the


1383


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Herod
Herodias


command of erecting an imperial statue in the city
of Jerus; and when he was forced to take sides in the
struggle between Judaism and the nascent Christian
sect, he did not hesitate a moment, but assumed the
réle of its bitter persecutor, slaying Jamesthe apostle
with the sword and harrying the church whenever
possible (Acts 12). He died, in the full flush of his
power, of a death, which, in its harrowing details
reminds us of the fate of his grandfather (Acts 12
20-23; Ant, XIX, viii,2). Of the four children he
left (BJ, II, xi, 6), three are known to history—
Herod Agrippa II, king of Calchis, Bernice of im-
moral celebrity, who consorted with her own
brother in defiance of human and Divine law, and
became a byword even among the heathen (Juv.
Sat, vi.156-60), and Drusilla, the wife of the Rom
governor Felix (Acts 24 24). According to tradi-
tion the latter perished in the eruption of Vesuvius
in 79 AD, together with her son Agrippa. With
Herod Agrippa I, the Herodian power had virtu-
ally run its course.

Herod Agrippa II was the son of Herod Agrippa
I and Cypros. When his father died in 44 AD he
was a youth of only 17 years and con-
sidered too young to assume the gov-
ernment of Judaea. Claudius there-
fore placed the country under the care
of a procurator. Agrippa had received a royal
education in the palace of the emperor himself
(Ant, XIX, ix, 2). But be had not wholly for-
gotten his people, as is proven by his intercession
in behalf of the Jews, when they asked to be per-
mitted to have the custody of the official high-
priestly robes, till then in the hands of the Romans
and to be used only on stated occasions (Ant, XX,
i, 1). On the death of his uncle, Herod of Calchis,
Claudius made Agrippa II “tetrarch”’ of the terri-
tory, 48 AD (BJ, II, xii, 1; XIV, iv; Ant, XX, v,
2). As Jos tells us, he espoused the cause of the
Jews whenever he could (Ant, XX, vi, 3). Four
years later (52 AD), Claudius extended the do-
minion of Agrippa by giving him the old “‘tetrar-
chies” of Philip and Lysanias. Even at Calchis they
had called him king; now it became his official title
(Ant, XX, vii, 1). Still later (65 AD), Nero added
some Galilean and Peraean cities to his domain.
His whole career indicates the predominating influ-
ence of the Asmonean blood, which had shown itself
in his father’s eareer also. If the Herodian taste
for architecture reveals itself here and there (Ant,
XX, viii, 11; [X, iv), there is a total absence of the
cold disdain wherewith the Herods in general treated
their subjects. The Agrippas are Jews. —

Herod Agrippa II figures in the NT in Acts 25
13; 26 32. Paul there calls him “king” and ap-
peals to him as to one knowing the Scriptures. As
the brother-in-law of Felix he was a favored guest
on this occasion. His relation to Bernice his sister
was a scandal among Jews and Gentiles alike (Ant,
XX, vii, 3). In the fall of the Jewish nation, Herod
Agrippa’s kingdom went down. Knowing the
futility of resistance, Agrippa warned the Jews not
to rebel against Rome, but in vain (BJ, I, xvi, 2-
5; XVII, iv; XVIII, ix; XIX, iii). When the
war began he boldly sided with Rome and fought
under its banners, getting wounded by a sling-stone
in the siege of Gamala (BJ, IV, i, 3). The
oration by which he sought to persuade the Jews
against the rebellion is a masterpiece of its kind
and became historical (BJ, II, xvi). When the in-
evitable came and when with the Jewish nation
also the kingdom of Herod Agrippa II had been
destroyed, the Romans remembered his loyalty.
With Bernice his sister he removed to Rome,
where he became a praetor and died in the year 100
AD, at the age of 70 years, in the beginning of
Trajan’s reign.


7. Herod
Agrippa II


Lirsraturs.—Jos, Ani and BJ; Strabo; Dio Cassius.
Among all modern works on the subject, Schtirer, The
Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ (5 vols) is per-
haps still the best.

Hewry E. Doskxer

HERODIANS, hé-ro’di-anz (Hpwktavol, Héra-
dianot): A party twice mentioned in the Gospels
(Mi 22 16||Mk 12 13; 3 6) as acting with the
Pharisees in opposition to Jesus. They were not a
religious sect, but, as the name implies, a court or
police party, supporters of the dynasty of Herod.

othing is known of them beyond what the Gospels
state. Whatever their political aims, they early
perceived that Christ’s pure and spiritual teaching
on the kingdom of God was irreconcilable with
these, and that Christ’s influence with the people
was antagonistic to their interests. Hence, in
Galilee, on the occasion of the healing of the man
with the withered hand, they readily joined with
the more powerful party of the Pharisees in plots to
crush Jesus (Mk 3 6); and again, in Jerus, in the
last week of Christ’s life, they renewed this alliance
in the attempt to entrap Jesus on the question of
the tribute money (Mt 22 16). The warning of
Jesus to His disciples to “beware of the leaven of
Herod” (Mk 8 15) may have had reference to the
insidious spirit of this party. JAMES ORR


_ HERODIAS, hé-ro’di-as (Hpedids or “Hpwitds,
Hérédids): The woman who compassed the death
of John the Baptist at Machaerus (Mt 14 1-12;
Mk 6 14-29; ef also Lk 3 19.20; 9 7-9). Accord-
ing to the Gospel records, Herodias had previously
been married to Philip, but had deserted him for
his brother Herod the tetrarch. For this Herod
was reproved by John (cf Lev 18 16; 20 21), and
Herod, therefore, to please Herodias, bound him
and cast him into prison. According to Mt 14 5
he would even then have put John to death, but
‘feared the multitude,’’ which regarded John as a
prophet. But Mk 6 19f relates it was Herodias
who esp. desired the death of John, but that she
was withstood by Herod whose conscience was not
altogether dead. This latter explanation is more
in harmony with the sequel. At Herod’s birthday
feast, Herodias induced her daughter Salome, whose
dancing had so charmed the tetrarch, to ask as her
reward the head of John the Baptist on a charger.
This was given her and she then brought it to her
mother.

Herodias was daughter of Aristobulus, son of
Herod the Great, by Mariamne, daughter of Hyr-
ecanus. Her second husband (cf above) was Herod
Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee and Peraea (c 4-39 AD),
son of Herod the Great by Malthace. Herod Anti-
pas was thus the step-brother of Aristobulus, father
of Herodias. Regarding the first husband of Hero-
dias, to whom she bore Salome, some hold that the
Gospel accounts are at variance with that of Jos.
In Mt 14 8; Mk 6 17; Lk 3 19, heis called Philip
the brother of Herod (Antipas). But in Mt 143
and Lk 3 19 the name Philip is omitted by certain
important MSS. According to Jos, he was Herod,
son of Herod the Great by Mariamne daughter of
Simon the high priest, and was thus a step-brother
of Herod Antipas (cf Jos, Ant, XVIII, v, 4). It is
suggested in explanation of the discrepancy (1) that
Herod, son of Mariamne, bore a second name
Philip, or (2) that there is confusion in the Gospels
with Herod-Philip, tetrarch of Trachonitis, who
was the son of Herod the Great and Cleopatra, and
who was in reality the husband of Salome, daughter
of Herodias (cf also A. B. Bruce, Expos Gr Test.,
IL, 381; A. C. Headlam, art. “Herod” in HDB, II,
359, 860). According to Jos (Ant, VIII, vii, 2;
XVIII, vii, 1) the ambition of Herodias proved the
ruin of Herod Antipas. Being jealous of the power
of Agrippa her brother, she induced Herod to de-


Herodion
Hezekiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1384


mand of Caligula the title of king. This was refused
through the machinations of Agrippa, and Herod
was banished. But the pride of Herodias kept her
still faithful to her husband in his misfortune.
C. M. Kerr

HERODION, hé-rd’di-on (HpwStwv, Héradion;
WH ‘HpgSiwv): A Rom Christian to whom Paul
sent greetings (Rom 16 11). The name seems to
imply that he was a freedman of the Herods, or a
member of the household of Aristobulus, the grand-
son of Herod the Great (ver 10). Paul calls him
“my kinsman,” i.e. “a Jew” (see Juntas, 1).


HERON, her'un (MQIN, ’dnaphah; xapaSprés,
charadriés; Lat Ardea cinerea): Herons are men-
tioned only in the abomination lists of Lev 11 19
(m ‘‘ibis”) and Dt 14 18. They are near relatives


Heron (Ardea cinerea).


of crane, stork, ibis and bittern. These birds, blue,
white or brown, swarmed in Europe and wintered
around Merom, along the Jordan, at the head-
waters of the Jabbok and along its marshy bed in
the dry season. Herons of Southern Africa that
summered in the Holy Land loved to nest on the
banks of Merom, and raise their young among the
bulrushes, papyrus, reeds and water grasses,
although it is their usual habit to build in large trees.
The white herons were small, the blue, larger, and
the brown, close to the same size. The blue were
33 ft. in length, and had a 5-ft. sweep. The beak,
neck and legs constituted two-thirds of the length
of the body, which is small, lean and bony, taking
its appearance of size from its long loose feathers.
Moses no doubt forbade these birds as an article of
diet, because they ate fish and in older specimens
would be tough, dark and evil smelling. The very
poor of our western and southeastern coast states
eat them. GENE STRATTON-PoRTER


HESED, hé’sed, SON OF. Sce BEN-HESEn.


HESHBON, hesh’bon (DWT, heshban; ‘EoeBav,
Hesebén):, The royal city of Sihon king of the Amor-
ites, taken and occupied by the Israelites under
Moses (Nu 21 25f, etc). It lay on the southern
border of Gad (Josh 13 26), and was one of the
cities fortified by Reuben (Nu 82 87). It is reck-
oned among the cities of Gad given to the Merarite


Levites (Josh 21 39). In later lit. (Isa 15 4; 16
Sf; Jer 48 2.34.45; 49 3) it is referred to as a
city of Moab. It passed again into Jewish hands,
and is mentioned by Jos (Ant, XIII, xv, 4) as
among their possessions in the country of Moab
under Alexander Jannaeus. The city with its
district called Hesebonitis, was also under the juris-
diction of Herod the Great (Ant, XV, vii, 5, where
it is described as lying in the Peraea). Onom
places it 20 Rom miles from the Jordan. It is rep-
resented by the modern Hesban, a ruined site in the
mountains over against Jericho, about 16 miles E.
of the Jordan. It stands on the edge of Wddy
Hesban in a position of great strength, about 600
ft. above ‘Ain Hesban. "The ruins, dating mainly
from Rom times, spread over two hills, respectively
2,930 ft. and 2,954 ft. in height. There are remains
of a temple overlooked from the W. by those of a
castle. There is also a large ruined reservoir; while
the spring in the valley forms a succession of pools
(Cant 7 4). Thecity is approached from the valley
by a steep path passing through a cutting in_the
rock, which may have been closed by a gate (Con-
der, Heth and Moab, 142). On a hill to the W.,
el-Kurmiyeh, is a collection of dolmens and stone
circles (Musil, Arabia Petraea, I, 383 ff).
b aes W. Ewine

HESHMON, hesh’mon (j1207, heshmén): An
unidentified place on the border of Judah toward
Edom (Josh 15 27). This may have been the
original home of the Hasmoneans. :


HETH, hath (m): The eighth letter of the Heb
alphabet; transhterated in this Encyclopaedia as
Ah (guttural hk). It came also to be used for the
number 8. For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


HETH, heth (7, héth): In Gen 23 10 the an-
cestor of the Hittites. As the various peoples who
occupied Canaan were thought to belong to one
stock, Gen 10 15 (1 Ch 1 13) makes Heth the
(2d) son of Canaan. In Gen 23 the ‘“‘sons of Heth”’
occupy Hebron, but they were known to have come
there from the north. A reference to this seems to
be preserved in the order of the names in Gen 10
15.16, where Heth is placed between Sidon and the
Jebusites. See Hirritss.


HETHLON, heth’lon (j5MM, hethlan; Pesh
hethrén}: Name of a place associated with Zedad
on the ideal northern boundary of Israel, as given
in Ezk 47 15 and 48 1, but not named in Nu 34
8, while the LX-X evidently tr? the text it had. In
accordance with the opinion they hold as to the
boundary line of Northern Israel, van Kasteren and
Buhl seek to identify Hethlon with ’Adlun on the
river Qasmiyeh. Much more in harmony with the
line of the other border towns given is its identifi-
cation with Heitala to the N.E. of Tripoli. The
‘way of Hethlon” would then coincide with the
Eleutherus valley, between Homs and the Mediter-
ranean, through which the railway now runs, and
to this identification the LXX seems to give testi-
mony, indicating some path of ‘‘descent” from the
Biga’a. : W. M. Curisrre


HEWER, hi’ér (1077, hotébh): Applies esp. to a
wood-worker or wood-gatherer (cf Arab. hattab,
‘a woodman”) (Josh 9 21.23.27; 2 Ch 2 10; Jer
46 22). Gathering wood, like drawing water, was
a menial task. Special servants were assigned to
the work (Dt 29 11). Joshua set the Gibeonites to
hewing wood and drawing water as a punishment
for their trickery, whereas were it not for the oath
which the Israelites had sworn, the Gibeonites
would probably have been killed. See DRawEr
or WATER


1385


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Herodion
Hezekiah


Am, haécabh, from the root “to cut’? or “to
carve,’’ applies to hewers of stone in 1 K 6 15;
2K 12 12; 1 Ch 22 15; 2 Ch 2 18.

Jamgs A. Parco

HEXATEUCH, hek’sa-ttik: This word, formed
on the analogy of Pentateuch, Heptateuch, etc, is

used by modern writers to denote the
1. Evidence first six books of the Bible (i.e. the
for Law and Josh) collectively. Many

critics hold that these six books were
composed out of the sources JEP, etc (on which
see PENTATEUCH), and only separated very much
later into different works. The main grounds for
this belief are: (1) the obvious fact that Josh pro-
vides the sequel to the Pent, narrating the conquest
and settlement in Canaan to which the latter work
looks forward, and (2) certain material and stylistic
resemblances. The composition of the respective
works is considered in the arts. PentaTeuce and
JOSHUA.

Here we must glance at the evidence against the

theory of a Hexateuch. It is admitted that there
is no trace of- any such work as the
2. Evidence Hexateuch anywhere in _ tradition.
against The Jewish Canon places the Pent in
a separate category from Josh. The
Samaritans went farther and adopted the Pent
alone. The orthography of the two works differs
in certain important particulars (see E. Kénig,
Hinleitung, 1511, 250). Hence a different literary
history has to be postulated for the two works, even
by those who adopt the theory of a Hexateuch.
But that theory is open to objection on other
grounds. There are grave differences of opinion
among its supporters as to whether all the supposed
Pentateucha] documents are present in Josh, and
in any case it is held that they are quite differently
worked up, the redactors having proceeded on one
system in the Pent and on quite another in Josh.
Arguments are given in the art. PENTATEUCH to
show the presence of Mosaic and pre-Mosaic ele-
ments in the Pent and the unsoundness of the docu-
mentary theory in that work, and if these be correct
the theory of a Hexateuch necessarily falls to the
ground. ;
For Bibliography see Pentatrucu; JosHUA.
Harotp M. Wiener

HEZEK], he2’/é-ki (PI, hizki). See Hizx1.

HEZEKIAH, hez-é-ki’a (PPI, hizkiyah):

(1) King of Judah. See special art.

(2) A son of Neariah, of the royal family of ‘Ju-
dah (1 Ch 3 23, RV “Hizkiah’’).

(8) An ancestor of Zephaniah (Zeph 11, AV
“Hizkiah’’).

(4) One of the returned exiles from Babylon
(Ezr 2 16; Neh 7 21).


HEZEKIAH ("p11 hizkiyah, “Jeh has strength-
ened”; also written WPT, hizkiyaha, “Jeh has
strengthened him’; “Efextas, Hezekias): One of the
greatest of the kings of Judah; reigned (according
to the most self-consistent chronology) from c 715
to ec 690 BC. ;

On the OT standard of loyalty to Jeh he is eulo-
gized by Jesus Sirach as one of the three kings who
alone did not “commit trespass” (Sir
49 4), the other two being David and
Josiah. The Chronicler represents him
(2 Ch 82 31) as lapsing from the wis-
dom of piety only by his vainglory in revealing
the resources of his realm to the envoys of
Merodach-baladan. In 2 K.18 5, the earliest es-
timate, his special distinction, beyond all other
Judaean kings, before or after, was that he
“trusted in Jeh, the God of Israel.” It is as the


OT Esti-
mate


king who “clave to Jeh” (2 IX 18 6) that the Heb
mind sums up his royal and personal character.
I. Sources for His Life and Times.—The his-
torical accounts in 2 K 18-20 and 2 Ch 29-32
are derived in the main from the same
1. Scripture state annals, though the latter seems
Annals also to have had the Temple archives
to draw upon. For “the rest of his
acts,’’ 2 K refers to a source then still in existence
but now lost, “the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Judah” (2 K 20 20), and 2 Ch to “the
vision of Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, in
the book of the kings of Judah and Israel” (2 Ch 32
32). In this last-named source (if this is the origi-
nal of our Book of Isa), besides the warnings and
directions called out by the course of the history,
there is a narrative section (Isa 36-39) recounting
the Sennacherib crisis much as do the other his-
tories, but incorporating also a passage of Isaianic
prophecy (87 22-32) and a “writing of Hezekiah
king of Judah” (88 10-20). Lastly, in Sir 48 17-
25, there is a summary of the good and wise deeds
of Hezekiah, drawn from the accounts that we
already have.
Of these sources the account in 2 K is most purely
annalistic, originating at a time when religious and
political values, in the Heb mind, were


2. View- inseparable. In 2 Ch the religious
point and coloring, esp. in its later developed
Coloring ritual and legal aspects, has the de-


cided predominance. Sirach, with the
mind of a man of letters, is concerned mainly
with eulogizing H. in his “praise of famous men”
(ef Sir 44-50), of course from the devout Heb
point of view. In the vision of Isaiah (Isa 1-39),
we have the reflection of the moral and spiritual
situation in Jerus, as realized in the fervid prophetic
consciousness; and in the prophecy of his younger
contemporary Micah, the state of things in the out-
lying country districts nearest the path of invasion,
where both the iniquities of the ruling classes and
the horrors of war were felt most keenly. Doubt-
less also many devotional echoes of these times of
stress are deducible from the Pss, so far as we can
fairly identify them.
It is in Hezekiah’s times esp. that the Assyr in-
scriptions become illuminating for the history of
Israel; for one important thing they
3. Side- furnish certain fixed dates to which the
Lights chronology of the times can be ad-
justed. Of Sennacherib’s campaign of
701, for instance, no fewer than six accounts are at
present known (see G. A. Smith, Jerus, II, 154, n.),
the most detailed being the ‘“Taylor Cylinder,” now
in the British Museum, which in the main agrees, or
at least isnot inconsistent, with the Scripture history.
I. Events of His Reign.—From his weak and
unprincipled father Ahaz (cf 2 Ch 28 16-25),
Hezekiah inherited not only a dis-
1. His organized realm but a grievous burden
Heritage of Assyr dominance and tribute, and
the constant peril and-suspense of
greater encroachments from that arrogant and arbi-
trary power: the state of things foretold in Isa 7
20; 8 7f. The situation was aggravated by the
fact that not only the nation’s weakness but its
spiritual propensities had incurred it: the domi-
nant classes were aping the sentiments, fashions and
cultus of the East (cf Isa 2 6-8), while the neg-
lected common people were exposed to the corrup-
tions of the still surviving heathenism of the land.
The realm, in short, was at the spiritual nadir-point
from which prophets like Isaiah and Micah were
laboring to bring about the birth of a true Heb con-
science and faith. Their task was a hard one: with
a nation smear-eyed, dull-eared, fat-hearted (Isa 6
10), whose religion was a precept of men learned by


Hezekiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1386


rote (Isa 29 13). Clearly, from this point of view,
a most difficult career was before him.
The sense of this unspiritual state of things fur-
nishes the best keynote of Hezekiah’s reforms in
religion, which according to the Chroni-
2. Religious cler he set. about as soon as he came
Reform to the throne (2 Ch 29 3). It is the
Chronicler who gives the fullest ac-
count of these reforms (2 Ch 29-31); naturally,
from his priestly point of view and access to eccle-
siastical archives. Hezekiah began with the most
pressing constructive need, the opening and cleans-
ing of the Temple, which his father Ahaz had left
closed and desecrated (2 Ch 28 24), and went on
to the reorganization of its liturgical and choral
service. In connection with this work he appointed
a Passover observance, which, on a scale and spirit
unknown since Solomon (2 Ch 80 26), he designed
as a religious reunion of the devout-minded in all
Israel, open not only to Jerus and Judah, but to all
who would accept his invitation from Samaria,
Galilee, and beyond the Jordan (2 Ch 30 5-12.18).
The immediate result of the enthusiasm engendered
by this Old Home Week was a vigorous popular
movement of iconoclasm against the idolatrous high
places of theland. That this wasno weak fanatical
impulse to break something, but a touch of real
spiritual quickening, seems evidenced by one inci-
dent of it: the breaking up of Moses’ old brazen
serpent and calling it what it had come to mean,
mhushtan, “a piece of brass’ (2 K 18 4); the
movement seems in fact to have had in it the sense,
however crude, that old religious forms had become
hurtful and effete superstitions, hindering spirit-
uality. Nor could the movement stop with the old
fetich. With it went the demolition of the high
places themselves and the breaking down of the
pillars (maccébhéth) and felling of the sacred groves
(dshérah), main symbols these of a debasing nature~
cult. This reform, on account of later reactions
(see under MawassEH), has been deemed ineffective;
rather, its effects were inward and germinal; nor
were they less outwardly than could reasonably be
expected, before its meanings were more deepened
and centralized. :
All this, on the king’s part, was his response to
the spiritual influence of Isaiah, with whose mind
his own was sincerely at one. As a


3. Internal devout disciple in the school of pro-
Improve- _phetic ideas, he earnestly desired to
ments maintain the prophet’s insistent atti-


tude of “quietness and confidence”
(cf Isa 30 15), that is, of stedfast trust in Jeh
alone, and of abstinence from revolt and entangling
alliances with foreign powers. This, however, in
the stress and suspense of the times, did not pre-
clude a quiet preparation for emergencies; and
doubtless the early years of his reign were notable,
not only for mild and just administration through-
out his realm, but for measures looking to the forti-
fying and defence of the capital. His work of
repairing and extending the walls and of strength-
ening the citadel (Millo), as mentioned in 2 Ch 32
5,had probably been in progress long before the
Assyr crisis was imminent. Nor was he backward
in coming to an understanding with other nations,
as to the outlook for revolt against Assyria. He
could not learn his lesson of faith all at once, esp.
with a factious court pulling the other way. He
did not escape the suspicion of Sargon (d. 705), who
for his Egyp leanings counted him among the “‘plot-
ters of sedition” (cf COT, 100); while the increas-
ing prosperity and strength of his realm marked
him for a leading réle in an eventual uprising. He
weathercd at least one chance of rebellion, however,
in 711, probably through the strenuous exertions
of Isaiah (see Isa 20 1 ff).


Hezekiah’s opportunity to rise against Assyr
domination seems to have been taken about 704.
How so pious a king came to do it in


4. The spite of Isaiah’s strenuous warnings,
Assyrian both against opposition to Assyria and
Crisis alliance with other powers, is not very


clear. The present writer ventures
to suggest the view that the beginning was forced
or perhaps sprung upon him by his princes and
nobles. In the year before, Sargon, dying, had left
his throne to Sennacherib, and, as at all ancient
changes of sovereignty, this was the signal for a
general effort for independence on the part of sub-
ject provinces. That was also the year of Heze-


Pool of Hezekiah.


kiah’s deadly illness (2 K 20; Isa 38), when for
a, time we know not how long he would be incapaci-
tated for active administration of affairs. Not un-
likely on his recovery he found his realm committed
beyond withdrawal to an alliance with Egypt and
perhaps the leadership of a coalition with Philistia;
in which case personally he could only make the
best of the situation. There was nothing for it but
to confirm this coalition by force, which he did in
his Phili campaign mentioned in 2 K 18 8. Mean-
while, in the same general uprising, the Chaldaean
Merodach-baladan, who had already been expelled
from Babylon after an ll-year reign (721-710),
again seized that throne; and in due time envoys
from him appeared in Jerus, ostensibly to con-
gratulate the king on his recovery from his illness,
but really to secure his aid and alliance against
Assyria (2 K 20 12-15; Isa 89 1-4). Hezekiah,
flattered by such distinguished attention from so
distant and powerful a source, by revealing his
resources committed what the Chronicler calls the
one impious indiscretion of his life (2 Ch $2 31),
incurring also Isaiah’s reproof and adverse predic-
tion (2 K 20 17f; Isa 89 6f). The conflict with
Sennacherib was now inevitable; and Hezekiah,
by turning the water supply of Jerus from the Gihon
spring to a pool within the walls and closing it from
without, put the capital in readiness to stand a
siege. The faith evoked by this wise work, con-
firmed by the subsequent deliverance, is reflected
in Ps 46. That this incurring of a hazardous war,
however, with its turmoils and treacheries, and the
presence of uncouth Arab mercenaries, was little
to the king’s desire or disposition, seems indicated
in Ps 120, which with the other Songs of Degrees
(Pss 120-34) may well reflect the religious faith of
this period of Hezekiah’s life, :
The critical moment came in 701, when Sen-
nacherib, who the year before had reconquered
_ Babylon and = expelled Merodach-
5. Invasion baladan (perhaps Isa 21 1-9 refers to
and De- this), was free to invade his rebellioug
liverance provinces in the W. It was a vig-
: _ oreus and sweeping campaign; in
which, beginning with Sidon and advancing down


1387


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hezekiah


through the coast lands, he speedily subdued the
Phili cities, defeating them and their southern allies
(whether these were from Egypt proper or from its
extension across the Sinai peninsula and Northern
Arabia, Mugri, is not quite clear) at Eltekeh; in
which campaign, according to his inscription, he
took 46 walled towns belonging to Judah with their
spoil and deported over 200,000 of their inhabitants.
This, which left Jerus a blockaded town (in fact
he says of Hezekiah: ‘Himself I shut up like a bird
in a cage in Jerus his royal city’’), seems referred to
in Isa 1 7-9 and predicted in Isa 6 11f. Its
immediate effect was to bring Hezekiah to terms
and extort an enormous tribute (2 K 18 14-16).
When ‘later, however, he was treacherous enough
to disregard the compact thus implied (perhaps Isa
ch 33 refers to this), and demanded the surrender of
the city (2 K 18 17—19 7; Isa 86 2—37 7), Heze-
kiah besought the counsel of Isaiah, who bade him
refuse the demand, and predicted that Sennacherib
would “hear tidings’? and return to his own land;
which prediction actually came to pass, and sudden-
ly Hezekiah found himself free. A deliverance so
great, and so signally vindicating the forthputting
of faith, could not but produce a momentous revul-
sion in the nation’s mind, like a new spiritual birth
in which the faith of the ‘“remnant’’ became a vital
power in Israel; its immediate effect seems por-
trayed in Ps 124 and perhaps Ps 126, and its deep
significance as the birth of a nation in a day seems
summarized long afterward in Isa 66 7-9; ef 87 3;

2K 19 8.
A second summons to surrender, sent from Libnah
by letter (2 K 19 1ff; Isa 37 8 ff), is treated by
the Scripture historians as a later


6. The feature of the same campaign; but
Second recent researches seem to make it
Summons possible, nay probable, that this be-


longed to another campaign of Sen-
nacherib, when Taharka of Ethiopia (Tirhakah,
2 K 19 9; Isa 37 9) came to power in Egypt, in
691. If this was so, there is room in Hezeckiah’s
latter years for a decade of peace and prosperity
(ef Ch 32 22.23.27-30), and in Isaiah’s old age for
a collection and revision of his so wonderfully
vindicated prophecies. The historians’ evident
union of two stories in one makes the new attitude
with which this crisis was met, obscure; but the tone
of confirmed confidence and courage seems decidedly
higher. The discomfiture of Sennachcrib in this
-case was brought about, not by a rumor of rebellions
at home, but by an outbreak of plague (2 K 19
35f; Isa 37 36f), which event the Scripture
writers interpreted as a miracle. The prophetic
sign of deliverance (2 K 19 29; Isa 37 30) may
be referred to the recovery of the devastated lands
from the ravage inflicted by Sennacherib in his first
campaign (cf also Ps 126 5f). ;
I. His Character.—Our estimate of Hezekiah’s
character is most consistently made by regarding
him as a disciple of Isaiah, who was earnestly
minded to carry out his prophetic ideas. As
however, these were to begin with only the initial
ideas of a spiritual “remnant,” the king’s sym-
pathies must needs be identified at heart, not with
his imperious nobles and princes, but with a minor-
ity of the common people, whose religious faith did
not become a recognizable influence in the state until
after 701. In the meantime his zeal for purer wor-
ship and juster domestic administration, which
made him virtually king of the remnant, made him
a wise and sagacious prince over the whole realm.
Isaiah’s glowing prophecy (32 1-8) seems to be a
Messianic projection of the saner and clearer-seeing
era that his domestic policy adumbrated—a time
when king and nobles rule in righteousness, when
man can lean on man, when things good and evil


are seen as they are and called by their right names.
When it came to dealing with the foreign situation,
however, esp. according to the Isaianic program,
his task was exceedingly difficult, as it were a pioneer
venture in faith. His effort to maintain an attitude
of stedfast trust in Jeh, with the devout quietism
which, though really its consistency and strength
looked like a supine passivity, would lead his rest-
lessly scheming nobles to regard him as a pious
weakling; and not improbably they came to deem
him almost a negligible quantity, and forced his
hand into diplomacies and coalitions that were not
to his mind. Some such insolent attitude of theirs
seems to be portrayed in Isa 28 14-22. This was
rendered all the more feasible, perhaps, by the
eriod of incapacitation that must have attended
is illness, in the very midst of the nation’s critical
affairs. Isaiah’s words (83 17 ff) may be an allu-
sion at once to his essential kingliness, to the abey-
ance of its manifestation duc to his disease, and to
the constricted condition into which, meanwhile, the
realm had fallen. This exceedingly critical episode
of Hezekiah’s career does not seem to have had its
rights with students of the era. Considering the
trials that his patient faith must have had, always
at cross-purposes with his nobles (cf Ps 120 61);
that now by reason of his sickness they had the
whip hand; that his disease cut him off not only
from hope of life, but from association with men and
access to the sanctuary (cf Isa 38 10.11.12); that,
as his son Manasseh was not born till three years
within the fifteen now graciously added to his life
(cf 2 K 21 1), his illness seemed to endanger the
very perpetuity of the Davidic dynasty, we have
reason for regarding him as well-nigh a martyr to
the new spiritual uprise of faith which Isaiah was
laboring to bring about. In the Messianic ideal
which, in Isaiah’s sublime conception, was rising
into personal form, it fell to his lot to adumbrate
the first kingly stage, the stage of committal to
Jeh’s word and will and abiding the event. It was
a cardinal element in that composite ideal which
the Second Isaiah pushes to its ultimate in his por-
trayal of the servant of Jeh; another element, the
element of sacrifice, has yet to be added. Mean-
while, as with the king so with his remnant-realm,
the venture of faith is like a precipitation of spirit-
ual vitality, or, as the prophet puts it, a new birth
(cf Isa 26 17{; 37 3; 66 7{, for the stages of it).
The event of deliverance, not by men’s policies but
by Jeh’s miraculous hand, was the speedy vindi-
cation of such trust; and the revulsion of the next
decade witnessed a confirming and solidifying of
spiritual integrity in the remnant which made it a
factor to be reckoned with in the trying times that
succeeded (see under Manassen). The date of
Hezekiah’s death (probably not long after 690) is
not certainly known; nor of the death of his mentor
Isaiah (tradition puts this by martyrdom under
Manasseh); but if our view of his closing years is
correct, the king’s death crowned a consistent char-
acter of strength and spiritual stedfastness; while
the popperoachable greatness of Isaiah speaks for
itself.
IV. Reflection of His Age in Literature.—The
sublime and mature utterances of Isaiah alone, fall-
ing in this time, are sufficient evidence
1. Compila- that in Hezekiah’s age, Israel reached
tion and its golden literary prime. Among the
Revival idealists and thinkers throughout the
nation a new spiritual vigor and insight
were awake, Of their fellowship was the king him-
self, who emulated the activity of his predecessor
Solomon as patron of piety and letters. The com-
pilation of the later Solomonic section of the Prov-
erbs (Prov 25-29), attributed to the “men of
Hezekiah,” indicates the value attached to the


Hezekiah
High Day


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1388


accumulations of the so-called Wisdom literature;
and it is fair to assume that these men of Hezekiah
did not stop with compiling, but stamped upon the
body of Proverbs as a whole that sense of it as a
philosophy of life which it henceforth bears, and
perhaps added the introductory section, Prov 1-9.
Nor would a king so zealous for the organization and
enrichment of the temple-worship (cf Isa 38 20)
be indifferent to its body of sacred song. It seems
certain that his was, in all the nation’s history, the
greatest single agency in compiling and adapting
the older Davidie Pss, and in the composition of
new ones. Perhaps this union of collecting and
creative work in psalmody is referred to in the men-
tion of ‘‘the words of David, and of Asaph the seer’’
(2 Ch 29 30). To Hezekiah himself is attributed
one ‘‘writing”’ which is virtually a psalm, Isa 38 20.
The custom through all the history of hymnology
(in our own day also) of adapting older composi-
tions to new liturgical uses makes uncertain the
identification of psalms belonging specifically to
this period; still, many psalms of books ii and iii,
and esp. those ascribed to Asaph and the sons of
Korah, seem a close reflection of the spirit of the
times. An interesting theory recently advanced
(see Thirtle, OT Problems) that the fifteen Songs
of the Steps (‘‘Degrees”’ or ‘‘Ascents,”’ Pss 120-34)
are a memorial of Hezekiah’s fiftcen added years,
when as a sign the shadow went backward on the
steps of Ahaz (2 K 20 8-11), seems to reveal
many remarkable echoes of that eventful time.
Nor does it seem unlikely that with this first ex-
tensive collection of psalms the titles began to be
added.
This literary activity of Hezekiah’s time, though
concerned largely with collecting and reviving the
treasures of older literature, was pur-
2. Of More sued not in the cold scribal spirit, but
Creative in a fervid creative way. This may be
Strain realized in two of the psalms which the
present writer ascribes to this period.
Ps 49, a psalm of the sons of Korah, is concerned to
make an essential tenet of Wisdom viable in song (cf
vs 3.4), as if one of the “men of Hezekiah” who is
busy with the Solomonic counsels would popularize
the spirit of his findings. Ps 78 in like manner, a
Maschil of Asaph, is concerned to make the noble
histories of old viable in song (ver 2), esp. the wilder-
ness history when Israel received the law and beheld
Jeh’s wonders, and down to the time when Ephraim
was rejected and Judah, in the person of David,
was chosen to the leadership in Israel.


Such a didactic poem would not stand solitary in a
period so instructed. As in Wisdom and psalmody, so
in the domain of law and its attendant history, theliterary
activity was vigorous. This age of Hezekiah seems the
likeliest time for puting into literary idiom that ‘‘ book
of the law’ found later in the Temple (2 K 22); which
book Josiah's reforms, carried out according to its com-
mands, prove to have been our Book of Dt. This is
not the place to discuss the Deuteronomic problem (see
under Josian); itis fair to note here, however, that as
compared with the austere statement of the Mosaic
statutes elsewhere, this book has a literary art and color-
ing which seem to stamp its style as that of a later age
than Moses’, though its substance is Mosaic; and this
age of Hezekiah seems the likeliest time to put its re-
writing and adaptation. Nor did the new spirit_of
literary creation feed itself entirely on the past. The
king's chastening experience of illness and trial, with the
stedfast faith that upbore and survived it, must have
been fruitful of new ideas, esp. of that tremendous con-
ception, now just entering into thought, of the ministry
of suffering. Time, of course, must be allowed for the
ripening of an idea so full of involvement; and it is long
before its sacrificial and atoning values come to light
in such utterances as Isa §3. But such psalms as 49
and 73,not to mention Hezekiah's own psahn (Isa 38),
show that the problem was a living one; it was working,
moreover, in connection with the growing Wisdom phi-
losophy, toward the composition of the Book of Job,
which in a masterly way both subjects the current Wis-
dom motives to a searching test and vindicates the
intrinsic integrity of the patriarch in a discipline of ex-


tremest trial. The life of a king whose experience had.
some share in clarifying the ideas of such a book was not
lived in vain.

Joun FraNKLIN GENUNG


HEZEKIAW’S SICKNESS. See Drat or Awaz.


HEZEKIAH, THE MEN OF: A body of men of
letters to whom is ascribed the compilation of a sup-
plementary collection of Solomonic proverbs (Prov
25 1). See Proverss, Boox or, II, 5; Hazexran,
IV, 2.


HEZION, hé’zi-on (JPIM, hezydn; LXX B,
*Atelv, Azein, A, ’AtafA, Azaél): An ancestor of
Ben-hadad, king of Syria (1 K 16 18).


HEZIR, hé’zér: 7

(1) (WT, béeir; LXX B, Xnfelv, Chézein, A,
Ietelp, Iezeir): A Levite in the time of David (1 Ch
24 15).

(2) (LXX ‘Htelp, Hézeir): A chief of the people
in the time of Nehemiah (Neh 10 20).


HEZRO, hez’rd, HEZRAI, hez’ra-i, hea‘ri (TTT,
heerd, 2S 23 35; 1 Ch 11 37, but the Keré of
28 23 35is “I hezray. The ancient VSS almost
unanimously support the form Hezrai): A Carmel-
ite, ie. an inhabitant of Carmel. See CarmMEniTe.
One of David's thirty “mighty men.”


HEZRON, hez’ron (FEN, hegrén, and jI7Z,
hegrin; LXX ’Acpav, Asrén):

(1) Ason of Reuben (Gen 46 9; Ex 6 14), and
head of the family of the Hezronites (Nu 26 6).

(2) Ason of Perez, and grandson of Judah (Gen
46 12; Nu 26 21; 1 Ch 2 5.9.18.21.24.25; 4 1),
a direct ancestor of David (Ruth 4 18f). He
appears also in the genealogy of Our Lord ('Eepdu,
Esrém) (Mt 1 3; Lk 3 33).


HEZRON (j1730, hecrén, “inclosure’’): On the
S. boundary of Judah between ‘“Kadesh-barnea’’
and ‘“Addar’ (Josh 15 3); in the || passage (Nu
34 4) “Hazar-addar.”” The two places may have
been near together. Conder suggests that the name
survives in Jebel Hadhireh, a mountain N.W. of
Petra in the Tth.


HEZRONITES, hez/ronits QO} and
IEG , ha-hegroni; LXX 6 ’Acpwvel, ho Asrénet):
The name of the descendants of Hezron the son of
Reuben (Nu 26 6), and of the descendants of Hez-
ron the son of Perez (26 21).


HIDDAI, hid’é-i, hi-da’i CU, hidday; Alex.
‘A0Gal, Haththat): One of David’s thirty “mighty
men” (2 § 23 30), described as “of the brooks of
Gaash.”? In the || list in 1 Ch 11 32 the form of
the name is “Hurai” (Y10, haray).


HIDDEKEL, hid’é-kel OPI, hiddekel): One
of the rivers of Eprn (q.v.) (Gen 2 14, RVm “that
is, Tigris”; so L Tiyps, Tigris), said to flow E.
to Assyria, usually identified with the Tigris, which
rises in Armenia near Lake Van and, after flowing
8.E. through 8 degrees of latitude, joins the Eu-
phrates in Babylonia to form the Shatt el-’Arab,
which runs for 100 miles through a delta which
has been formed since the time of Abraham, and
now enters the Pers Gulf through 2 branches.
About one-third of the distance below its source,
and soon after it emerges from the mountains of
Kurdistan, the Tigris passes by Mosul, the site of
ancicnt Nineveh, and, lower down at Bagdad, ap-
proaches within a few miles of the Euphrates. ere
and for many miles below, since the level is lower


1389


than that of the Euphrates, numerous canals are
conducted to it, irrigating the most fertile portions
of Babylonia. Grorce FREDERICK WRIGHT


HIDDEN, hid’’n: The tr of taman, “to hide,”
‘to bury” (Job 8 16); of ¢aphan “to conceal,”
“store up’? (15 20, “The number of years is hidden
to the oppressor,’’ RV “even the number of years
that are laid up for the oppressor,’? m “and years
that are numbered are laid up’; Job 24 1, ‘Why,
seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty,”
RV “Why are times not laid up by the Almighty?”
m as AV with “Why is it?” prefixed; Ps 83 3,
“They consulted [RV “‘consult’’] against thy hidden
ones’); of magptunim (from ¢dphan), “hidden things
or places’ (Ob ver 6, ‘How are his hidden things
sought up!” RV “treasures,” ARV “sought out’);
of pala’, “to be wonderful,” “difficult” (Dt 30 11,
“This commandment . . . . isnot hidden from thee,”
RV ‘‘too hard for thee,’ m “or wonderful’); of
haphas, Hithpael, “‘to hide one’s self” (Prov 28 12,
RV ‘‘When the wicked rise, men hide themselves,”’
m ‘Heb must be searched for’); of kruptés,
“hidden,” ‘‘secret’’ (1 Pet 3 4, ‘the hidden man
of the heart’; 1 Cor 4 5, krupton, “‘the hidden
things of darkness’; 2 Cor 4 2, “the hidden
things of dishonesty,” RV “‘of shame’); of apokrip-
td, “‘to hide away,” trop., not to reveal or make
known (1 Cor 2 7, “But we speak God’s wisdom
in a mystery, even the wisdom that hath been
hidden”; cf Eph 3 9; Col 1 26).

Among the occurrences of ‘‘hidden’’ in Apoc we have
(2 Esd 16 62), ‘'The Spirit of Almighty God....
searcheth out all hidden things in the secrets of the
earth,’ RV ‘‘He who made all things and searcheth out
hidden things in hidden places’'; Ecclus 42 19, ‘‘reveal-


ing the steps [RV ‘‘traces”] of hidden things,"’ apékru-
hos; ver 20, ‘‘ Neither any word is hidden from him,"’


V ‘‘hid,” ekrdbé).
W. L. Walker

HIEL, hi’el OSM, Ai’al; ’AxuAA, Achiél): A
Bethelite who according to 1 K 16 34 rebuilt
Jericho, and in fulfilment of a curse pronounced by
Joshua (Josh 6 26) sacrificed his two sons. This
seems to have been a custom prevalent among
primitive peoples, the purpose being to ward off ill
luck from the inhabitants, esp. in a case where the
destroyer had invoked a curse on him who pre-
sumed torebuild. Numerous instances are brought
to light in the excavations of Gezer (Macalister,
Bible Side-Lights from the Mound of Gezer, ch x).
At first the very best was claimed as a gift to the
deity, e.g. one’s own sons; then some less valuable
member of the community. When civilization
prevented human sacrifice, animals were offered
instead. The story of Abraham offering Isaac may
be a trace of this old custom, the tenor of the story
implying that at the time of the writing of the
record, the custom was coming to be in disrepute.
A similar instance is the offering of his eldest son by
the king of Edom to appease the deity and win suc-
cess in battle (2 K 3 27; ef Mic 6 7). Various
conjectures have been made as to the identity of
this king. Ewald regarded him as a man of wealth
and enterprise (unternehmender reicher Mann);
Cheyne following Niebuhr makes it Jehu in dis-
guise, putting 1 K 16 34after2 K 10 33; Winck-
ler explains as folklore. W. N. Stearns


HIERAPOLIS, hé-ér-ap’é-lis (“Iepdwodts, Hier-
dpolis, “sacred city’): As the name implies, Hierap-
olis was a holy city. It was situated 6 miles from
Laodicea and twice that distance from Colossae,
on the road from Sardis to Apamea. Though its
history is not well known, it seems to have been of
Lydian origin, and once bore the name of Kydrara.
The Phrygian god Sabazios was worshipped there
under the name Echidma, and represented by the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hezekiah
High Day


symbol of the serpent. Other local deities were Leto
and her son Lairbenos. Though called the holy
city, Hierapolis was peculiarly regarded as the
stronghold of Satan, for there was a Plutonium, or
a hole reaching far down into the earth, from which
there issued a vapor, even poisoning the birds flying
above. It is supposed that upon a stool, deep in
the Plutonium, a priest or priestess sat, and, when
under the influence of the vapor, uttered prophecies
valuable to those who sought them. Though a
stronghold of Satan, Hierapolis early became a
Christian city, for, according to Col 4 13, the only
place where it is mentioned in the NT, a church
was founded there through the influence of Paul
while he was at Ephesus. Tradition claims that
Philip was the first evangelist to preach there, and
it also claims that he and his two unmarried
daughters were buried there; a third who was
married, was buried at Ephesus. Several of the
early Christians suffered martyrdom at Hierapolis,
yet Christianity flourished, other churches were
built, and during the 4th cent. the Christians
filled the Plutonium with stones, thus giving evi-
dence that the paganism had been entirely sup-
planted by the church. During the Rom period,
Justinian made the city a metropolis, and it con-
tinued to exist into the Middle Ages. In the year
1190 Frederick Barbarossa fought with the Byzan-
tines there.

The modern town is called Pambuk Kalessi, or
cotton castle, not because cotton is raised in the
vicinity, but because of the white deposit from the
water of the calcareous springs. The springs were
famous in ancient times because they were supposed
to possess Divine powers. The water is tepid,
impregnated with alum, but pleasant to the taste.
It was used by the ancients for dyeing and medicinal
Punoeye: The deposit of pure white brought up

y the water from the springs has heaped itself
over the surrounding buildings, nearly burying
them, and stalactite formations, resembling icicles,
hang from the ruins. The ruins, which are exten-
sive, stand on a terrace, commanding an extensive
view, and though they are partly covered by the
deposit, one may still trace the city walls, the
temple, several churches, the triumphal arch, the
gymnasium and baths, and the most perfect theater
in Asia Minor. Outside the walls are many tombs.

E. J. Banks

HIEREEL, hi-er’é-el (‘IepefA, Hiereél): 1 Esd

9 21. In Ezr 8 9 the name is Jehiel.


HIERIELUS, hi-er-i-é’lus (’Iefp{ydos, Tezriélos).
See JezRiELUS.


HIEREMOTH, hi-er’é-moth (‘Tepeya0, Iereméth):

(1) 1 Esd 9 27=Jeremoth (Ezr 10 26).

(2) 1 Esd 9 30=Jeremoth (Ezr 10 29, m ‘‘and
Ramoth’’).


HIERMAS, hi-dr’mas (‘Ieppds, Hiermds): 1 Esd
9 26, corresponding to Ramiah in Ezr 10 25.


HIGGAION, hi-ga’yon, hi-gion (JT3G, hig-
gayon): The meaning of this word is uncertain.
Two interpretations are possible; the one based
on an allied Arab. root gives ‘a deep vibrating
sound,” the other derived from the Gr VSS of Ps
9 16, where we read higgdydn Selah, takes it to
mean an instrumental interlude. See Psaums.


HIGH DAY: Is found in Gen 29 7 as a render-
ing of the Heb 2173 D1, yam gadhdl, lit. “great
day.’’ The Heb means the day at its height, broad
daylight, as contrasted with the time for getting
the cattle to their sheds for the night (cf Fr. grand
jour). In Jn 19 31, “highday” renders peydAq


Highest
High Things


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1390


tysépa, megdlé héméra, lit. ‘great day,’’ and refers to
the Passover Sabbath—and therefore a Sabbath of
special sanctity.


HIGHEST, hi’est (JDP, ‘elyon; tweros, hi-
psistos): The tr of ‘elyon, used frequently of God
and commonly tr “Most High’ (Ps 18 13, “The
Highest gave his voice,’’ RV “Most High’; 87 5,
“the highest himself,” RV “Most High”; Ezk 41
7, ‘the lowest [chamber] to the highest’’); of gam-
mereth, the foliage of a tree (as if the wool or hair
of trees), “the highest branch” (Ezk 17 3.22, RV
“top,” “lofty top”); of ra’sh, “head,’’ ‘‘top’’ (Prov
8 26, “the highest part of the dust of the world,”
AVm “the chief part,’’ RV “the beginning of,’’ m
“sum’’); gappé marém, “‘on the ridges of the
heights” (Prov 9 3, “the highest places of the
city’); ghabhéth méal gabhorh, lit. “one high
[powerful] who is above the high [oppressor],”’ is tré
“he that is higher than the highest’? (Eccl 5 8),
RV “one higher than the high [regardeth].” In
the NT, hupsistos (like ‘ely6n) is used of God (Lk 1
32, “the Son of the Highest,” ver 35, “the power
of the Highest,” ver 76, “the prophet of the High-
est’; 6 35, “‘the children of the Highest,” in these
places RV has ‘Most High’’); we have also ‘‘Ho-
ganna in the highest’? (Mt 21 9; Mk 11 10; see
Hosanna), “Glory to God in the highest” (Lk 2
14), “Glory in the highest’ (Lk 19 38); prdtoklista,
“the first reclining-place”’ (at table), the chief place
at meals, the middle place in each couch of the
triclinium (Robinson), is rendered (Lk 14 8), “‘the
highest room,’”’ RV “chief seat’’; “room’’ was intro-
duced by Tindale; Wiclif had ‘‘the first place” :
protokathedria (prétos, “‘first,” kdthedra, “seat’’),
‘the first or chief seat,’’ is rendered (Lk 20 46) “‘the
highest seats,’ RV “chief seats,’ Wiclif “the first
chairs.’”

“The Highest”’ as a term for God appears (2 Esd
4 11.34, RV “Most High’; Wisd 6 3, hupsistos;
Ecclus 28 7, RV ‘Most High’’). See also Gon,
NaMEs OF. W. L. WaLKER


HIGHMINDED, hi’mind-ed: In modern usage
denotes elevation of mind in a good sense, but
formerly it was used to denote_upliftedness in
a bad sense, pride, arrogance. It is the tr of
hupsélophroné6, “to be highminded,” | “proud,”
‘haughty’ (Rom 11 20, “Be not highminded, but
fear’; 1 Tim 6 17, ‘Charge them that are rich
.... that they be not highminded”’); of tuphéa
“to wrap in mist or smoke,’’ trop., to wrap in con-
ceit, to make proud, ete (2 Tim 3 4, “Traitors,
heady, highminded,” RV “puffed up”; ef 1 Tim
36; 6 4). “No one can be highminded without
thinking better of himself, and worse of others, than
he ought to think” (Crabb, English Synonymes).

W. L. WaLkER

HIGH, MOST. See Gop, Namus or.


HIGH PLACE: (1) ‘High place’ is the normal
tr of TAB, bamah, a word that means simply “‘ele-
vation” (Jer 26 18; Ezk 36 2, ete;

1. General cf the use in Job 9 8 of the waves of
the sea. For the pl. as a proper noun

see Bamotu). In AV_ of Bak 16 24.25.31.39,
“high places” is the tr of 27, rdmah (RV “lofty
places”), a common word (see Raman) of exactly
the same meaning, indistinguishable from bamdah
in ver 16. In three of these vs of Ezk (24.31.39)
raméh is paralleled by 24, gabh, which again has
recisely the same sense (“eminent place” in AV,
RV), and the ‘vaulted place” of ARV (ERVm) is
in disregard of Heb parallelism. In particular, the
high places are places of worship, specifically of
idolatrous worship. So the title was transferred from
the elevation to the sanctuary on the elevation


(1 K 117; 14 23; ef the burning of the “high
place” in 2 K 23 15), aud so came to be used of any
idolatrous shrine, whether constructed on _an ele-
vation or not (note how in 2 K 16 4; 2 Ch. 28 4
the “high places” are distinguished from the ‘‘hills’’).
So the “high places” in the cities (2 K 17 9; 2 Ch
21 11 [LXX]) could have stood anywhere, while
in Ezk 16 16 a portable structure seems to be in
point. (2) The use of elevations for purposes of
worship is so widespread as to be almost universal,


a ad


Tell Taanach (a Typical Canaanite High Place).


and rests, probably, on motives so primitive as to
evade formal analysis. If any reason is to be as-
signed, the best seems to be that to dwellers in hilly
country the heaven appears to rest on the ridges
and the sun to go forth from them—but such reasons
are certainly insufficient to explain everything.
Certain it is that Israel, no less than her neighbors,
found special sanctity in the hills. Not only was
Sinai the ‘‘Mount of God,” but a long list can be
drawn up of peaks that have a special relation to
Jeh (see Mount, Mountain; and for the NT, ef
Mk 9 2; He 12 18-24, ete). And the choice of a
hilltop for the Temple was based on considerations
other than convenience and visibility. (But bémah
is not used of the Temple Mount.)
Archaeological research, particularly at Petra
and Gezer, aided by the OT notices, enables us to
reconstruct these sanctuaries with
2. Descrip- tolerable fulness. The cult was not
tion limited to the summit of the hill but
took place also on the slopes, and the
objects of the cult might be scattered over a con-
siderable area. The most sacred objects were the
upright stone pillars (mag¢ébhah), which seem to
have been indispensable. (Probably the simplest
“high places’? were only a single upright stone.)
They were regarded as the habitation of the deity,
but, none the less, were usually many in number
(a fact that in no way need implicate a plurality of
deities). At one time they were the only altars,
and even at a.later period, when the altar proper
was used, libations were sometimes poured on the
pillars directly. The altars were of various shapes,
according to their purpose (incense, whole burnt
offerings, etc), but were always accompanied by
one or more pillars. Saucer-shaped depressions,
into which sacrifices could be poured, are a remnant
of very primitive rites (to this day in Samaria the
paschal lamb is cooked in a pit). The trees of the
high place, esp. the “‘terebinths’’ (oaks?), were
sacred, and their number could be supplemented
or their absence supplied by an artificial tree or pole
(dshérah, the “grove” of AV). (Of course the
original meaning of the pillar and asherah was not
always known to the worshipper.) An amusing
feature of the discoveries is that these objects were
often of minute size, so that the gods could be grati-
fied at a minimum of expense to the worshipper.
Images (ephods?; the t*ra@phim were household
objects, normally) are certain, but in Pal no rem-
nants exist (the little Bes and Astarte figures were


ROCK ALTARS AT TELL EL-MUTASELLIM—MEGIDDO


1391


not idols used in worship). Other necessary fea-
tures of a high place of the larger size were ample
provision of water for lustral purposes, kitchens
where the sacrifices could be cooked (normally by
boiling), and tables for the sacrificial feasts. Kon
mally, also, the service went on in the open air, but
slight shelters were provided frequently for some
of the objects. If a regular priest was attached to
the high place (not always the case), his dwelling


, Rts: Pos) eee
Pillars and Hollow Stone of the High Place at Gezer.
[Bible Side-Lights from the Mound of Gezer.]


must have been a feature, unless he lived in some
nearby village. Huts for those practising incuba-
tion (sleeping in the sanctuary to obtain revelations
through dreams) seem not to have been uncommon.
But formal temples were very rare and “houses of the
high places” in 1 K 12 31; 13 32; 2 K 17 29.32;
23 19 may refer only to the slighter structures just
mentioned (see the comm.). In any case, however,
the boundaries of the sanctuary were marked out,
generally by a low stone wall, and ablutions and
removal of the sandals were necessary before the
worshipper could enter.

For the ritual, of course, there was no uniform
rule. The gods of the different localities were
different, and in Pal a more or less thorough rededi-
cation of the high places to Jeh had taken place.
So the service might be anything from the orderly
worship of Jeh under so thoroughly an accredited
leader as Samuel (1 S 9 11-24) to the wildest
orgiastic rites. That the worship at many high
places was intensely licentious is certain (but it
must be emphasized against the statements of many
writers that there is no evidence for a specific phallic
cult, and that the explorations have revealed no un-
mistakable phallic emblems). The gruesome ceme-
tery for newly born infants at Gezer is only one of
the proofs of the prevalence of child-sacrifice, and
the evidence for human sacrifice in other forms is
unfortunately only too clear. See Gezzr, and
illustration on p. 1224.

(1) The opposition to the high places had many
motives. When used for the worship of other gods

their objectionable character is ob-
3. History vious, but even the worship of Jeh in

the high places was intermixed with
heathen practices (Hos 4 14, etc). In Am 6 21-
24, etc, sacrifice in the high places is denounced
because it ig regarded as a substitute for righteous-
ness in exactly the same way that sacrifice in the
Temple is denounced in Jer 7 21-24. Or, sacri-
fice in the high places may be denounced under the
best of conditions, because in violation of the law
of the one sanctuary (2 Ch 33 17, etc).

(2) In 1 8, sacrifice outside of Jerus is treated
as an entirely normal thing, and Samuel presides
in one such case (1 S 9 11-24). In1 K the prac-
tice of using high places is treated as legitimate
before the construction of the Temple (1 K 3 2-4),
but after that it is condemned unequivocally. The
primal sin of Northern Israel was the establishment


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Highest
High Things


of high places (1 K 12 31-33; 13 2.33 f), and their
continuance was a chief cause of the evils that came
to pass (2 K 17 10f), while worship.in them was
a characteristic of the mongrel throng that repopu-
lated Samaria (2 K 17 32). So Judah sinned in
building high places (1 K 14 23), but the editor of
K notes with obvious regret that even the pious
kings (Asa, 1K 16 14; Jehoshaphat, 22 43;
Jehoash, 2K 123; Amaziah, 14 4; Azariah,
15 4; Jotham, 16 Be) did not put them away; i.e.
the editor of K has about the point of view of Dt
12 8-11, according to which sacrifice was not to be
restricted to Jerus until the country should -be at
peace, but afterward the restriction should be
absolute. The practice had been of such long
standing that Hezekiah’s destruction of the high
places (2 K 18 4) could be cited by. Rabshakeh
as an act of apostasy from Jeh (2 K 18 22; 2 Ch
82 12; Isa 36 7). Under Manasseh they were


‘rebuilt, in connection with other idolatrous prac-
tices (2 K 21 3-9),


This act determined the final
punishment of the nation (vs 10-15), and the root-
and-branch reformation of Josiah (ch 23) came too
late. The attitude of the editor of Ch is still more
condemnatory. He explains the sacrifice at Gibeon
as justified by the presence of the Tabernacle (1 Ch
16 39; 2129; 2 Ch 1 3.18), states that God-
fearing northerners avoided the high places (2 Ch
11 16; cf 1 K 19 10.14), and (against K) credits
Asa (2 Ch 14 3.5) and Jehoshaphat (2 Ch 17 6)
with their removal. (This last notice is also in con-
tradiction with 2 Ch 20 33, but 16 17a is probably
meant to refer to the Northern Kingdom, despite
17b.) On the other hand, the construction of high
places is added to the sins of Jehoram (2 Ch 21 11)
and of Ahaz (2 Ch 28 4.5).

(8) Among the prophets, Elijah felt the destruc-
tion of the many altars of God as a terrible grief
(1 K 19 10.14). Amos and Hosea each mention
the high places by name only once (Am 7 9; Hos
10 8), but hoth prophets have only denunciation
for the sacrificial practices of the Northern Kingdom.
That, however, these sacrifices were offered in the
wrong place is not said. Isa has nothing to say
about the high places, except in 36 7, while Mic
1 5 equates the sins of Jerus with those of the
high places (if the text is right), but promises the
exaltation of Jerus (4 1f). In the references in
Jer 7 31; 19 5; 32 85; Ezk 6 3.6; 16 16; 20
29; 48 7, idolatry or abominable practices are in
point (so probably in Jer 17 3, while Jer 48 35
and Isa 16 12 refer to non-Israelites).

(4) The interpretation of the above data and their
historical import depend on the critical position
taken as to the general history of Israel’s religion.
See Reticion oF JsraEL; Criticism; DrEuTer-
ONOMY, etc.

LireRraTuRE.—See, esp., IpoLatry, and also ALTARS;
AsueRaH, etc. For the archaeological lit., see Pauzs-
TINE.

Burton Scotr Easton

HIGH PRIEST. Sce Prizst, Hicu.


HIGH THINGS: The tr of hupsélés, “high,”
“lofty,”’ “elevated” (Rom 12 16, “Mind not high
things, but condescend to men of low estate,”” AVm
“be contented with mean things,” RV ‘Set not
your mind on high things, but condescend to [m “Gr
be carried away with’’] things [m ‘‘them”’] that are
lowly’); high things are proud things, things re-
garded by the world as high.

High thing is hipsdma, “a high place,” “eleva-
tion,” ete (2 Cor 10 5, “casting down every high
thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God,”
‘Vike a lofty tower or fortress built up proudly by
the enemy’”’). In Jth 10 8; 13 4, hupsdma is ren-
dered ‘‘exaltation.”’ W. L. WaLker


Highway
Hinnom


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1302


HIGHWAY, hi’'wa. See Roan; Way.

HILEN, hi’len qen , hilén): A city in the hill
country of Judah, probably W. or S.W. of Hebron,
assigned with its suburbs to the Levites (1 Ch 6 58
[Heb 48]). The form of the name in Josh 15 51;
21 15 is Hoton (q.v.).


HILKIAH, hil-ki’a (m>por, hilkiyah, ‘“Jeh is
my portion”’ or ‘‘Jeh’s portion’): The name of 8
individuals in the OT or 7, if the person mentioned
in Neh 12 7.21 was the same who stood with Ezra
at the reading of the Law (Neh 8 4). The latter
appears as Ezecias (AV) in 1 Esd 9 43. Five of
this name are clearly associated with the priest-
hood, and the others are presumably so. The ety-
mology suggests this. Either interpretation of the
name expresses the person’s claim on Jeh or the
parents’ recognition of Jeh’s claim on him.

(1) The person mentioned above (Neh 8 4, etc).

(2) A Levite of the sons of Merari (1 Ch 6 45).

(8) Another Levite of Merari, son of Hosah (1 Ch
26 11). Is he the “‘porter,’’ i.e. “doorkeeper” of
1 Ch 16 38?

(4) Father of the Gemariah whom Zedekiah of
Judah sent to Nebuchadnezzar (Jer 29 3).

(5) The man in 2 K 18 18 ff who is evidently
more famous as the father of Eliakim, the major-
domo of Hezekiah’s palace (Isa 22 20 ff; 36 3 ff).
Probably the father’s name is given in this and
similar cases to distinguish between two persons of
otherwise identical name.

(6) A priest of Anathoth, father of Jeremiah
(Jer 1 1).

(7) The son of Shallum, and the best known of
the name (1 Ch 6 13). He is great-grandfather
of Ezra through his son Azariah (1 Esd 8 1; cf
1 Ch 911; Neh 11 11). He discovered the lost
Book of the Law during the repairing of the Temple
(2 K 22 4.8 ff); became chief leader in the ensuing
reformation in 621 BC (2 K 23 4; 2 Ch 34 Off;
35 8). He showed the recovered book to Shaphan
the scribe, who, in turn, brought it to the notice of
the king. At Josiah’s request he led a deputation
to Huldah the prophetess to ‘enquire of the Lord”’
concerning the new situation created by the dis-
covery. The book discovered is nsnally identified
with the Book of Dt. See DEuTERONomY.

Henry WALLACE

HILL, HILL COUNTRY, hil’ kun-tri: The com-
mon tr of three Heb words:

(1) MPRA, gibh‘ah, from root meaning ‘to be
curved,” is almost always tr’ “hill”; it is a pecul-
ia-ly appropriate designation for the very rounded
hills of Pal; it is never used for a range of mountains.
Several times it occurs as a place-name, “‘Gibeah
of Judah” (Josh 15 20.57); ‘“Gibeah of Benjamin”
or “Saul” (Jgs 19 12-16, etc); “Gibeah of Phine-
has” (Josh 24 33m), ete (see GrszaH). Many
such hills were used for idolatrous rites (1 K 14 23;
2K 17 10; Jer 2 20, etc). ; :

(2) WO, har, frequently tr4 in AV “hill,” is in RV
usually tr? “mountain” (cf Gen 7 19; Josh 15 9;
18 15f, and many other references), or ‘‘hill-
country.” Thus we have the “hill-country of the
Amorites” (Dt 1 7.19.20); the “hill-country of
Gilead” (Dt 3 12); the “hill-country of Ephraim”
(Josh 17 15.16.18; 19 50; 20 7, etc); the “‘hill-
country of Judah”? (Josh 11 21; 20 7; 21 11; 2
Ch 27/4, etc; and (4 épew#, hé oreiné] Lk 1 39.65);
the “hill-country of Naphtali” (Josh 20 7). For
geographical descriptions scc PALESTINE, Country;
pura; JupAg, ete.

(3) DBY, ‘ophel, is tr? by “hill” in 2 K 6 24;
Isa 32 14; Mic 4 8, but may possibly mean


“tower” or “fort.” In other passages the word
occurs with the art. as a place-name. See OPHEL.
. W. G. MastermMan

HILL, MOUNT, MOUNTAIN:

(1) The commonest word is WW, har (also
“1, hardr, and VW, herer), which is rendered
“hill,” “mount,” or “mountain.” It
occurs several hundreds of times.

In a numher of places RV changes “‘hill’’ to “*moun-
tain," eg. Gen 7°19, mountains covered by flood; Ex
24 4, Horeb; Josh 18 14, mountain hefore Beth-horon:
Jgs 16 3, mountain before Hebron; Ps 95 4, ‘The
heights of the mountains are his also"; 121 i, “I will
lift up mine eyes unto the mountains.’ ‘ Hill’ remains
in Dt 11 11, “land of hilis and valleys"; 1 K 20 23,
“god of the hills’: Ps 2 6, ‘‘my holy hill of Zion”;
98 8, ‘hills sing for joy.’ ‘‘Mount’ is changed to
“hill-country" in Dt 1 7, “hill-country of the Amor-
ites"; Jgs 12 15, ‘“‘hill-country of the Amalekites’’;
Dt 3 12, “hill-country of- Gilead"; but Gen 31 21,
‘mountain of Gilead'’; and Jgs 7 3, ‘‘ Mount Gilead."
“Hill” or “hills” is changed to ‘hill-country”’ in Dt
17; Josh 9 1; 10 40; 11 16; 17 16; 2111. In Dtl
41.43, ARV changes “hill” to '‘hill-country,”’ while ERV
has ‘‘mountain."’ The reasons for these differences of
treatment are not in all cases apparent.


(2) The Gr 8pos, dros, is perhaps etymologically
akin to “Wi, har. Tt occurs often in the NT, and is
usually tr? “mount” or “mountain.” In three
places (Mt 6 14; Lk 4 29; 9 37) AV has hill,
which RV retains, except in Lk 9 37, “when they
were come down from the mountain”’ (of the trans-
figuration). The derivative épevés, oreinds, “hill
country,” occurs in Lk 1 39.65.

(3) The common Heb word for “hill” is “933,
gibh‘ah=Gibeah (Jgs 19.12); cf Geba, 923, gebha‘
(1 $ 18 8); Gibeon, JIRA, gib‘én (Josh 9 3);
from root 334, gabha', ‘to be high’; cf Arab. Bae) 4
kubbeh, ‘‘dome”’; Lat caput; xepady}, kephalé.

(4)In 18911, AV has “hill” for M23,
ma‘dleh, root mby , ?alah, “to ascend”; cf Arab.


Pad


Ue, ‘ala’, “to be high,” and As, “ali, “high.”


Here and elsewhere RV has “‘ascent.”’
(5) EV has “hill” in Isa 6 1 for TIP, keren,


=


1. Names


a
“horn”; ef Arab. wy karn, “horn,” which is


also used for a mountain peak.
(6) 0, fdr, is trd “mountain” in Dnl 2 35.45,


3
but RVm “rock” in Dni 2 35. The Arab. yr.
tar, “mountain,” is esp. used with Sinai, Aves


meen ) lo, jebel tar sind’.


(7) S82, mugcdbh (Isa 29 3), is tré in AV
“mount,” in ERV “fort,” in ARV ‘“‘posted troops”;
cf AB, magcabh, “garrison” (1 S 14 1, etc), from


root AX}


=—T?


“to set.”

(8) b$D, sollah, from 590, salal, “‘to raise,”
isin AV and ERV “mount,” AVm “engine of shot,”
ARV ‘‘mound” (Jer 32 24; 33 4; Ezk 42; 17
17; 21 22; 26 8; Dnl 11 15).

The mountains and hills of Pal are the features
of the country, and were much in the thoughts of

; the Bib. writers. Their general aspect

2. Figura- is that of vast expanses of rock. As
tive and compared with better-watered regions
Descriptive of the earth, the verdure is sparse and
incidental. Snow remains through-

out the year on Hermon and the two highest peaks
of Lebanon, although in the summer it is in great
isolated drifts which are not usually visible from
below. In Pal proper, there are no snow moun-


nacabh, ‘‘to set’’; cf Arab. es , nagab,


1393


tains. Most of the valleys are dry wadies, aud the
roads often follow these wadies, which are to the
traveler veritable ovens. It is when he reaches
a commanding height and sees the peaks and ridges
stretching away one after the other, with perhaps,
through some opening to the W., a gleam of the sea
like molten metal, that he thinks of the vastness
and enduring strength of the mountains. At sun-
set the rosy lights are succeeded by the cool purple
shadows that gradually fade into cold gray, and the
traveler is glad of the shelter of his tent. The stars
come out, and there is no sound outside the camp
except perhaps the cries of jackals or the barking
of some goat-herd’s dog. These mountains are
apt to repel the casual traveler by their bareness.
They have no great forests on their slopes. Steep
and rugged peaks like those of the Alps are entirely
absent. There are no snow peaks or glaciers.
There are, it is true, cliffs and crags, but the general
outlines are not striking. Nevertheless, these
mountains and hills have a great charm for those
who have come to know them. To the Bib. writers
they are symbols of eternity (Gen 49 26; Dt 33
15; Job 16 7; Hab 3 6). They are strong and
stedfast, but they too are the creation of God, and
they manifest. His power (Ps 18 7; 97.5; Isa 40
12; 4115; 5410; Jer 4 24; Nah 15; Hab 3
6). The hills were places of heathen sacrifice (Dt
122; 1K 117; 2K 164; 17 10; Ezk 6 13;
Hos 4 13), and also of sacrifice to Jeh (Gen 22 2;
31 54; Josh 8 30). Zion is the hill of the Lord
(Ps 2 6; 185 21; Isa 8 18; Joel 3 21; Mic 4 2).


Many proper names are associated with the moun-
tains and hills: as Abarim, Amalekites, Ammah, Amorites,


Ararat, Baalah, Baal-hermon, Bashan,
8. Par- Beth-el, Bether, Carmel, Chesalon, Ebal,
ticular Ephraim, Ephron, Esau, Gaash, Gareb,
CAE: Geba, Gerizim, Gibeah, Gibeon, Gilboa,
Mountains Gilead, Hachilah, Halak, Hebron, Heres,


Hermon, Hor, Horeb, Jearim, Judah,
Lebanon, Mizar, Moreh, Moriah, Naphtali, Neho, Olives,
Olivet, Paran, Perazim, Pisgah, Samaria, Seir, Senir,
Sephar, Shepher, Sinai. Sion, Sirion, Tahor, Zalmon,
Zemaraim, Zion. See also ‘mountain of the east’ (Gen
0 30); ‘‘mountains of the leopards” (Cant 4 8); “rocks
ild goats" (1 S 24 2); ‘hill of the foreskins"’
(Gibeah-haaraloth) (Josh 5 3); ‘‘mountains of brass
(Zee 6 1); ‘hill of God" (Gibeah of God) (1.8 10 5);
“hill of Jeh'’ (Ps 24 3); ‘‘mount of congre enone ste
14 13); see also Mt 4 8; 5 1; 14 23; 15 29; 17 1;


28 16; Lk 8 32; Gal 4 25.
ALFRED Ety Day
HILLEL, hil’el (O57, hillal, “he greatly praised”;
LXX '’EAAAA, Ellél): An inhabitant of Pirathon in
the hill country of Ephraim, and father of Abdon,
one of the judges of Israel (Jgs 12 13.15).


HIN, hin (7°, Ain): A liquid measure containing
12 logs, equal to about 8 quarts. See WurcuTs
AND MEASURES.


_HIND, hind. See Due.


HIND OF THE MORNING, THE: The tr of
Aijeleth hash-Shahar (‘ayyeleth ha-shahar) in the
title of Ps 22, probably the name of some well-
known song to which the ps was intended to be
sung, which possibly had reference to the early
habits of the deer tribe in search of water and
food, or to the flight of the hind from the hunters
in early dawn; or “morning” may symbolize the
deliverance from persecution and sorrow.

“The first rays of the morning sun, by which it an-
nounces its appearance before being itself visible, are
compared to the fork-like antlers of a stag; and this
appearance is called, Ps 22 title, ‘The hind of the morn-
ing,’ because those antler rays preceded the red of dawn,
which again forms the transition to sunrise" (Delitzsch,
Iris, 107).

According to Hengstenberg, the words indicate
the subject-matter of the poem, the character,
sufferings, and triumph of the person who is set


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Highway
Hinnom


before us. Sec Psatms. For an interesting Mes-
sianic interpretation see Hood, Christmas Evans,
the Preacher of Wild Waies, 92 ff. M.O. Evans


HINGE, hinj (M5, pdth): Hinges of Jewish
sacred buildings in Scripture are mentioned only in
connection with Solomon’s temple. Here those for
the doors, both of the oracle and of the outer temple,
are said to have been of
gold (I K 7 50). By this
is probably to be under-
stood that the pivots upon
which the doors swung,
and which turned in the
sockets of the threshold
and the lintel, were cased
in gold. The proverb,
‘As the door turneth upon
its hinges, so doth the
sluggard upon his bed”
(Prov 26 14), describes the
ancient mode of ingress
and egress into important
edifices. In the British
Museum are many exam-
ples of stone sockets taken
from Bab and Assyr pal-
aces and temples, engraved
with the name and titles of the royal builder; while
in the Hauran doors of a single slab of stone with
stone pivots are still found in situ. Hinges, as we
understand the word, were unknown in the ancient
world. See Houss II, 1.


Ancient Egyptian Hinges.


1, 2, 4. Bronze pivot hinges; 3. Ba-
salt pivot for hinges.—Brit. Mus.


W. SHaw Ca.pecorr
HINNOM, hin’om, VALLEY OF (0379 73, gé
hinném, Josh 16 8; 18 16; “valley of the son of
Hinnom”’ [037 ja 74, gé bhen hinndm), Josh 16 8;
18 16; 2 Ch 283; 336; Jer 7 31f; 19 2.6;
32 35; “valley of the children [sons] of Hinnom”’
[OSM "2A "A, gé bheng hinndm], 2 K 23 10; or simply
“the valley,” lit. the “hollow” or “ravine” [N°30,
ha-gay’], 2 Ch 26 9; Neh 2 13.15; 3 18; Jer 31
40 and, perhaps also, Jer 2 23 [the above refer-
ences are in the Heb text; there are some variations
in the LXX]): The meaning of ‘‘Hinnom”’ is un-
known; the expressions ben Hinnom and bené
Hinnom would suggest that it is a proper name; in
Jer 7 32; 19 6 it is altered by the prophet to
‘valley of slaughter,’’ and therefore some have
thought the original name must have had a pleasing
meaning.
It was near the walls of Jerus, “by the entry of the
gate Harsith’’ (Jer 19 2); the Valley Gate opened
into it (Neh 213; 313). The
1. Bible boundary between Judah and Benja-
References min ran along it (Josh 15 8; 18 16).
and History It was the scene of idolatrous practices
in the days of Ahaz (2 Ch 28 3) andof
Manasseh, who “made his children to pass through
the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom”’ (2 Ch
33 6), but Josiah in the course of his reforms ‘“de-
filed Topheth, which is in the valley of the children
[m “son’’] of Hinnom, that no man might make his
son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Mo-
lech” (2 K 23 10). It was on account of these
evil practices that Jeremiah (7 32; 19 6) announced
the change of name. Into this valley dead bodies
were probably cast to be consumed by the dogs, as
is done in the Wddy er-Rabdabi today, and fires were
here kept burning to consume the rubbish of the
city. Such associations led to the Ge-Hinnom
(NT “‘Gehenna’’) becoming the “type of Hell”
(Milton, Paradise Lost, i, 405). See GEHENNA.
The Valley of Hinnom has been located by differ-
ent writcrs in each of the three great valleys of
Jerus. In favor of the eastern or Kidron valley


Hinnom
Hittites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1304


we have the facts that, Eusebius and Jerome
(Onom) place “Gehennom’ under the eastern wall
: of Jerus and the Moslem geographical

2. Situation writers, Mukaddasi and NAsir-i-khus-
tan, call the Kidron valley Wddy

Jahamum. The Jewish writer Kimchi also identifies
the Valley of Jehoshaphat (i.e. the Kidron) with
Hinnom. These ideas are probably due to the


Z. 2 “ Sa


Gehenna and Akeldama.


identification of the eastern valley, on account of its
propinquity to the Temple, as the scene of the last
judgment—the “Valley of Jehoshaphat?’ of Joel
3 2—and the consequent transference there of the
scene of the punishment of the wicked, Gehenna,
after the ancient geographical position of the Valley
of Hinnom, had long been lost. In selecting sacred
sites, from the 4th Christian cent. onward, no
critical topographical acumen has been displayed
until quite modern times. There are three amply
sufficient arguments against this view: (1) the
Kidron valley is always called a nahal and not a
gay’ (see Kivron); (2) the “Gate of the Gai”
clearly did not lie to the E. of the city; (3) En-rogel,
which lay at the beginning of the Valley of Hinnom
and to its E. (Josh 15 8; 18 16) cannot be the
‘Virgin’s fount,’ the ancient Gihon (2 S 17 17).
See GIHON.

Several distinguished modern writers have sought
to identify the Tyropceon Valley (el Wad) with
Hinnom, but as the Tyropceon was incorporated
within the city walls before the days of Manasseh
(see JERUSALEM), it is practically impossible that
it could have been the scene of the sacrifice of
children—a ritual which must have occurred be-
yond the city’s limits (2 K 23 10, ete).

The clearest geographical fact is found in Josh
15 8; 18 16, where we find that the boundary of

Judah and Benjamin passed from
3. WAdy er- En-rogel ‘‘by the valley of the son of
Rababi Hinnom’’; if the modern Bir Eyydb is

En-rogel, as is certainly most probable,
then the Wddy er-Rabébi, known traditionally as
Hinnom, is correctly so called. It is possible that,
the name extended to the wide open land formed
by the junction of the three valleys; indeed, some
would place Tophet at this spot, but there is no
need to extend the name beyond the actual gorge.
The Wédy er-Rababi commences in a shallow, open
valley due W. of the Jaffa Gate, in the center of
which lies the Birkeé Mamilla; near the Jaffa Gate
it turns S. for about 3 of a mile, its course being
dammed here to form a large pool, the Birket es
Sulian. Below this it gradually curves to the E.
and rapidly descends between sides of bare rocky
scarps, much steeper in ancient _times. A little
before the valley joins the wide Kidron valley lies
the traditional site of AKELDAMA (q.v.).

E. W. G. Masrerman


HIP (pw, shdk, “leg,” “limb,” “hip,” ‘‘shoul-
der’): Samson smote the Philis “hip and thigh”
(Heb “leg upon thigh’”’), which was indicative of ‘“‘a
great slaughter” (Jgs 15 8), the bodies being hewed,
in pieces with such violence that they lay in bloody
confusion, their limbs piled up on one another in
great heaps. See also SINEW.


HIPPOPOTAMDS, hip-d-pot’a-mus (Job 41 1m).
See BEHEMOTH.


HIRAH, hi'ra (1, hirah; LXX Elpds, Hirds):
A native of Adullam, and a “friend” of Judah
(Gen 38 1.12). The LXX and the Vulg both
describe him as Judah’s “shepherd.”


HIRAM, hiram (7%, hiram; LXX Xipdp,
Chirdm, but Xapép, Cheirdm, in 2S 6 11; 1 Ch
14 1): There is some confusion regarding the form
of this name. In the books of S and K the pre-
vailing form is ‘Hiram’ (O°, hirém); but in
1K 5 10.18m (Heb 24.32); 740m ‘“Hirom”
(OT, hirém) is found. In Ch the form of the
word is uniformly ‘“Huram’”’ (O77, haradm).

(1) A king of Tyre who lived on most friendly
terms with both David and Solomon. After David
had taken the stronghold of Zion, Hiram sent
messengers and workmen and materials to build
a palace for him at Jerus (2 8 6 11; 1 Ch 14 1).
Solomon, on his accession to the throne, made a
league with Hiram, in consequence of which Hiram
furnished the new king of Israel with skilled work-
men and with cedar trees and fir trees and algum
trees from Lebanon for the building of the Temple.
In return Solomon gave annually to Hiram large
quantities of wheat and oil (1 K 6 1 [Heb 15] ff;
2 Ch 2 3 [Heb 2] ff). “At the end of twenty years,
wherein Solomon had built the two houses, the
house of Jeh and the king’s house,” Solomon made
a present to Hiram of twenty cities in the land of
Galilee. Hiram was not at all pleased with these
cities and contemptuously called them ‘‘Cabul.”
His displeasure, however, with this gift, does not
seem to- have disturbed the amicable relations that
had hitherto existed between the two kings, for
subsequently Hiram sent to the king of Israel 120
talents of gold (1 K 9 10-14). Hiram and Solo-
mon maintained merchant vessels on the Medi-
terranean and shared mutually in a profitable trade
with foreign ports (1 K 10 22). Hiram’s servants,
“shipmen that had knowledge of the sea,’”’ taught
the sailors of Solomon the route from Ezion-geber
and Eloth to Ophir, whence large stores of gold were
brought to King Solomon (1 K 9 26; 2 Ch 8 171).

Jos (CAp, I, 17, 18) informs us, on the authority
of the historians Dius and Menander, that Hiram
was the son of Abibal, that he had a prosperous
reign of 34 years, and died at the age of 53. He’
tells us on the same authority that Hiram and
Solomon sent problems to each other to solve; that
Hiram could not solve those sent him by Solomon,
whereupon he paid to Solomon a large sum of money,
as had at first been agreed upon. Finally, Abde-
mon, a man of Tyre, did solve the problems, and
proposed others which Solomon was unable to ex-

lain; consequently Solomon was obliged to pay

ack to Hiram a vast sum of money. Jos further
states (Ant, VIII, ii, 8) that the correspondence
carried on between Solomon and Hiram in regard
to the building of the Temple was preserved, not
only in the records of the Jews, but also in the publie
records of Tyre. It is also related by Phoenician
historians that Hiram gave his daughter to Solomon
in marriage.

(2) The name of a skilful worker in brass and
other substances, whom Solomon secured from


1395


Hiram king of Tyre to do work on the Temple.
His father was a brass-worker of Tyre, and his
mother was a woman of the tribe of Naphtali (1 K
7 14), “a woman of the daughters of Dan’’ (2 Ch
2 14 [Heb 13]; 1 K 7 13 ff; 2 Ch 2 13f [Heb
12.13)). Jesse L. Corron
HIRCANUS, hér-ka’nuz. See Hrrcanus.


HIRE, hir: Two entirely different words are tré
“hire” in the OT: .

(1) The most frequent one is "2W, sakhdr, vb.
“20 , sdkhar, and verbal adj. W2W, sakhir. (a) As
a vb. it means “to hire’’ for a wage, either money
or something else; in this sense it is used with regard
to ordinary laborers (1S 2 5; 2 Ch 24 12), or
mercenary soldiers (25 10 6; 2K 76; 1 Ch 19
6; 2 Ch 26 6), or a goldsmith (Isa 46 6), or a
band of loose followers (Jgs 9 4), or a false priest
(Jgs 18 4), or Balaam (Dt 23 4; Neh 13 2), or
hostile counsellors (Ezr 4 5), or false prophets (Neh
6 12f), As a verbal adj. it refers to things (Ex
22 15; Isa 7 20) or men (Lev 19 13; Jer 46 21).
(b) As anoun it denotes the wage in money, or some-
thing else, paid to workmen for their services (Gen
30 32f; 318; Dt 24 15; 1K 5 6; Zec 8 10),
or the rent or hire paid for a thing (Ex 22 15), or
a work-beast (Zec 8 10). In Gen 80 16 Leah hires
from Rachel the privilege of having Jacob with her
again, and her conception and the subsequent birth
of a son, she calls her Aire or wage from the Lord
for the gift of her slave girl to Jacob as a concubine
(Gen 30 18).

(2) The other word tr‘ hire is 72N, ’ethnan,
once J2mIN , ’ethnan. It is rather a gift (from root
D2, ndthan, “to give’) than a wage earned by
labor, and is used uniformly in a bad sense. It is
the gift made to a harlot (Dt 23 18), or, reversing
the usual custom, made by the harlot nation (Kzk
16 31.41). It was also used metaphorically of the
gifts made by Israelites to idols, since this was
regarded as spiritual harlotry (Isa 23 17f; Mic
1 7; cf also Hos 8 9 f).

In the Eng. NT the word occurs once as a vb.
and 3 t as a noun as the tr of muodds, misthés, and
its verbal form. In Mt 20 1.8 and Jas 6 4 it
refers to the hiring of ordinary field laborers for a
daily wage. In Lk 10 7 it signifies the stipend
which is due the laborer in the spiritual work of the
kingdom of God. It is a wage, earned by toil, as
that of other laborers. The word is very significant
here and absolutely negatives the idea, all too
prevalent, that money received by the spiritual toiler
isa gift. Itisrather a wage, the reward of real toil.

Wiiiam Joszpa McGLotauin

HIRELING, hir'ling (W>2W, sakhir): Occurs
only 6 t in the OT, and uniformly means a laborer
for a wage. In Job 7 1f there is reference to the
hireling’s anxiety for the close of the day. In Isa
16 14 and 21 16 the length of the years of a hireling
is referred to, probably because of the accuracy
with which they were determined by the employer
and the employee. Malachi (3 5) speaks of the
oppression of the hireling in his wages, probably by
the smallness of the wage or by in some way de-
frauding him of part of it.

In the NT the word “hireling”’ (uo Owrds, misthotds)
occurs only in Jn 10 12f, where his neglect of the
sheep is contrasted unfavorably with the care and
courage of the shepherd who owns the sheep, who
leads them to pasture and lays down his life for their
protection from danger and death.

Wiutam Joserpa McGuortauin

HIS, hiz: Used often in AV with reference to a
neuter or inanimate thing, or to a lower animal


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hinnom
Hittites


(Gen 1 11, “after his kind’; Lev 1 16, “pluck
away his crop’”’ } Acts 12 10, “of his own accord’’;
1 Cor 15 38, “his own body’’), etc. RV substi-
tutes “its.”


HISS, his (PW, sharak): “To hiss’’ has two appli-
cations: (1) to call, (2) to express contempt or
scorn.

(1) Itis the tr of sharak, a mimetic word meaning
to hiss or whistle, to call (bees, etc), (a) Isa 5 26,
“T will hiss unto them from the ends of the earth,”
RV “hiss for them [m “him’’] from the end of the
earth’; 7 18, “Jeh will hiss for the fly that is in the
uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee
that is in the land of Assyria’; viz. Egyptians whose
land was noted for flies (18 1) and Assyrians whose
country was preéminently one of bees. Danger-
ous enemies are compared to bees in Dt 1 44;
Ps 118 12 (Skinner’s Isaiah): Zec 10 8, “I will hiss
for them, and gather them’’ (His own people, who
will come at His call).

(2) More often, to hiss is to express contempt or
derision (1 K 9 8; Job 27 23; Jer 19 8, etc).
In this sense we have also frequently a hissing (2
Ch 29 8; Jer 19 8; 26 9.18; 29 18; 51 37; Mic
6 16, sh*rékah); Jer 18 16, sh*rikdth or sh*rikoth;
Ecclus 22 1, ‘Every one will hiss him [the slothful
man] out in his disgrace’’ (eksurissd, ‘“‘to hiss out’);
Wisd 17 9, “hissing of serpents’’ (surigmdés).

W. L. WaLKER

HITHERTO, hith’ér-to6 (to this): Used of both
place and time. It is the tr of various words and
phrases:

(1) Of place, ‘adh hdélam (2 § 7 18, “Thou hast
brought me hitherto,’ RV “thus far’; 1 Ch 17 16;
perhaps 1 S 7 12, ‘adh hénnah, “Hitherto hath Jeh
helped us” [in connection with the setting up of the
stone Ebenezer]) belongs to this head; hénnah is
properly an adv. of place; it might always be ren-
dered ‘thus far.”

(2) Of time, ‘adh koh, “unto this” (Ex 7 16,
“Hitherto thou hast not hearkened”; Josh 17 14,
“Hitherto Jeh hath blessed me’); méaz, “from
then” (28 16 34, RV “in time past’); hal’ah,
“beyond,” etc (Isa 18 7, “terrible from their be-
ginning hitherto,’’ RV ‘‘onward’’); ‘adh kah, Aram.
(Dnl 7 28, RV “here,’’ m “hitherto’’); ‘adh hén-
nah, “unto here” (Jgs 16 138; 181 16; Ps 71 17,
etc); dchri tou detro (Rom 1 13, ‘was let [RV
“hindered’’] hitherto’’); héds drti, “until now’ (Jn
6 17, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work,”
RV “even until now,” that is, “on the Sabbath as
well as on other days, and I do as He does”’; 16 24,
“Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask,
and ye'shall receive,” that is “up till now’; “now
ask in my name and ye shall receive’); mipé, “not
yet”’ (1 Cor 3 2, “Hitherto ye were not able to
bear it,” RV ‘not yet’). W. L. Waker


HITTITES, hit’its (0 WA, DUAN, bend beth,
hittim; Xerrato., Chetiatoi): One of the seven
nations conquered by Israel in Pal.


I. OT Notices
I. Enumeration of Races
2. Individuais
3. Later Mention
II. History
Sources
. Chronology. :
Egyptian Invasions: XVIIIth Dynasty
“The Great King”
Egyptian Invasions: XIXth Dynasty
. Declension of Power: Aryan Invasion
Second Aryan Invasion
. Assyrian Invasions
. Invasion by Assur-nasir-pal
10. Invasions by Shalmaneser II and Rimmon-
nirari ITI
11. Revolts and Invasions
12. Break-up of Hittite Power
13. Mongols in Syrla


OWNER GOW p+


Hittites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1396


WII. Lanevacs
- Mongol Race
. Hittite and Egyptian Monuments
. Hair and Beard
. Hittite Dress :
. Hittite Names
. Vocabulary of Pterium Epistles
- Tell el-Amarna Tablet
IV. Reuicion
1. Polytheism: Names of Deities
2. Religious Symbolism
V. Script
1. Cuneiform and Hieroglyphic
2. Description of Signs
3. Interpretation of Monuments
LITERATURE
I. OT Notices.—The “sons of Heth’’ are noticed
12 t and the Hittites 48 t in the OT. In 21 cases
the name occurs in the enumeration
1. Enumer- of races, in Syria and Canaan, which are
ation of said (Gen 10 6f) to have been akin
Races to the early inhabitants of Chaldaea
: and Babylon. From at least 2000
BC this population is known, from monumental
records, to have been partly Sem and partly Mon-
golic; and the same mixed race is represented by the
Hittite records recently discovered in Cappadocia and
Pontus. Thus while the Canaanites (“lowlanders’’),
Amorites (probably “highlanders’’), Hivites (‘‘tribes-
men”’) and Perizzites (“‘rusties’’) bear Sem titles, the
Hittites, Jebusites and Girgashites appear to have
non-Sem names. Ezekiel (16 3.45) speaks of the
Jebusites as a mixed Hittite-Amorite people.
The names of Hittites noticed in the OT include
several that are Sem (Ahimelech, Judith, Bashe-
_,. math, etc), but others like Uriah and
2. Individ- Beeri (Gen 26 34) which are probably
uals non-Sem. Uriah appears to have mar-
_ ., Ned a Heb wife (Bathsheba), and
Esau in like manner married Hittite women (Gen
26 34; 36 2). In the time of Abraham we read
of Hittites as far S. as Hebron (Gen 23 3 ff; 27 46),
but there is no historic improbability in this at a
time when the same race appears (see Zon) to
have ruled in the Nile Delta (but see Gray in Expos,
May, 1898, 340).


NOR ONE


In later times the “land of the Hittites’? (Josh 1
4; Jgs 1 26) was in Syria and near the Euphrates
(see TAHTIM-HopsHI); though Uriah
(2 11) lived in Jerus, and Ahimelech
(1 8 26 6) followed David. In the
time of Solomon (I K 10 29), the
“kings of the Hittites’ are mentioned with the
“kings of Syria,’ and were still powerful a century
later (2 K 7 6). Solomon himself married Hittite
wives (1 K 11 1), and a few Hittites seem still to
have been left in the S. (2 Ch 8 7), even in his time,
if not after the captivity (Ezr 9 1; Neh 9 8).

IL History.—The Hittites were known to the
Assyrians as Hatli, and to the Egyptians as Kheta,

and their history has been very fully
1. Sources recovered from the records of the
XVIIIth and XIXth Egyp Dynasties,
from the Am Tab, from Assyr annals and, quite


3. Later
Mention


recently, from copies of letters addressed to Bab
rulers by the Hittite kings, discovered by Dr. H.
Winckler in the ruins of Boghaz-keui (‘the town
of the pass’), the ancient Pterium in Pontus, E.
of the river Halys. The earliest known notice
(King, Egypt and W. Asia, 250) is in the reign of
Saamsu-ditana, the last king of the first Bab Dy-
nasty, about 2000 BC, when the Hittites marched
on the “land of Akkad,” or “highlands” N. of Meso-
potamia.
The chronology of the Hittites has been made
clear by the notices of contemporary rulers in Baby-
lonia, Matiene, Syria and Egypt,
2. Chronol- found by Winckler in the Hittite
ogy correspondence above noticed, and is
of great importance to Bible history,
because, taken in conjunction with the Am Tab,
with the Kassite monuments of Nippur, with the
Bab chronicles and contemporary chronicles of
Babylon and Assyria, it serves to fix the dates of the
Egyp kings of the XVIJIth and XIXth Dynasties
which were previously uncertain by nearly a century,
but which may now be regarded as settled within a
few years. From the Am Tab it is known that
Thothmes IV was contemporary with the father
of Adad-nirari of. Assyria (Berlin no. 30), and
Amenophis IV with Buma-burias of Babylon
(Brit. Mus. no. 2); while a letter from Hattu-sil,
the Hittite contemporary of Rameses I], was
addressed to Kadashman-lurgu of Babylon on the
occasion of his accession. These notices serve to
show that the approximate dates given by Brugsch
for the Pharaohs are more correct than those pro-
posed by Mahler; and the following table will be
useful for the understanding of the history—Thoth-
mes III being known to have reigned 54 years,
Amenophis ITI at least 36 years, and Rameses II,
66 yearsor more. The approximate dates appear to
be thus fixed.
The Hyksos race having been expelled from the
Delta by Aahmes, the founder of the XVIIIth
(Theban) Dynasty, after 1700 BC,
3. Egyptian the great trade route through Pal and


Invasions: Syria waslater conquered by Thothmes
XVIIIth I, who set up a monument on the W.
Dynasty bank ofthe Euphrates. The conquests


of Aahmes were maintained by his suc-

cessors Amenophis I and Thothmes I and II; but
when Thothmes III attained his majority (about
1580 BC), a great league of Syrian tribes and of
Canaanites, from Sharuhen near Gaza and “from
the water of Egypt, as far as the land of Naharain”
(Aram-naharaim), opposed this Pharaoh in his 22d
‘aay being led by the king of Kadesh—probably
adesh on the Orontes (now Kedes, N. of Riblah)—
but they were defeated near Megiddo in Central
Pal; and in successive campaigns down to his 31st
year, Thothmes III reconquered the Pal plains, and
all Syria to Carchemish on the Euphrates. In his
29th year, after the conquest of Tuneb (now Tennib,
W.of Arpad), he mentions the tribute of the Hit-
tites including ‘304 Ibs in 8 rings of silver, a great
piece of white precious stone, and zagu wood.”
‘They were, however, still powerful, and further wars
in Syria were waged by Amenophis II, while Thoth-
mes IV also speaks of his first “campaign against
the land of the Khbeta.’’ Adad-nirari I wrote to
Egypt to say that Thothmes IV had established
his father (Bel-tiglat-Assur) as ruler of the land of
Marhasse (probably Mer’ash in the extreme N. of
Syria), and to ask aid against the “king of the land
of the Hittites.’ Against the increasing power of
this race Thothmes IV and his son Amenophis III
strengthened themselves by marriage alliances with
the Kassite kings of Babylon, and with the cognate
rulers of Matiene, E. of the Hittite lands of Syria,
and Cappadocia. Dusratta of Matiene, whose sister


1397


_THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hittites


Gilukhepa was married by Amenophis III in his
10th year, wrote subsequently to this Pharaoh to
announce his own accession (Am Tab, Brit. Mus.
no. 9) and his defeat of the Hittites, sending a two-
horse chariot and a young man and young woman
as “spoils of the land of the Hittites.’
About this time (1480 BC) arose a great Hittite
ruler bearing the strange name Subbiliuliuma,
similar to that of Sapalulmi, chief of
4, “The the Hattinai, in North Syria, men-
Great King” tioned by Shalmaneser II in the 9th
cent. BC. He seems to have ruled at
Pterium, and calls himself ‘the great king, the noble
king of the Hatti.”’ He allied himself against
Dusratta with Artatama, king of the Harri or North
Syrians. The Syrian Hittites in Marhassi, N. of
the land of the Amorites, were led shortly after by
Edugamma of Kinza (probably Kittiz, N. of Arpad)
in alliance with Aziru the Amorite, on a great raid
into Phoenicia and to Bashan, S. of Damascus.
Thus it appears that the Amorites had only reached
this region shortly before the Heb conquest of


The XVIIIth Dynasty was succeeded, about
1400 BC, or a little later, by the XIXth, and
Rameses I appears to have been the

5. Egyptian Pharaoh who made the treaty which
Invasions: Mursilis, brother of Arandas, con-
XIXth tracted with Egypt. But on the
Dynasty accession of Seti I, son of Rameses I,
the Syrian tribes prepared to “make

a stand in the country of the Harri’ against the
Egyp resolution to recover the suzerainty ofs their
country. Seti I claims to have conquered ‘‘Kadesh
(on the Orontes) in the Land of the Amorites,’’ and
it is known that Mutallis, the eldest son of Mur-
silis, fought against Egypt. According to his
younger brother Hattusil, he was a tyrant, who
was finally driven out by his subjects and died before
the accession of Kadashman-Turgu (about 1355 BC)
in Babylon. Hattusil, the contemporary of Rameses
II, then seized the throne as ‘‘great king of the
Hittites’ and “king of Kus’ (“Cush,”’ Gen 2 13),
a term which in the Akkadian language meant, “the
West.” In his 2d year Rameses II advanced,


CONTEMPORARIES OF THE HITTITE KINGS


Babylon Assyria Egypt
1529 BC, Ussi ce 1520 BC, Bel-tiglat-Assur e 1520 BC, Thothmes IV
1521 ‘‘ Adumetas
©1510 ‘* Tazzigurumas
e 1500 ‘* Agukakrime ¢ 1500 Rimmon-nirari I
¢ 1490 ‘* Kadashman-Aku ec 1490 Amenophis IIT
ec 1480 ‘* Kadashman-indas ec 1480 “ Assur-Bel-nisisu
© 1475 ** Kuri-galzul e 1454 ‘' Amenophis IV
ec 1440 ‘* Burna-burias ec 1450 ‘* Buzur-Assur ce 1480 ‘* Horus
ec 1400 ‘* Kadashman-urutas c 1430 ‘ Assur-uballidh e 1400 ‘* Rameses I
e€ 13895 ‘* Kuri-galzu IT ec 1390 ‘* Bel-nirari I
¢ 1355 ‘' Nazimarutas ce 1360 ‘ Arik-dén-ilu ec 1360 ‘ Setil
e 1335 ‘* Kadashman-Turgu e 1340 ‘* Adad-nirari II ¢ 1337 ‘* Rameses II
ec 1320 Kadashman-burias e 1320 ‘* Shalmaneser I
c 1300 Kadashman-Enlil ©1300 ‘“ Tukulti-Ninip
e© 1285 ‘ Sagarakti-burias
e 1270 ‘* Rimmon-nadin-akhi e© 1265 ‘* Bél-kudur-usur ec 1270 ‘* Merenptah
e 1240 ‘* Rimmon-sum-nasir ©1235 ‘* Adar-bal-asar e 12385 “ Seti IT
e 1210 Zagaga-sum-edin c 1200 ‘ Assur-dan
1176 Marduk-bal-edin ©1175 “* Mutakkil-Nusku ec 1200 ‘** Rameses III
Bashan. Amenophis III repelled them in Phoeni- | after the capture of Ashkelon, as far as Beirft, and


cia, and Subbiliuliuma descended on Kinza, having
made a treaty with Egypt, and captured Edugamma
and his father Suttatarra. He also conquered the
land of Ikata which apparently lay E. of the Eu-
hrates and S. of Carchemish. Some 30 years
ater in the reign of Amenophis IV, Dusratta of
Matiene was murdered, and _ his kingdom was
attacked by the Assyrians; but Subbiliuliuma,
though not a friend of Dusratta with whom he
disputed the suzerainty of North Syria, sent aid
to Dusratta’s son Mattipiza, whom he set on his
throne, giving him his own daughter as a wife. A
little later (about 1440 BC) Aziru the Amorite, who
had been subject to Amenophis III, submitted to
this same great Hittite ruler, and was soon able to
conquer the whole of Phoenicia down to Tyre. All
the Egyp conquests were thus lost in the latter part
of the reign of Amenophis III, and in that of Ameno-
phis IV. Only Gaza seems to have been retained,
and Burna-burias of Babylon, writing to Amenophis
IV, speaks of the Canaanite rebellion as beginning
in the time of his father Kuri-galzu I (Am Tab,
Brit. Mus. no. 2), and of subsequent risings in his
own time (Berlin ne. 7) which interrupted communi-
cation with Egypt. Assur-yuballidh of Assyria
(Berlin no. 9), writing to the same Pharach, states
also that the relations with Assyria, which dated
back even to the time of Assur-nadin-akhi (about
1550 BC), had ceased. About this earlier period
Thothmes III records that he received presents from
Assyria. The ruin of Egypt thus left the Hittites
independent, in North Syria, about the time when
—according to OT chronology—Pal was conquered
by Joshua. They probably acknowledged Arandas,
the successor of Subbiliuliuma, as their suzerain.


in his 5th year he advanced on Kadesh where he
was opposed by a league of the natives of ‘the land
of the Kheta, the land of Naharain, and of all the
Kati’ (or inhabitants of Cilicia), among which con-
federates the “prince of Aleppo’ is specially noticed.
The famous poem of Pentaur gives an exaggerated
account of the victory won by Rameses II at
Kadesh, over the allies, who included the people
of Carchemish and of many other unknown places;
for it admits that the Egyp advance was not con-
tinued, and that peace was concluded. A second
war occurred later (when the sons of Rameses I[
were old enough to take part), and a battle was
then fought at Tuneb (Tennib) far N. of Kadesh,

robably about 13816 BC. The celebrated treaty
Beuween Rameses IT and Hattusil was then made, in
the 21st year of the first named. It was engraved
on a silver tablet having on the back the image of
Set (or Sutekh), the Hittite god of heaven, and was
brought to Egypt by Tar-Tessubas, the Hittite
envoy. The two “great kings” treated together
as equals, and formed a defensive and offensive
alliance, with extradition clauses which show the
advanced civilization of the age. In the 34th
year of his reign, Rameses II (who was then over
50 years of age) married a daughter of Hattusil,
who wrote to a son of Kadashman-Turgu (probably
Kadashman-burias) to inform this Kassite ruler of
Babylon of the event. He states in another letter
that he was allied by marriage to the father of
Kadashman-Turgu, but the relations between the
Kassite rulers and the Hittites were not very cordial,
and complaints were made on both sides. Hattusil
died before Rameses II, who ruled to extreme old
age; for the latter (and his queen) wrote letters to


Hittites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1398


Pudukhipa, the widow of this successful Hittite
overlord. He was succeeded by Duchalia, who
calls himself “the great king’ ‘and the “son of
Pudukhipa the great queen, queen of the land of
the city of the Hatti.”


Hittite King and Daughter.


_ The Hittite power began now, however, to decline,
in consequence of attacks from the W. by hostile
Aryan invaders. In the 5th year of


6. Declen- Seti Merenptah II, son of Rameses II,
sion of these fair ‘“‘peoples of the North” raided
Power: the Syrian coasts, and advanced even
Aryan In- to Belbeis and Heliopolis in Egypt,
vasion in alliance with the Libyans W. of


the Delta. They were defeated, and
Merenptah appears to have pursued them even to
Pa-Kan’ana near Tyre. A text of his 5th year
(found by Dr. Flinders Petrie in 1896) speaks of
this campaign, and says that while ‘‘Israel is spoiled”
the ‘‘Hittites are quieted’: for Merenptah appears
to have been on good terms with them, and allowed
corn to be sent in ships ‘‘to preserve the life of
this people of the Hatti.”’ Dudhalia was succeeded
by his son “Arnuanta the great king,” of whom
a bilingual seal has been found by Dr. Winckler,
in Hittite and cuneiform characters; but the con-
federacy of Hittite tribes which had so long resisted
Egypt seems to have been broken up by these
disasters and by the increasing power of Assyria.
A second invasion by the Aryans occurred in the
reign of Rameses III (about 1200 BC) when “agi-
tation seized the peoples of the North,”’
7. Second and “no people stood before their
Aryan In- arms, beginning with the people of the
vasion Hatti, of the Kati, of Carchemish and
Aradus.” The invaders, including Da-
nai (or early Greeks), came by land and sea to
Egypt, but were again defeated, and Rameses ITI—
the last of the great Pharaohs—pursued them far
north, and is even supposed by Brugsch to have
conquered Cyprus. Among the cities which he took
he names Carchemish, and among his captives were
‘the miserable king of the Hatti, a living prisoner,”
and the ‘‘miserable king of the Amorites.”’ :
Half a century later (1150 BC) the Assyrians
began to invade Syria, and Assur-ris-ist reached
Beirit; for even as early as about 1270 BC Tukulti-
Ninip of Assyria had conquered the Kassites, and
had set a Sem prince on their throne in Babylon.
Early in his reign (about 1130 BC) Tiglath-pileser I


claims to have subdued 42 kings, marching “‘to the
fords of the Euphrates, the land of the Hatti, and
the upper sea of the setting sun’’—or
8. Assyrian Mediterranean. Soldiers of the Hatti
Invasions had seized the cities of Sumasti (prob-
ably Samosata), but the Assyr conqueror
made his soldiers swim the Euphrates on skin bags,
and so attacked “‘Carchemish of the land of the
Hittites.” The Moschians in Cappadocia were ap-
parently of Hittite race, and were ruled by 5 kings:
for 50 years they had exacted tribute in Comma-~
gene (Northeastern Syria), and they were defeated,
though placing 20,000 men in the field against
Tiglath-pileser I. He advanced to Kumani (prob-
ably Comana in Cappadocia), and to Arini which
was apparently the Hittite capital called Arinas
(now Iranes), W. of Caesarea in the same region.
The power of the Hittites was thus broken by
Assyria, yet they continued the struggle for more
than 4 centuries afterward. After the
9. Invasion defeat of Tiglath-pileser I by Marduk-
by Assur- nadin-akhi of Babylon (1128-1111
nasir-pal BC), there is a gap in Assyr records,
and we next hear of the Hittites in the
reign of Assur-nasir-pal (883-858 BC); he entered
Commagene, and took tribute from ‘‘the son of
Bahian of the land of the Hatti,’”’ and from ‘‘San-
gara of Carchemish in the land of the Hatti,’’ so
that it appears that the Hittites no longer acknowl-
edged a single “great king.’”’ They were, however,
still rich, judging from the spoil taken at Carche-
mish, which included 20 talents of silver, beads,
chains, and sword scabbards of gold, 100 talents
of copper, 250 talents of iron, and bronze objects
from the palace representing sacred bulls, bowls,
cups and censers, couches, seats, thrones, dishes,
instruments of ivory and 200 slave girls, besides
embroidered robes of linen and of black and purple
stuffs, gems, elephants’ tusks, chariots and horses.
The Assyr advance continued to ‘Azz4z in North
Syria, and to the Afrin river, in the country of the
Hattinai who were no doubt Hittites, where similar
spoils are noticed, with 1,000 oxen and 10,000 sheep:
the pagutu, or “maces” which the Syrian kings used
as scepters, and which are often represented on
Hittite monuments, are specially mentioned in this
record. Assur-nasir-pal reached the Mediterranean
at Arvad, and received tribute from “kings of
the sea coast’’ including those of Gebal, Sidon and
Tyre. He reaped the corn of the Hittites, and from
Mt. Amanus in North Syria he took logs of cedar,
pine, box and cypress.
His son Shalmaneser II (858-823 BC) also in-
vaded Syria in his Ist year, and again mentions
Sangara of Carchemish, with Sapalulmi


10. Inva- of the Hattinai. In Commagene the
sions by chief of the Gamgums bore the old
Shalma- Hittite name Mutallis. In 856 BC
neserJIand Shalmaneser II attacked Mer’ash and

immon- advanced by Dabigu (now Toipuk)
nirari III to ‘Azziz. He took from the Hat-


tinai 3 talents of gold, 100 of silver,
300 of copper, 1,000 bronze vases and 1,000 em-
broidered robes. He also accepted as wives a
daughter of Mutallis and another Syrian princess.
Two years later 120,000 Assyrians raided the same
region, but the southward advance was barred
by the great Syrian league which came to the
aid of Irhuléna, king of Hamath, who was not sub-
dued till about 840 BC. In 836 BC the people of
Tubal, and the Kati of Cappadocia and Cilicia, were
again attacked. In 831 BC Qubarna, the vassal
king of the Hattinai in Syria, was murdered by his
subjects, and an Assyr tartanu or general was sent
to restore order. The rebels under Sapalulmi had
been confederated with Sangara of Carchemish.
Adad-nirari III, grandson of Shalmaneser II, was


1399


the next Assyr conqueror: in 805 BC he attacked
‘Azziz and Arpad, but the resistance of the
Syrians was feeble, and presents were sent from
Tyre, Sidon, Damascus and Edom. This conqueror
states that he subdued “the land of the Hittites,
the land of the Amorites, to the limits of the land
of Sidon,” as well as Damascus, Edom and Philistia.
But the Hittites were not as yet thoroughly sub-
dued, and often revolted. In 738 BC Tiglath-
pileser I1 mentions among his tribu-
11. Revolts taries a chief of the Gamgums bearing
and In- the Hittite name Tarku-lara, with
vasions Pisiris of Carchemish. In 702 BC
Sennacherib passed peacefully through
the “land of the Hatti’” on his way to Sidon: for
in 717 BC Sargon had destroyed Carchemish, and
had taken many of the Hittites prisoners, sending
them away far east and replacing them by Baby-
lonians. Two years later he in the same way took
the Hamathites as captives to Assyria. Some of
the Hittites may have fled to the S., for in 709 BC
Sargon states that the king of Ashdod was deposed
by “people of the Hatti plotting rebellion who des-
pised his rule,’’ and who set up Azuri instead.
The power of the Hittites was thus entirely broken
before Sennacherib’s time, but they were not entirely
exterminated, for, in 673 BC, Esar-
12. Break- haddon speaks of “twenty-two kings
up of Hit- of the Hattiandnearthesea.’”’ Hittite
tite Power names occur in 712 BC (Tarhu-nazi of
Meletene) and in 711 BC (Mutallis
of Commagene), but after this they disappear.
Yet, even in a recently found text of Nebuchad-
nezzar (after 600 BC), we read that ‘‘chiefs of the
land of the Hattim, bordering on the Euphrates to
the W., where by command of Nergal my lord
I had destroyed their rule, were made to bring
strong beams from the mountain of Lebanon to
my city Babylon.” A Hittite population seems to
have survived even in Rom times in Cilicia and
Cappadocia, for (as Dr. Mordtman observed) a
king and his son in this region both bore the name
Tarkon-dimotos in the time of Augustus, according
to Dio Cassius and Tacitus; and this name recalls
that of Tarku-timme, the king of Erine in Cappa-
docia, occurring on a monument which shows him
as brought captive before an Assyr king, while the
same name also occurs on the bilingual silver boss
which was the head of his scepter, inscribed in
Hittite and cuneiform characters.
The power of the Mongolic race decayed gradu-
ally as that of the Sem Assyrians increased; but
even now in Syria the two races remain


13. Mon- mingled, and Turkoman nomads still
gols in camp even as far §. as the site of
Syria Kadesh on the Orontes, while a few


tribes of the same stock (which entered
Syria in the Middle Ages) still inhabit the plains
of Sharon and Esdraelon, just as the southern Hit-
tites dwelt, among the Amorites at Jerus and Hebron
in the days of Abraham, before they were driven
north by Thothmes III. ;
If, Language.—The gucstions of race and lan-
guage in early times, before the early stocks were
mixed or decayed, cannot be dissoci-
1. Mongol ated, and we have abundant evidence
Race of the racial type and characteristic
dress of the Hittites. The late Dr.
Birch of the British Museum pointed out the Mon-
gol character of the Hittite type, and his opinion has
been very generally adopted. In 1888 Dr. Sayce
(The Hittites, 15, 101) calls them ‘“Mongoloid,”’
and says, “They had in fact, according to craniolo-
gists, the characteristics of a Mongoloid race.”
This was also the opinion of Sir W. Flower; and,
if the Hittites were Mongols, it would appear prob-
able that they spoke a Mongol dialect. It is also


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hittites


apparent that, in this case, they would be related
to the old Mongol population of Chaldaea (the people
of Akkad and Sumir or “of the highlands and river
valley”) from whom the Sem Babylonians derived
their earliest civilization.


Passage-Frieze, Iasili-kaia.


The Hittite type is represented, not only on their
own monuments, but on those of the XVIIIth and
XIXth Egyp Dynasties, including a

2. Hittite colored picture of the time of Rame-
on Egyp- ses III. The type represented has a
tian Monu- short head and receding forehead,


ments a prominent and sometimes rather
curved nose, a strong jaw and a hair-
less face. The complexion is yellow, the eyes


slightly slanting, the hair of the head black, and
gathered into a long pigtail behind. The physiog-
nomy is like that of the Sumerians represented on a
bas-relief at Tel-loh (Zirgul) in Chaldaea, and very
like that of some of the Kirghiz Mongols of the
present time, and of some of the more purely Mon-
golic Turks. The head of Gudea at Zirgul in like
manner shows (about 2800 BC) the broad cheek
bones and hairless face of the Turkish type; and the
language of his texts, in both grammar and vocabu-
lary, is closely similar to pure Turkish speech.


Gz Le “ofo .
AES REGS


Priest-King and God of Cultivation.


ie Hs"


Among Mongolic peoples the beard grows only
late in life, and among the Akkadians it is rarely
represented—-excepting in the case of

8. Hair and gods and ancient kings. The great
Beard bas-relief found by Koldewey at
: Babylon, and representing a Hittite
thunder-god with a lone pigtail and (at the back) a
Hittite inscription, is bearded, but the pigtailed
heads on other Hittite monuments are usually hair-


Hittites


less. At Iasili-Kaia—the rock shrine near Pterium
—only the supreme god is bearded, and all the other
male figures are beardless. At Ibreez, in Lycaonia,
the gigantic god who holds corn and grapes in his
hands is bearded, and the worshipper who approaches
him also has a beard, and his hair is arranged in the
distinctive fashion of the Sem Babylonians and
Assyrians. This type may represent Sem mixture,
for M. Chantre discovered at Kara-eyak, in Cappa-
docia, tablets in Sem Bab representing traders’
letters perhaps as old as 2000 BC. The type of
the Ibreez figures has been said to resemble that of
the Armenian peasantry of today; but, although the
Armenians are Aryans of the old Phrygian stock,
and their language almost purely Aryan, they have
mixed with the Turkish and Sem races, and have
been said even to resemble the Jews. Little re-
liance can be placed, therefore, on comparison with
modern mixed types. The Hittite pigtail is very
distinctive of a Mongolic race. It was imposed on
the Chinese by the Manchus in the 17th cent., but
it is unknown among Aryan or Sem peoples, though
it seems to be represented on some Akkadian seals,
and on a bas-relief picturing the Mongolic Susians
in the 7th cent. BC.

The costume of the Hittites on monuments seems
also to indicate Mongolic origin. Kings and

riests wear long robes, but warriors
(and the gods at Ibreez and Babylon)
wear short jerkins, and the Turkish
shoe or slipper with a curled-up toe,
which, however, is also worn by the Heb tribute
bearers from Jehu on the ‘‘black obelisk” (about
840 BC) of Shalmaneser II. Hittite gods and
warriors are shown as wearing a high, conical head-
dress, just like that which (with addition of the
Moslem turban) characterized the Turks at least
as late as the 18th cent. The short jerkin also
appears on Akkadian seals and bas-reliefs, and,


4. Hittite
Dress


Hittite Warrior (from Senjirli).


generally speaking, the Hittites (who were enemies
of the Lycians, Danai and other Aryans to their
west) may be held to be very clearly Mongolic
in physical type and costume, while the art of
their monuments is closely similar to that of the
most archaic Akkadian and Bab sculptures of Meso-
potamia. It is natural to suppose that they were a
branch of the same remarkable race which civilized


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1400


Chaldaea, but which seems to have had its earliest
home in Akkad, or the “highlands” near Ararat
and Media, long before the appearance of Aryan
tribes either in this region or in Ionia. The con-
clusion also agrees with the OT statement that the
Hittites were akin to the descendants of Ham in
Babylonia, and not to the “fair” tribes (Japheth),
incliding Medes, Ionians and other Aryan peoples.

As early as 1866 Chabas remarked that the
Hittite names (of which so many have been men-
tioned above) were clearly not Sem,
and this has been generally allowed.
Those of the Amorites, on the other
hand, are Sem, and the type repre-
sented, with brown skin, dark eyes and hair, aqui-
line features and beards, agrees (as is generally
allowed) in indicating a Sem race. There are now
some 60 of these Hittite names known, and they
do not suggest any Aryan etymology. They are
quite unlike those of the Aryan Medes (such
as Baga-datta, etc) mentioned by the Assyrians,
or those of the Vannic kings whose language (as
shown by recently published bilinguals in Vannic
and Assyrian) seems very clearly to have been
TIranian—or similar to Pers and Sanskrit—but which
only occurs in the later Assyr age. Comparisons
with Armenian and Georgian (derived from the
Phrygian and Scythian) also fail to show any
similarity of vocabulary or of syntax, while on the
other hand comparisons with the Akkadian, the
Kassite and modern Turkish at once suggest a
linguistic connection which fully agrees with what
has been said above of the racial type. The
common element Tarku, or Tarkhan, m Hittite
names suggests the Mongol dargo and the Turkish
tarkhan, meaning a “tribal chief.’ Sz again is an
Akkadian word for a “ruler,” and nazi is an element
in both Hittite and Kassite names.

It has also been remarked that the vocabulary
of the Hittite letters discovered by Chantre at
Pterium recalls that of the letter writ-
ten by Dusratta of Matiene to Amen-
ophis III (Am Tab no. 27, Berlin),
and that Dusratta adored the Hittite
god Tessupas. A careful study of the
language of this letter shows that, in
syntax and vocabulary alike, it must be regarded
as Mongolic and as a dialect of the Akkadian group.
The cases of the noun, for instance, are the same
as in Akkadian and in modern Turkish. No less
than 50 words and terminations are common to the
language of this letter and of those discovered
by M. Chantre and attributed to the Hittites whose
territory immediately adjoined that of Matiene.
The majority of these words occur also in Akkadian.

But in addition to these indications we have a
letter in the Am Tab (Berlin no. 10) written by a

Hittite prince, in his own tongue and


5. Hittite
Names


6. Vocabu-
lary of
Pterium
Epistles


7. Tellel- in the cuneiform script. It is from
Amarna (and not to, as has been wrongly sup-
Tablet posed by Knudtzon) a chief named


_ -Yarhun-dara, and is addressed to
Amenophis III, whose name stands first. In all
the other letters the name of the sender always
follows that of the recipient. The general meaning
of this letter is clear from the known meanings of
the “ideograms” used for many words; and it is
also clear that the language is “agglutinative”’
like the Akkadian. The suffixed possessive pro-
nouns follow the pl. termination of the noun as in
Akkadian, and prepositions are not used as they
are in Sem and Aryan speech; the precative form
of the vb. has also been recognized to be the same
as used in Akkadian. The pronouns mi, “my,”
and iz, “thy,” are to be found in many living Mon-
golic dialects (e.g. the Zyrianian me and te); in
Akkadian also they occur as mi and zt. The letter


1401


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hittites


opens with the usual salutation: “Letter to Ameno-
phis III the great king, king of the land of Egypt
[Mizzari-na], from Tarhun-dara [Tarhundara-dal,
king of the land of Arzapi [or Arzaa], thus. To
me is prosperity. To my ‘
nobles, my hosts, my ca-
valry, to all that is mine
in all my lands, may there
be prosperity; [moreover?]
may there Be prosperity:
to thy house, thy wives,
thy sons, thy nobles, thy
hosts, thy cavalry, to all
that is thine in thy lands
may there be prosper-
ity.” The letter continues
to speak of a daughter of
the Pharaoh, and of a sum
of gold which is being
sent in charge of an envoy
named Irsappa. It con-
cludes (as in many other
instances) with a list of
presets, these being sent
y “the Hittite prince
[Nu Hattu] from the land
Igait’”? (perhaps the same
as Ikata), and including,
besides the gold, various
robes, and ten chairs of
ebony inlaid with ivory.
As far as it can at present be understood, the
language of this letter, which bears no indications
of either Sem or Aryan speech, whether in vocabu-
lary or in syntax, strongly favors the conclusion that
the native Hittite language was a dialeet of that
spoken by the Akkadians, the Kassites and the Min-
yans of Matiene, in the same age.
IV. Religion.—The Hittites like their neighbors
adored many gods. Besides Set (or Sutekh),
the “great ruler of heaven,” and


Storm-God Tessupas.


1. Poly- Istar (Ashtoreth), we also find men-
theism: tioned (in Hattusil’s treaty) gods and
Names of goddesses of ‘“‘the hills and rivers of the
Deities land of the Hatti,” ‘the great sea, the


winds and the clouds.” Tessupas was
known to the Babylonians as a name of Rimmon
the god of thunder and rain. On a bilingual seal
(in Hittite and cuneiform characters), now in the
Ashmolean Museum, we find noticed the goddess
Ishara, whose name, among the Kassites, was
equivalent to Istar. The Hittite gods are repre-
sented—like those of the Assyrians—standing erect
on lions. One of them (at Samala in Syria) is
lion-headed like Nergal. They also believed in
demons, like the Akkadians and others.
Their pantheon was thus also Mongolic, and the
suggestion (by Dr. Winckler) that they adored
Indian gods (Indra, Varuna), and the
2. Religious Pers Mithra, not only seems improb-
Symbolism able, but is also hardly supported by
the quotations from Sem texts on
which this idea is based. The sphinx is found as a
Hittite emblem at Eyuk, N. of Pterium, with the
double-headed eagle which again, at Iasili-kaia,
supports a pair of deities. It also occurs at Tel-
loh as an Akkadian emblem, and was adopted
by the Seljuk Turks about 1000 AD. At Eyuk
we have a representation of a procession bringing
goats and rams to an altar. At Imflatun-bunar
the winged sun is an emblem as in Babylonia. At
Mer’ash, in Syria, the mother goddess carries her
child, while an eagle perches on a harp beside her.
At Carchemish the naked Istar is represented with
wings. The religious symbolism, like the names of
deities, thus suggests a close connection with the em-
blems and beliefs of the Kassites and Akkadians.


V. Script.—In the 16th cent. BC, and down to
the 18th cent., the Hittites used the cuneiform
characters and the Bab language


1. Cunei- for correspondence abroad. On seals
.form and and mace-heads they used their own
Hiero- hieroglyphics, together with the cunei-
glyphic form, These emblems, which occur


on archaic monuments at Hamath,
Carchemish and Aleppo in Syria, as well as very
frequently in Cappadocia and Pontus, and less fre-
quently as far W. as Ionia, and on the E. at Baby-
lon, are now proved to be of Hittite origin, since the
discovery of the seal of Arnuanta already noticed.
The suggestion that they were Hittite was first made
by the late Dr. W. Wright (British and Foreign
Evangelical Review, 1874). About 100 such monu-
ments are now known, including seals from Nineveh
and Cappadocia, and Hittite gold ornaments in the
Ashmolean Museum; and there can be little doubt
that, in cases where the texts accompany figures
of the gods, they are of a votive character.
The script is quite distinctive, though many of
the emblems are similar to those used by the
1 adians. There are some 170 signs
2. Descrip- in all, arranged one below another in
tion of the lme—as among Akkadians. The
Signs lines read alternately from right to left
and from left to right, the profile em-
blems always facing the beginning of each line.
The interpretation of these texts is still a contro-
versial question, but the most valuable suggestion
toward their understanding is that made by the
late Canon Isaac Taylor (see The Alphabet, 1883).
A syllabary which was afterward used by the


Inscription and Mutiiated Figure from Jerabis.


Greeks in Cyprus, and which is found extensively
spread in Asia Minor, Egypt, Pal, Crete, and even
on later coins in Spain, was recognized by Dr.
Taylor as being derived irom the Hittite signs. It


Hivite
Holiness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1402


was deciphered by George Smith from a Cypriote-
Phoenician bilingual, and appears to give the sounds
applying to some 60 signs. These
3. Interpre- sounds are confirmed by the short bi-
tation of linguals as yet known, and they appear
Monuments in some cases at least to be very clearly
: _ the monosyllabic words which apply
in Akkadian to similar emblems. We have thus
the bases of a comparative study, by aid of a
known language and script—a method similar to
that which enabled Sir H. Rawlinson to recover
scientifically the lost cuneiform, or Champollion
to decipher Egyp hieroglyphics. See also ARcHaE-
oLocy oF Asta Minor; Recent EXxpiorarion.
Litzprature.—The Egyp notices will be found in
Brugsch’s A History of Egypt under the Pharaohs, 1879,
and the Assyr in Schrader’s Cuneiform Inseriptions and
the OT, ET, 1885. The discoveries of Chantre_ are
published in his Mission en Cappadoce, 1898, and those
of Dr. H. Winckler in the Mitteilungen der deutschen


Orient-Gesellschaft, no. 35, December, 1907. The re-
searches of Humann and Puchstein, Reisen in Klein-


asien und Nordsyrien, 1890, are also valuable for this |


question; as is also Dr. Robert Koldewey's discovery of
a Hittite mouument at Babylon (Die hetiische Inschrift,
1900). The recent discovery of sculpture at a site N. of
Samala by Professor Garstang is published in the Annals
of Archaeology, I, no. 4, 1908, by the University of Liver-
ool. These sculptures are supposed to date about 800
C, but no accompanying inscriptions have as yet been
found. The views of the present writer are detailed in
his Teil Amarna Tablets, 2d ed, 1894, andin The Hittites
and Their Languages, 1898. Dr. Sayce has given an
account of his researches in a small volume, The Hittites
1888, but many discoveries by Sir C. Wilson, Mr. D. G
Hogarth, Sir W. Ramsay, and other explorers have since
been published, and are scattered in various periodicals
not easily accessible. The suggestions of Drs. Jensen,
Hommel, and Peiser, in Germany, of comparison with
Armenian, Georgian and Turkish, have not as yet pro-
duced any agreement; nor have those of Dr. Sayce, who
looks to Vannic or to Gr; and further light on Hittite
decipberment is still awaited. See, further, Professor
Garstang’s Land of the Hittites, 1910.
C. R. Conpur
HIVITE, hi’vit (10, hiwwt; Etatos, Heuatos):
A son of Canaan (Gen 10 17), i.e. an inhabitant of
the land of Canaan along with the
Canaanite and other tribes (Ex 3 17,
; etc). In the list of Canaanite peoples
given in Gen 16 19-21, the Hivites are omitted
in the Heb text, though inserted in LXX and 8.
Gesenius suggests that the name is descriptive,
meaning “villagers.’’ The difficulty of explaining
it is increased by the fact that it has been confused
with ‘“Horite” in some passages of the Heb text.
In Josh 9 7 the LXX reads “‘Horite’ as also does
Cod. Ain Gen 34 2, and in Gen 36 2 a comparison
with vs 24.25 shows that ‘“Horite’’ must be substi-
tuted for ‘‘Hivite.’’
In Jgs 3 3 the Hittites are described as dwelling
“in Mount Lebanon, from Mount Baal-hermon unto
the entrance of Hamath,’’ andin accord-


1, Name


2, Geo- ance with this the Hivite is described
graphical in Josh 11 3 as being “under Hermon
Situation in the land of Mizpeh,” and in 2 8 24


7 they are mentioned immediately
after “the stronghold of Tyre.’”’ Hence the LXX
(Cod. A) reading must be right in Gen 34 2 and
Josh 9 7, which makes the inhabitants of Shechem
and Gibeon Horites instead of Hivites; indeed, in
Gen 48 22 the people of Shechem are called Amorite,
though this was a general name for the population
of Canaan in the patriarchal period. No name


resembling Hivite has yet been found in the Egyp
or Bab inscriptions. A. H. Sayce
HIZKI, hiz’ki Opt, hizki; LXX ’Atoxl,


Azaki; AV Hezeki): A son of Elpaal, a descendant
of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 17).


HIZKIAH, hizki’a (A3PIM, hizkiyah; LXX
‘Etexta, Ezekia, “strength of Jeh’’):


(1) A son of Neariah, a descendant of David
(1 Ch 3 23, AV ‘“‘Hezekiah’’).

(2) An ancestor of the prophet Zephaaiah (Zeph
11). In RV this word is here tr? ‘‘Hezekiah.”
This name again appears in Neh 10 17 [Heb 18]
in the form of “Hizkijah” in AV, but as “Hezekiah”
in RV. See Hezexrau.


HOAR, hor, HOARY, hor’i. See Cotor (8);
Ha:r. ;


HOAR-FROST, hér’frost, HOARY. See Frost.


HOBAB, hi’bab (3M , habhabh, “beloved”; LXX
*OB4B, Obdb): This name occurs only twice (Nu 10
29; Jgs 4.11). It is not certain whether it denotes
the father-in-law or the brother-in-law of Moses.
The direct statement of Nu 10 29 is that Hobab
was “the son of Reuel” (AV ‘‘Raguel”). This is
probably the correct view and finds support in Ex
18 27, which tells us that some time before the
departure of the Israelites from Sinai, Jethro had
departed and returned to his own land. The state-
ment of Jgs 4 11 is ambiguous, and therefore does
not help us out of the difficulty, but is rather itself
to be interpreted in the light of the earlier statement
in Nu 10 29.

Mohammedan traditions favor the view that
Hobab was only another name for Jethro. But
this has little weight against the statements of
Scripture. However, whether father-in-law or
brother-in-law to Moses, the service he rendered to
the leader of the hosts of Israel was most valuable
and beautiful. Hobab was an experienced sheikh
of the desert whose counsel and companionship
Moses desired in the unfamiliar regions through
which he was to journey. His knowledge of the
wilderness and of its possible dangers would enable
him to be to the Israelites “instead of eyes.”’

The facts recorded of this man are too meager to
enable us to answer all the questions that arise con-
cerning him, A difficulty that remains unsolved is
the fact that in Jgs 1 16 and 4 11 he is described as
a Kenite, while in Ex 3 1 and 18 1, the father-in-
law of Moses is spoken of as “‘the priest of Midian.’’

‘ Jesse L. Cotton

HOBAH, hio’ba (1310, hobhah): A place ‘‘on the
left hand,” i.e. to the N. of ‘“Damascus,” to which
Abraham pursued the defeated army of Chedor-
laomer (Gen 14 15). It is probably identical with
the modern Hoba, about 60 miles N.W. of Damascus.


HOBAIAH, hi-ba’ya (M730, hobhayah, “whom
Jeh hides,” i.e. ‘‘protects’’): The head of a priestly
family that returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel.
Because they could not trace their genealogy, they
were not permitted to serve in the priestly office
(Neh 7 63 f). In the K’ré of this passage and in the
| list of Ezr 2 61, this name appears in the form
“Habaiah” (M3, hdbhayyah). “Obdia’’ is the
form of the word in 1 Esd 5 38.


HOCK ("Pp%, ‘akar, “to root out’’): To hamstring,
i.e. to render useless by cutting the tendons of the
hock (in AV and ERV “hough”). ‘In their self-
will they hocked an ox” (Gen 49 6, AV “digged
down a wall’), in their destructiveness maiming
those which they could not carry off. See also
Josh 11 6.9; 25 8 4.


HOD, hod (351, hadh, “majesty,” “splendor”;
LXX A, “05, Héd; B, ’N4, 04): One of the sons
of Zophah, a descendant of Asher (1 Ch 7 37).


HODAIAH, hi-da’ya. See Honavian,


1403


HODAVIAH, hod-a-vi'a (TITIAN, hodhawyah,
or JVM, hadhawyaha; A, ‘O8ovla, Ha-
douta):

(1) One of the heads of the half-tribe of Manasseh
on the E. of the Jordan (1 Ch 6 24).

: (2) A Benjamite, the son of Hassenuah (1 Ch 9


(8) A Levite, who seems to have been the head
of an important family in that tribe (Ezr 2 40).
In Neh 7 48 the name is Hodevah (MTN, hédh-
wah; Kers MYT, hodhyah). Cf Ear 8 9.

(4) Ason of Elioenai, and a descendant of David
(1 Ch 3 24; APT, hadhaywaha; Keren,
hodhawyadhu, AV ‘‘Hodaiah’’).


HODESG, ho’desh (7h, hadhesh, “new moon”):
He of the wives of Shaharaim, a Benjamite (1 Ch


HODEVAH, hé-de'va, ho’dé-va (ITN, hadh-
wah, TITW, haodhtyah, “splendor of Jeh”’): A
Levite and founder of a Levite family, seventy-four
of whom returned from exile with Zerubbabel, 538
BC (Neh 7 43). ARVm gives as another reading
“Hodeiah.”? In Ezr 2 40 he is called Hodaviah,
of which Hodevah and Hodeiah are slight textual
corruptions, and in Ezr 3 9 Judah, a name prac-
tically synonymous.


HODIAH, hé-di’a, HODIJAH, hé-di’ja (PTW,
hodhiyah, “splendor of Jeh’’):

(1) A brother-in-law of Naham (1 Ch 4 19),
and possibly for that reason reckoned a member of
the tribe of Judah. AV tr “‘his wife” is wrong.

(2) One of the Levites who explained to the


people the Law as read by Ezra (Neh 8 7) and led |


their prayers (Neh 9 5). He is doubtless one of
the two Levites of this name who sealed the cove-
nant of Nehemiah (Neh 10 10.18).

(3) One of the chiefs of the people who sealed
the covenant of Nehemiah (Neh 10 18).

J. Gray McA.usTEer

HOGLAH, hog’la (1237), hoghlah, “partridge”):
The third of five daughters of Zelophehad of the
tribe of Manasseh (Nu 26 33). Z. leaving no male
heir, it was made a statute that the inheritance in
such eases should pass to the daughters, if such
there were, as joint heirs, on condition, however, of
marriage within the tribe (Nu 27 1-11; 36 1-12;
Josh 17 3 f).


HOHAM, hio’ham (O71, hdham, “whom Jeh
impels[?]’ Ges.): An Amorite king of Hebron and
one of the five kings of the Amorites who leagued
for war on Gibeon because of its treaty of peace
with Joshua. The five were defeated in the decisive
battle of Beth-horon, shut up in the cave at Mak-
kedah in which they had taken refuge, and after
the battle were slain, hanged and cast into the cave
(Josh 10 1-27).


HOISE, hoiz: The older form of “hoist” (OH
hoise), to raise, to lift, and is the tr of epaird, “to
lift up’: “they ... . hoised up the mainsail to
the wind” (Acts 27 40). RV “and hoisting up
the foresail to the wind”; Wiclif has “‘lefte up,”
Tindale “‘hoysed up.”


HOLD, hold: In ARV frequently “stronghold”
(Jes 9 49; 18224; 24 22; 286 17; 23 14;
1 Ch 11 16; 12 16). See Fortirication. In Rev
18 2 for AV “cage” (phulaké) RV substitutes, as in
first clause, “hold,” and in m “prison.”


HOLDING, hdl’ding: Occurs with various
shades of meaning: (1) as the tr of tamakh, “to


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hivite
Holiness


acquire,’’ it has the sense of taking, obtaining (Isa
33 15, RV ‘that shaketh his hands from taking a
bribe,’’ ERV, as AV, “holding’’); (2) of kal, “to
hold,” “contain,” having the sense of containing
or restraining (Jer 6 11, “I am weary with holding
in’); (8) of kratéd, ‘to receive,” “observe,” “main-
tain” (Mk 7 3, “holding the tradition of the
elders’; 1 Tim 1 19, échd, “holding faith and a
good conscience’; 3 9, “holding the mystery of the
faith in a pure conscience’); (4) holding fast, cleav-
ing to, krafed (Col 2 19, ‘not holding the head,”
RV “holding fast’; cf Acts3 11; Rev 7 1,
“holding the four winds of the earth, that no wind
should blow’’); antéchomat, ‘to hold over against
one’s self,” “to hold fast’ (Tit 1 9, RV “holding
to the faithful word’’); (5) holding forth, epécho,
“to hold upon, to hold out toward” (Phil 2 16,
“holding forth the word of life,’ so RV); Lightfoot
has “holding out” (as offering); others, however,
render “holding fast,”’ persevering in the Christian
faith and life—connecting with being ‘‘blameless
and harmless’”’ in ver 15. WALKER


HOLINESS, hi'li-nes (OTR, kadhosh, “holy,”
WIP, kadhesh, “holiness”; dyros, hdgios, ‘“‘holy’’):
I. In rep OT Muanino ofr THE TERM
1. The Holiness of God
@ Absoluteness and Majesty
2) Ethical Holiness
2 oliness of Place, Time and Object
3. Holiness of Men
3 Ceremonial
2) Ethical and Spiritual
Ii. In toe NT: Tae Curistian ConcEprion
1. Applied to God
2. To Christ
3. To Things
4. To Christians
1) As Separate from the World
£3 As Bound to the Pursuit of an Ethical Ideal
I. Inthe OT Meaning of the Term.—There has
been much discussion as to the original meaning
of the Sem root KDSH, by which the notion of
holiness is expressed in the OT. Some would con-
nect it with an Assyr word denoting purity, clear-
ness; most modern scholars incline to the view
that the primary idea is that of cutting off or separa-
tion. Etymology gives no sure verdict on the point,
but the idea of separation lends itself best to the
various senses in which the word “‘holiness” is em-
ployed. In primitive Sem usage “holiness” seems
to have expressed nothing more than that ceremonial
separation of an object from common use which the
modern study of savage religions has rendered famil-
iar under the name of taboo (W. R. Smith, Religion
of the Semites, Lect iv). But within the Bib. sphere,
with which alone we are immediately concerned,
holiness attaches itself first of all, not to visible
objects, but to the invisible Jeh, and to places, sea-
sons, things and human beings only in so far as they
are associated with Him. And while the idea of
ceremonial holiness runs through the OT, the ethi-
cal significance which Christianity attributes to the
term is never wholly absent, and gradually rises in
the course of the revelation into more emphatic
prominence. ; : .
As applied to God the notion of holiness is used
in the OT in two distinct senses: (1) First in the
more general sense of separation from


1. The all that is human and earthly, It thus
Holiness denotes the absoluteness, majesty, and
of God awfulness of the Creator in His dis-


tinction from the creature. In this
use of the word, “holiness” is little more than
an equivalent general term for “Godhead,” and the
adj. “holy” is almost synonymous with ‘‘Divine”’
(ef Dnl 4 8.9.18; 6 11). Jeh’s “holy arm’ (Isa
52 10; Ps 98 1) is His Divine arm, and His “holy
name” (Lev 20 3, etc) is His Divine name. When
Hannah sings “There is none holy as Jeh” (1 8 2 2),


Holiness
Holy Place


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1404


the rest of the verse suggests that she is referring,
not to His ethical holiness, but simply to His
supreme Divinity.
_ (2) But, in the next place, holiness of character
in the distinct ethical scnse is ascribed to God.
The injunction, “Be ye holy; for I am holy’’ (Lev
11 44; 19 2), plainly implies an ethical concep-
tion. Men cannot resemble God in His incom-
municable attributes. They can reflect His like-
ness only along the lines of those moral qualities of
righteousness and love in which true holiness con-
sists. In the Psalmists and Prophets the Divine
holiness becomes, above all, an ethical reality con-
victing men of sin (Isa 6 3.5) and demanding of
those who would stand in His presence clean hands
and a pure heart (Ps 24 3 f).
From the holiness of God is derived that cere-
monial holiness of things which is characteristic
of the OT religion. Whatever is con~
2, Holiness nected with the worship of the holy


of Place, Jeh is itself holy. Nothing is holy in
Time and itself, but anything becomes holy by
Object its consecration to Him. A _ place


where He manifests His presence is
holy ground (Ex 3 5). The tabernacle or temple
in which His glory is revealed is a holy building
(Ex 28 29; 2 Ch 36 5); and all its sacrifices (Ex
29 33), ceremonial materials (30 25; Nu 6 17)
and utensils (1 K 8 4) are also holy. The Sab-
bath is holy because it is the Sabbath of the Lord
(Ex 20 8-11). “Holiness, in short, expresses a
relation, which consists negatively in separation
from common use, and positively in dedication to
the service of Jeh” (Skinner in HDB, II, 395).

The holiness of men is of two kinds: (1) A cere-

monia! holiness, corresponding to that of impersonal
objects and depending upon their rela-
3. Holiness tion to the outward service of Jeh.
of Men Priests and Levites are holy because
they have been “hallowed” or “‘sancti-
fied’? by acts of consecration (Ex 29 1; Lev 8 12.
30). The Nazirite is holy because he has separated
himself unto the Lord (Nu 6 5). Above all,
Israel, notwithstanding allits sins and shortcomings,
is holy, as a nation separated from other nations
for Divine purposes and uses (Ex 19 6, etc; ef
Lev 20 24). (2) But out of this merely ceremonial
holiness there emerges a higher holiness that is spirit-
ual andethical. For unlike other creatures man wag
made in the image of God and capable of reflecting
the Divine likeness. And as God reveals Himself
as ethically holy, He calls man to a holiness resem-
bling His own (Lev 19 2). In theso-called “Law of
Holiness’? (Lev 17-26), God’s demand for moral
holiness is made clear; and yet the moral contents
of the Law are still intermingled with ceremonial
elements (17 10 ff; 19 19; 21 1 ff). In psalm and
prophecy, bowever, a purely ethical conception
comes into view—the conception of a human holi-
ness which rests upon righteousness and truth
(Ps 15 1f) and the possession of a contrite and
humble spirit ({[sa 57 15). This corresponds to the
knowledge of a God who, being Himself ethically
holy, esteems justice, mercy and lowly piety more
highly than sacrifice (Hos 6 6; Mic 6 6-8).

il. In the NT: The Christian Conception.—
The idea of holiness is expressed here chiefly by
the word hagios and its derivatives, which corre-
spond very closely to the words of the KDSH group
in Heb, and are employed to render them in the
LXX. The distinctive feature of the NT idea of
holiness is that the external aspect of it has almost
entirely disappeared, and the ethical meaning has
become supreme. ‘The ceremonial idea, still exists
in contemporary Judaism, and is typically repre-
sented by the Pharisees (Mk 7 1-13; Lk 18 11 f).
But Jesus proclaimed a new view of religion and


morality according to which men are cleansed or
defiled, not by anything outward, but by the
thoughts of their hearts (Mt 15 17-20), and God is
to be worshipped neither in Samaria nor Jerus, but
wherever men seek Him in spirit and in truth (Jn
4, 21-24). i

In the NT the term “holy” is seldom applied

to God, and except in quotations from the OT
(Lk 1 49; 1 Pet 1 15f), only in the
1. Applied Johannine writings (Jn 1711; Rev
to God 48; 610). Butitis constantly used
of the Spirit of God (Mt 1 18; Acts
12; Rom 5 5, etc), who now, in contrast with
OT usage, becomes specifically the Holy Spirit or
Holy Ghost. :
In several passages the term is
2. Applied applied to Christ (Mk 1 24; Acts 8
to Christ 14; 4 30, etc), as being the very type
of ethical perfection (cf He 7 26).
In keeping with the fact that things are holy in a
derivative sense through their relationship to God,
the word is used of Jerus (Mt 4 5),
3. Applied the OT covenant (Lk 1 72), the
to Things Scriptures (Rom 1 2), the Law (7
12), the Mount of Transfiguration (2
Pet 1 18), ete.

But it is esp. in its application to Christians that

the idea of holiness meets us in the NT in a sense

that is characteristic and distinctive.
4. Applied to Christ’s people are regularly called
Christians ‘‘saints’’ or holy persons, and holinessin

the high ethical and spiritual meaning
of the word is used to denote the appropriate quality
of their life and conduct. (1) No doubt, as applied
to believers, ‘‘saints’’ conveys in the first place the
notion of a separation from the world and a con-
secration to God. Just as Israel under the old
covenant was a chosen race, so the Christian church
in succeeding, to Israel’s privileges becomes a holy
nation (1 Pet 2 9), and the Christian individual,
as one of the elect people, becomes a holy man or
woman (Col 3 12). In Paul’s usage all baptized
persons are “saints,’’ however far they may still
be from the saintly character (cf 1 Cor 1 2.14
with 6 1ff). (2) But though the use of the name
does not imply high ethical character as a realized
fact, it_always assumes it as an ideal and an obliga-
tion. It is taken for granted that the Holy Spirit
has taken up His abode in the heart of every
regenerate person, and that a work of positive
sanctification is going on there. The NT leaves no
room for the thought of a holiness divorced from
those moral qualities which the holy God demands
of those whom He has called to be His people. See
SANCTIFICATION.

LitERatuRE.—Robertson Smith, Religion of the Sem-
ites, Lects lii, iv; A. B. Davidson, Theology of the OT,
145 ff; Schultz, Theology of the OT, II, 167 ff; Orr, Sin
as a Problem of To-day, ch iii; Sanday-Headlam, Romans,


12 ff; arts. ‘‘ Holiness’’ in HDB and ‘' Heiligkeit Gottes
im AT” in RE. S i


J.C. Lampert

HOLLOW, hol’d (93, kaph, 323, nabhabh):
“Hollow” is the tr of kaph, “hollow’’ (Gen 32
25.32, “the hollow of his thigh,” the hip-pan or
socket, over the sciatic nerve); of ndbhabh, ‘‘to be
hollow” (Ex 27 8; 38 7; Jer 62 21); of shd‘al,
“hollow” (Isa 40 12, “Who hath measured the
waters in the hollow of his hand?” [in handfuls;
ef 1 K 20 10; Ezk 13 19]); of makhtésh, “a mor-
tar,” “socket of a tooth” (from its shape) (Jgs 15
19, “God clave an [RV “the’’] hollow place that is
in Lehi’); of sh*ka‘drdrath, prob. from ké‘ar, “to
sink” (Lev 14 37, “the walls of the house with
hollow strakes,” so ERV, ARV “hollow streaks,”
depressions); of kotlétés (Wisd 17 19, “the hollow
mountains,” RV “hollows of the mountains’’); of
koiloma (2 Mace 1 19, “hollow place of a pit,” RV


1405


“hollow of a well’); of antrédés (2 5, “a hollow
cave,” RV ‘“‘a chamber in the rock,” m “Gr a caver-
nous chamber’’). W. L. WaLKER


HOLM-TREE, him’tré:

(1) TIM, treah (Isa 44 14, AV “cypress’’):
The name, from the root meaning (ef Arab. taraza)
“to be hard,’’ implies some very hard wood. Vulg
has tlex, which is Lat for holm oak, so named from
its holly-like leaves (hollen in OF =“‘holly’’); this tr
has now been adopted, but it is doubtful.

(2) mptvos, prinos, Sus ver 58. This is the ilex or
holm oak. There is a play on the words prinos
and prisai (lit. “‘saw’’) in vs 58 and 59 (seeSusanna).


The evergreen or holm oak is represented by two |


species in Pal, Quercus tlex and Q. coccifera. The
leaf of both species is somewhat like a small holly
leaf, is glossy green and usually spiny. The Q. lex
is insignificant, but Q. coccifera is a magnificent tree
growing to a height of 40 ft. or more, and often
found in Pal flourishing near sacred tombs, and itself
not infrequently the object of superstitious venera-
tion. E. W. G. MasterMan


HOLOFERNES, hol-é-far’néz (‘Ododépvns, Olo-
phérnés): According to the Book of Jth, chief cap-
tain of Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Assyrians
(Gth 2 4), who was commissioned to make war
upon the West country and to receive from the
inhabitants the usual tokens of complete sub-
mission, earth and water. The object of the
expedition of H., who thus became the typical
persecutor of the Jews, was to compel men every-
where to worship Nebuchadnezzar. He was slain
by Judith, the heroine of the book of that name,
during the siege of Bethulia. There is no notice of
H. except in the Book of Jth. The termination of
the word would seem to indicate a Pers origin for
the name. The H. of Shakespeare and Rabelais
is in no way connected with the deeds of the H.
of the Apoc. J. Hourcuison


HOLON, holon (72M or FSH, halan):

(1) One of the towns in the hill country of
Judah (Josh 15 51) assigned to the Levites (21
15). In 1 Ch 6 58 (Heb 48), it is HiLEN (which
see). The site may be the important ruins of
Beit ‘Alam (see PEF, III, 313, 321, Sh XX1).

(2) Probably once an important town in the
“plain,” i.e. plateau, of Moab (Jer 48 21); the
site is unknown.


HOLYDAY, ho’li-da: This word occurs twice in
AV, viz. Ps 42 4, “a multitude that kept [RV
“keeping’”’] holyday,’”’ and Col 2 16. In the latter
case it ig a rendering of the Gr word ¢opr#, heorté,
the ordinary term for a religious festival. RV
trs “feast day.’ In the former instance “‘keeping
holyday” renders 3219 , hghégh. The vb. means to
“make a pilgrimage,” or “keep a religious festival.”’
Occasionally the idea of merrymaking prevails, as
inl 8 30 16—“eating and drinking,’’ and enjoying
themselves merrily. The Psalmist (who was per-
haps an exiled priest) remembers with poignant
regret how he used to lead religious processions on
festival occasions. T. Lewis


HOLY GHOST, h3’li gost.


HOLY GHOST (SPIRIT), SIN AGAINST THE.
See BLaspuHemy; Hoty Spirit, III, 1, (4).


HOLY OF HOLIES, ho’liz (QWIPA wip, ko-
dhesh ha-kédhashim, Ex 26 33, “2"t, d°*bhar, 1 K
6 16, etc; in the NT, d&yva dylwv, hdgia hagién, He
9 3): The name given to the innermost shrine, or
adytum of the sanctuary of Jeh.


See Hoty Sprnrit.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Holiness
Holy Place


The most holy place of the tabernacle in the
wilderness (Ex 26 31-33) was a small cube of
10 cubits (15 ft.) every way. It was
1. Inthe — divided from the holy place by a veil
Tabernacle which was lifted when entrance was
made (see VrIL). Ceiled by curtains
which bore cherubic figures embroidered in blue and
pune and scarlet (26 1), it contained no furniture
ut the Ark of the Covenant, covered by a slab of
gold called the Mrrcy-Snat (q.v.), and having
within it only the two stone tables of the Law (see
TABERNACLE; ARK OF CovENANT). Only the
high priest, and he but once a year, on the great
Day or ATONEMENT (q.V.), was permitted to enter
within the veil, clothed in penitential garments,
amid a cloud of incense, and with blood of sacrifice
(Lev 16; cf He 9 7).
The proportions of the most holy place in the
first temple were the same as in the tabernacle,


but the dimensions were doubled.
2. Inthe The sacred chamber was enlarged to 20
Temple of cubits (80 ft.) each way. We now
Solomon meet with the word d*bhir, ‘oracle’


(1 K 6 16, ete), which with the
exception of Ps 28 2, belonging perhaps to the
same age, is met with in Scripture only in the period
of Solomon’s reign. This sanctum, like its pred-
ecessor, contained but one piece of furniture—the
Ark of the Covenant. It had, however, one new
conspicuous feature in the two large figures of cheru-
bim of clive wood, covered with gold, with wings
stretching from wall to wall, beneath which the ark
was now placed (1 K 6 23-28; 2 Ch 3 10-13;
see TEMPLE).

In Ezekiel’s temple plans, which in many things
may have been those of the temple of Zerubbabel,

the prophet gives 20 cubits as the
3. In Later length and breadth of the most holy
Times place, showing that these figures

were regarded as too sacred to undergo
change (Ezk 41 4). There was then no Ark of
the Covenant, but Jewish tradition relates that the
blood of the great Day of Atonement was sprinkled
on an unhewn stone that stood in its place. In
Herod’s temple, the dimensions of the two holy
chambers remained the same—at least in length
and breadth (see Tempity, Heron’s). The holiest
place continued empty. In the spoils of the temple
depicted on the Arch of Titus there is no representa-
tion of the Ark of the Covenant; only of the furni-
ture of the outer chamber or holy place.

In the Ep. to the He we are taught that the
true holy of holies is the heaven into which Jesus
has now entered to appear in virtue of
His own sacrifice in the presence of
God for us (He 9 11 ff). Restriction
is now removed, and the way into
the holiest is made open for all His people (10
19.20). W. Suaw CaLnecotr


HOLY ONE. See Gop, Namzs oF.


HOLY PLACE (WPT, ha-kédhesh, Ex 26 33,
Sar, ha-hékhal, 1 K 6 17, ete; | wpdry oxnva,
hé prété skené, He 9 6f): The taber-
nacle consisted of two divisions to
which a graduated scale of holiness ig
attached: ‘The veilshall separate unto
you between the holy place and the most holy”
(Ex 26 33). This distinction was never abrogated.
In the Ep. to the He these divisions are called the
“first?? and “‘second’”’ tabernacles (He 9 6f). The
term “holy place’’ is not indeed confined to the outer
chamber of the sanctuary; in Lev 6 16, it is
applied to “the court of the tent of meeting.’’
But the other is its technical use. In Solomon’s
temple we have a different usage. The word hékhal,


4, Figura-
tive


1. The
Terms


Holy Spirit


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1406


“temple,” is not at first applied, as after, to the
whole building, but is the designation specifically
of the holy place, in distinction from the d¢bhir,
or “oracle” (cf 1 K 6 3.5.16.17.33, etc; so in
Ezk 41 1.2.4, etc). The wider usage is later (cf
2 K 11 1011.18, ete).

The size of the holy place differed at different


times. The holy place of the tabernacle was 20

cubits long by 10 broad and 10 high
2. Size of (30X15X15 ft.); that of Solomon’s
the Holy temple was twice this in length and
Place breadth—40 by 20 cubits; but it is


; : contended by many (Bahr, etc) that
in ‘height it was the full internal height of the
building—30 cubits; the Herodian temple has
the same dimensions of length and breadth, but
Jos and Middoth give largely increased, though
differing, numbers for the height (see Tempra,
Herop’s).
The contents of the holy place were from the
beginning ordered to be these (Ex 25 23 ff; 30
1-10): the altar of incense, a golden
3. Contents candlestick (i Solomon’s temple in-
of Holy creased to ten, 1 K 7 49), and a table
Place of showbread (likewise increased to
; ten,2 Ch 4 8). For the construction,
position, history and uses of these objects, see
TABERNACLE; ‘TEMPLE, and arts. under the several
headings. This, as shown by Jos and by the sculp-
tures on the Arch of Titus, continued to be the
furniture of the holy place till the end.
As the outer division of the sanctuary, into which,
as yet, not the people, but only their representa-
tives in the priesthood, were admitted
4. Symbol- while yet the symbols of the people’s
ism consecrated life (prayer, light, thanks-
giving) were found in it, the holy place
may be said to represent the people’s relation to
God in the earthly life, as the holy of holies repre-
sented God’s relation to the people in a perfected
communion. In the Ep. to the He, the holy place
is not largely dwelt on as compared with the court
in which the perfect sacrifice was offered, and the
holiest of all into which Christ has now entered
(Christ passes “through” the tabernacle into the
holiest, 9 11). It pertains, however, evidently to
the earthly sphere of Christ’s manifestation, even
as carth is the present scene of the church’s fellow-
ship. Through earth, by the way which Christ has
opened up, the believer, already in spirit, finally
in fact, passes with Him into the holiest (He 10
19; cf 9 8; see Westcott, Hebrews, 233 ff).
_ W. Saw CaLnEcotr
HOLY SPIRIT, ho’li spir’it:
I. OT TeacuHinos ss To THE Spirit
. Meaning of the Word
. The Spirit in Relation to the Godhead
. In External Nature
In Man
Imparting Powers for Service
1) Judges and Warriors
2) Wisdom for Various Purposes
3) In Prophecy
Imparting Moral Character
In the Messiah
Predictions of Future Outpouring of the Spirit
HE Non-CanonicaL LITERATURE
. The Spirit in Josephus
. In the Pseudepigrapha
. In the Wisdom of Solomon
. In_Philo
He Hoty Spiniv in THE NT
. In Relation to the Person and Work of Christ
o) Birth of Jesus
2) Baptism
3) Temptation
a Public Ministry :
5) Death and Resurrection and Pentecostal


Cob whe


IT.


Legler ara ey


POD


III.


ale


Gift
2. The Holy Spirit in the Kingdom of God
(1) Synoptic Teachings
(2) In the Writings of John
oy In Acts aa
4) In Paul's Writings


(a) The Spirit and Jesus 2 a

(o) In Bestowing Charismatic Gifts fe

c) In the Beginnings of the Christian Life

3 In the Religious and Moral Life

(e) In the Church 1

(f) In the Resurrection of Believers

(5) The Holy Spirit in Other NT Writings

LITERATURE

The expression Spirit, or Spirit of God, or Holy
Spirit, is found in the great majority of the books of
the Bible. In the OT the Heb word uniformly
employed for the Spirit as referring to God’s Spirit
is 117, ré%h, meaning “breath,” “wind” or ‘‘breeze.
The vb. form of the word is 14, rah, or 17, ri*h,
used only in the Hiphil and meaning ‘‘to breathe,”
“to blow.’ A kindred vb. is M7], r@wah, meaning
“to breathe,” “having breathing room,” “to be
spacious,” etc. The word always used in the NT
for the Spirit is the Gr neuter noun rvedxa, pnetima,
with or without the article, and for Holy Spirit,
rvebua dywv, pneima hdgion, or 7d wveiua 7d ayo,
16 pnetima t6 hdgion. In the NT we find also the
expressions, “the Spirit of God,” “the Spirit of the
Lord,” “the Spirit of the Father,” “the Spirit of
Jesus,” “of Christ.” The word for Spirit in the
Gr is from the vb. rvéw, pnéd, “to breathe,’”’ “to
blow.” The corresponding word in the Lat is
spiritus, meaning “spirit.”

I. The Teachings as to the Spirit in the OT.—
At the outset we note the significance of the term

itself. From the primary meaning
1. Meaning of the word which is “wind,” as refer-
of the ring to Nature, arises the idea of breath
Word in man and thence the breath, wind or

Spirit of God. We have no way of
tracing exactly how the minds of the Bib. writers
connected the earlier literal meaning of the word
with the Divine Spirit. Nearly all shades of
meaning from the lowest to the highest appear in the
OT, and itis not difficult to conceive how the original
narrower meaning was gradually expanded into the
larger and wider. The following are some of the
shades of OT usage. From the notion of wind or
breath, ruth came to signify: (1) the principle of
life itself; spirit in this sense indicated the degree
of vitality: ‘My spirit is consumed, my days are
extinct’? (Job 17 1; also Jgs 16 19; 1 S 30 12);
(2) human feelings of various kinds, as anger (Jgs
8 3; Prov 29 11), desire (Isa 26 9), courage (Josh
211); (8) intelligence (Ex 28 3; Isa 29 24); (4)
general disposition (Ps 34 18; 5117; Prov 14 29;
16 18; 29 23).

No doubt the Bib. writers thought of man as
made in the image of God (Gen 1 27 f), and it was
easy for them to think of God as being likeman. It
is remarkable that their anthropomorphism did not
go farther. They preserve, however, a highly
spiritual conception of God as compared with that
of surrounding nations. But as the human breath
was an invisible part of man, and as it represented
his vitality, his life and energy, it was easy to trans-
fer the conception to God in the effort to represent
His energetic and transitive action upon man and
Nature. The Spirit of God, therefore, as based
upon the idea of the ruéh or breath of man, originally
stood for the energy or power of God (Isa 31 3;
cf A. B. Davidson, Theology of the OT, 117-18), as
contrasted with the weakness of the flesh.

We consider next the Spirit of God in relation to
God Himself in the OT. Here there are several

points to be noted. The first is that


2. The there is no indication of a belief that
Spirit in the Spirit of God was a material par-
Relation to ticle or emanation from God. The
the God- _ point of view of Bib. writers is nearly
head always practical rather than specula-


tive.


They did not philosophize about
the Divine nature. is 3


Nevertheless, they retained a


1407


very clear distinction between spirit and flesh or
other material forms. Again we observe in the OT
both an identification of God and the Spirit of God,
and also a clear distinction between them. The
identification is seen in Ps 139 7 where the omni-
presence of the Spirit is declared, and in Isa 63 10;
Jer 31 38; Ezk 36 27. In a great number of
passages, however, God and the Spirit of God are
not thought of as identical, as in Gen 1 2; 6 3;
Neh 9 20; Ps 5111; 104 29f. Of course this
does not mean that God and the Spirit of God were
two distinct beings in the thought of OT writers,
but only that the Spirit had functions of His own in
distinction from God. The Spirit was God in
action, particularly when the action was specific,
with a view to accomplishing some particular end
or purpose of God. The Spirit came upon indi-
viduals for special purposes. The Spirit was thus
God immanent in man and in the world. As the
angel of the Lord, or angel of the Covenant in certain
passages, represents both Jeh Himself and one sent
by Jeh, so in like manner the Spirit of Jeh was both
Jeh within or upon man, and at the same time one
sent by Jeh to man.

Do the OT teachings indicate that in the view
of the writers the Spirit of Jeh was a distinct person
in the Divine nature? The passage in Gen 1 26
is scarcely conclusive. The idea and importance
of personality were but slowly developed in Israelit-
ish thought. Not until some of the later prophets
did it receive great emphasis, and even then scarcely
in the fully developed form. The statement in
Gen 1 26 may be taken as the pl. of majesty or as
referring to the Divine council, and on this account
is not conclusive for the Trinitarian view. Indeed,
there are no OT passages which compel us to under-
stand the complete NT doctrine of the Trinity and
the distinct personality of the Spirit in the NT
sense. There are, however, numerous OT passages
which are in harmony with the Trinitarian con-
ception and prepare the way for it, such as Ps 139
7; Isa 638 10; 4816; Hag 2 5; Zec 46. The
Spirit is grieved, vexed, etc, and in other ways is
conceived of personally, but as He is God in action,
God exerting power, this was the natural way for
the OT writers to think of the Spirit. :

The question has been raised as to how the Bib.
writers were able to hold the conception of the
Spirit of God without violence to their monotheism.
A suggested reply is that the idea of the Spirit came
gradually and indirectly from the conception of
subordinate gods which prevailed among some of
the surrounding nations (I. F. Wood, The Spirit
of God in Bub. Literature, 30). But the best
Israelitish thought developed in opposition to,
rather than in analogy with, polytheism. A more
natural explanation seems to be that their simple
anthropomorphism led them to conceive the Spirit
of God as the breath of God parallel with the con-
ception of man’s breath as being part of man and
yet going forth from him.

We consider next the Spirit of God in external


Nature. “And the Spirit of God moved [was

brooding or hovering] upon the face
3. The of the waters” (Gen 1 2). The figure
Spirit in is that of a brooding or hovering bird
External (cf Dt 32 11). Here the Spirit brings
Nature order and beauty out of the primeval


chaos and conducts the cosmic forces
toward the goal of an ordered universe. Again in
Ps 104 28-30, God sends forth His Spirit, and visible
things are called into being: ‘Thou sendest forth
thy Spirit, they are created; and thou renewest
the face of the ground.” In Job 26 13 the beauty
of the heavens is ascribed to the Spirit: “By his
Spirit the heavens are garnished.” In Isa 32 15
the wilderness becomes a fruitful field as the result


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Holy Spirit


of the outpouring of the Spirit. The Bib. writers
scarcely took into their thinking the idea of second
causes, certainly not in the modern scientific sense.
They regarded the phenomena of Nature as the result
of God’s direct action through His Spirit. At
every point their conception of the Spirit saved
them from pantheism on the one hand and poly-

theism on the other.
The Spirit may next be considered in imparting
natural powers both physical and intellectual. In
Gen 2 7 God originates man’s person-


4. The al and intellectual life by breathing
Spirit of into his nostrils “the breath of life.”
God in ManIn Nu 16 22 God is “the God of

the spirits of all flesh.” In Ex 28 3;


31 3; 36 31, wisdom for all kinds of workmanship
is declared to be the gift of God. So also physical
life is due to the presence of the Spirit of God (Job
27 3); and Elihu declares (Job 33 4) that the
Spirit of God made him. See also Ezk 37 14 and
39 29. Thus man is regarded by the OT writers,
in all the parts of his being, body, mind and spirit, as
the direct result of the action of the Spirit of God.
In Gen 6 3 the Spirit of God “strives” with or
“rules’’ in or is “humbled” in man in the antedilu-
vian world. Here reference is not made to the
Spirit’s activity over and above, but within the
moral nature of man.

The greater part of the OT passages which refer
to the Spirit of God deal with the subject from the

oint of view of the covenant relations
5. In Im- etween Jeh and Israel. And the
parting greater portion of these, in turn, have
Powers for to do with gifts and powers conferred
Service by the Spirit for service in the ongoing
of the kingdom of God. We fail to
grasp the full meaning of very many statements
of the OT unless we keep constantly in mind the
fundamental assumption of all the OT, viz. the
covenant relations between God and Israel. Extra-
ordinary powers exhibited by Israelites of what-
ever kind were usually attributed to the Spirit.
These are so numerous that our limits of space
forbid an exhaustive presentation. The chief
points we may notice.

(1) Powers conferred upon judges and warriors.—
The children of Israel cried unto Jeh and He raised
up a savior for them, Othniel, the son of Kenaz:
“And the Spirit of Jeh came upon him, and he
judged Israel” (Jgs 3 10). So also Gideon (Jgs
6 34): “The Spirit of Jeh came upon [lit. clothed
itself with] Gideon.”’ In Jgs 11 29 “the spirit of
Jeh came upon Jephthah”’; and in 13 25 ‘“‘the
Spirit of Jeh began to move” Samson. In 14 6
“the Spirit of Jeh came mightily upon him.” In
18 16 14 we read “the Spirit of Jeh departed
from Saul, and an evil spirit from Jeh troubled
him.” In all this class of passages, the Spirit
imparts special endowments of power without
necessary reference to the moral character of the
recipient. The end in view is not personal, merely
to the agent, but concerns the theocratic kingdom
and implies the covenant between God and Israel.
In some cases the Spirit exerts physical energy in a
more direct way (2 K 2 16; Ezk 2 1f; 3 12).

(2) Wisdom and skill bestowed for various purposes.
—Bezalel is filled with the Spirit of God in wisdom
and in understanding to work in gold, and silver
and brass, etc, in the building of the tabernacle
(Ex 31 2-4; 35 31); and the Spirit of wisdom is
given to others in making Aaron’s garments (Ex
28 3). So also of one of the builders of Solomon’s
temple (1 K 7 14; 2 Ch 2 14). In these cases
there seems to be a combination of the thought of
natural talents and skill to which is superadded a
special endowment of theSpirit. Pharach refers to
Joseph as one in whom the Spirit of God is, as fitting


Holy Spirit


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1408


him for administration and government (Gen 41
88). Joshua is qualified for leadership hy the Spirit
(Nu 27 18). In this and in Dt 34 9, Joshua is
represented as possessing the Spirit through the
laying on of the hands of Moses. This is an inter-
esting OT parallel to the hestowment of the Spirit
by laying on of hands in the NT (Acts 8 17; 19 6).
Daniel is represented as having wisdom to interpret
dreams through the Spirit, and afterward because
of the Spirit he is exalted to a position of authority
and power (Dnl 4 8; 5 11-14; 6 3). The Spirit
qualifies Zerubbahel to rebuild the temple (Zec 4
6). The Spirit was given to the people for instruc-
tion and strengthening during the wilderness
wanderings (Neh 9 20), and to the elders along
with Moses (Nu 11 17.25). It thus appears how
very widespread were the activities of the redemp-
tive Spirit, or the Spirit in the covenant. All
these forms of the Spirit’s action bore in some
way upon the national life of the people, and were
eet in one way or another toward theocratic
ends.

(3) The Spirit in OT rophecy.—The most
distinctive and important manifestation of the
Spirit’s activity in the OT was in the sphere of
prophecy. In the earlier period the prophet was
called seer (TN, ré’eh), and later he was called
prophet (N°22, na@bhi’). The word “prophet”
(rpodyrns, prophétés) means one who speaks for God.
The prophets were very early differentiated from
the masses of the people into a prophetic class or
order, although Ahraham himself was called a
prophet, as were Moses and other leaders (Gen 20
7; Dt 18 15). The prophet was esp. distinguished
from others as the man who possessed the Spirit of
God (Hos 9 7). The prophets ordinarily began
their messages with the phrase, “thus saith Jeh,”
or its equivalent. But they ascribed their mes-
sages directly also to the Spirit of God (Eizk 2 2;
8 3; 11 1.24; 18 3). The case of Balaam pre-
sents some difficulties (Nu 24 2). He does not
seem to have been a genuine prophet, but rather a
diviner, although it is declared that the Spirit of
God came upon him. Balaam serves, however,
to illustrate the OT peint of view. The chief in-
terest was the national or theocratic or covenant
ideal, not that of the individual. The Spirit was
hestowed at times upon unworthy men for the
achievement of these ends. Saul presents a similar
example. The prophet was God’s messenger speak-
ing God’s message by the Spirit. His message was
not his own. It came directly from God, and at
times overpowered the prophet with its urgency, as
in the case of Jeremiah (1 4 ff).

There arc quite perceptible stages in the develop-
ment of the OT prophecy. In the earlier period
the prophet was sometimes moved, not so much to
intelligible speech, as hy a sort of enthusiasm or
prophetic ecstasy. In 1 § 10 we have an example
of this earlier form of prophecy, where a company
with musical instruments prophesied together. To
what extent this form of prophetic enthusiasm was
attended by warnings and exhortations, if so
attended at all, we do not know. There was more
in it than in the excitement of the diviners and
devotees of the surrounding nations. For the
Spirit of Jeh was its source.

In the later period we have prophecy in its highest
forms in the OT. The differences hctween earlier
and later prophecy are probably due in part to the
conditions. The early period required action, the
later required teaching. The judges on whom
the Spirit came were deliverers in a turbulent age.
There was not need for, nor could the people have
borne, the higher ethical and spiritual truths which
came in later revelations through the prophets


Isaiah, Jeremiah and others. See 2 8 93 2; Ezk
22: 83: 11 24; 13 3; Mic 3 8; Hos 9 7.

A difficulty arises from statements such as the
following: A lying spirit was sometimes present in
the prophet (1 K 22 21f); Jeh puts a spirit in the
king of Assyria and turns him back to his destruc-
tion (Isa 87 7); because of sin, a lying prophet
should serve the people (Mic 2 11); in Micaiah’s
vision Jeh sends a Pana Ae? one seer
lyi rophets (1 ; an evil spirit from
deneaiees ca Saul (1 S$ 16 14; 18 10; 19 9).
The following considerations may be of value in
explaining these passages. Jeh was the source
of things generally in OT thought. Its pronounced
monotheism appears in this as in so many other
ways. Besides this, OT writers usually spoke
phenomenally. Prophecy was a particular form
of manifestation with certain outward marks and
signs. Whatever presented these outward marks
was called prophecy, whether the message conveyed
was true or false. The standard of discrimination
here was not the outward signs of the prophet, but
the truth or right of the message as shown by the
event. As to the evil spirit from Jeh, it may he
explained in either of two ways. First, it may have
referred +o the evil disposition of the man upon
whom God’s Spirit was acting, in which case he
would resist the Spirit and his own spirit would be
the evil spirit. Or the “evil spirit from Jeh” may
have referred, in the prophet’s mind, to an actual
spirit of evil which Jeh sent or permitted to enter
the man. The latter is the more probable explana-
tion, in accordance with which the prophet would
conceive that Jeh’s higher will was accomplished,
even through the action of the evil spirit upon man’s
spirit. Jeh’s judicial anger against transgression
would, to the prophet’s mind, justify the sending of
an evil spirit by Jeh.

The activity of the Spirit in the OT is not limited
to gifts for service. Moral and spiritual character

is traced to the Spirit’s operations as


6. The well. “Thy holy Spirit’? (Ps 61 11);
SpiritIm- “his holy Spirit’? Usa 63 10); “thy
parting good Spirit’’ (Neh 9 20); “Thy Spirit
Moral and is good” (Ps 143 10) are expressions
Spiritual pointing to the ethical quality of the
Character Spirit’s action. ‘“Holy’’ is from the


vb. form (WIP, kadhash), whose root
meaning is doubtful, but which probably meant
“to be separated,’’ from which it comes to mean to
be exalted, and this led to the conception to be
Divine. And as Jeh is morally good, the concep-
tion of “the holy [= Divine] one’’ came to signify
the holy one in the moral sense. Thence the word
was applied to the Spirit of Jeh. Jeh gives His
good Spirit for instruction (Neh 9 20); the Spirit
is called good because it teaches to do God’s will
(Ps 148 10); the Spirit gives the fear of the Lord
(isa 11 2-5); Judgment and righteousness (Isa 32
15 ff); devotion to the Lord (Isa 44 3-5); hearty
obedience and a new heart (Ezk 36 26 f); penitence
and prayer (Zcc 12 10). In Ps 51 11 thereis an in-
tense sense of guilt and sin coupled with the prayer,
“Take not thy holy Spirit from me.” us we see
that the OT in numerous ways recognizes the Holy
Spirit as the source of inward moral purity, although
the thought is not so developed asin the NT.
In hoth the first and the second sections of Isa,
there are distinct references to the Spirit in con-
nection with the Messiah, although
7. The the Messiah is conceived as the ideal
Spirit in the King who springs from the root of
Messiah David in some instances, and in others
: as the Suffering Servant of Jeh. This
is not the place to discuss the Messianic import of
the latter group of passages which has given rise to


1409


Holy Spirit


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


much difference of opinion. As in the case of the
ideal Davidic King which, in the prophet’s mind,
passes from the lower to the higher and Messianic
conception, so, under the form of the Suffering Ser-
vant, the “remnant” of Israel becomes the basis for
an ideal which transcends in the Messianic sense
the original nucleus of the conception derived from
the historic events in the history of Israel. The
prophet rises in the employment of both conceptions
to the thought of the Messiah who is the “anointed”
of Jeh as endued esp. with the power and wisdom of
the Spirit. In Isa 11 1-5 a glowing picture is
given of the “shoot out of the stock of Jesse.”
The Spirit imparts “wisdom and understanding”
and endows him with manifold gifts through the
exercise of which he shall bring in the kingdom
of righteousness and peace. In Isa 42 1ff, the
“servant” is in like manner endowed most richly
with the gifts of the Spirit by virtue of which he shall
bring forth “justice to the Gentiles.’ InIsa 61 1 ff
occur the notable words cited by Jesus in Lk 4
18f, beginning, ‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,”
etc. In these passages the prophet describes elab-
orately and minutely the Messiah’s endowment
with a wide range of powers, all of which are traced
to the action of God’s Spirit.
In the later history of Israel, when the sufferings
of the exile pressed heavily, there arose a tendency
: to idcalize a past age as the era of the
8. Predic- special blessing of the Spirit, coupled


tions of Fu- with a very marked optimism as to a |


ture Out- future outpouring of the Spirit. In
pouring of Hag 2 5 reference is made to the Mo-
the Spirit saic period as the age of the Spirit,


“when ye came out of Egypt, and my
Spirit abode among you.” In Isa 44 3 the Spirit is
to be poured out on Jacob and his seed; and in Isa
59 20 a Redeemer is to come to Zion under the cove-
nant of Jeh, and the Spirit is to abide upon the
people. The passage, however, which esp. indicates
the transition from OT to NT times is that in Joel
2 28.32 which is cited by Peter in Acts 2 17-21.
In this prophecy the bestowal of the Spirit is
extended to all classes, is attended by marvelous
signs and is accompanied by the gift of salvation.
Looking back from the later to the earlier period of
OT history, we observe a twofold tendency of teach-
ing in relation to the Spirit. The first is from the
outward gift of the Spirit for various uses toward
a deepening sense of inner need of the Spirit for
moral purity, and consequent emphasis upon the
ethical energy of the Spirit. The second tendency
is toward a sense of the futility of the merely human
or theocratic national organization in and of itself
to achieve the ends of Jeh, along with a sense of the
need for the Spirit of God upon the people generally,
and a prediction of the universal diffusion of the
Spirit.

Hl, The Spirit in Nan-Canonical Jewish Litera-
ture.—In the Palestinian and Alexandrian literature
of the Jews there are comparatively few references
to the Spirit of God. The two books in which the
teachings as to the Spirit are most explicit and most
fully developed are of Alexandrian origin, viz.
The Wisdom of Solomon and the writings of Philo.

In the OT Apocrypha and in Jos the references to the
Spirit are nearly always merely echoes of a_long-past
age when the Spirit was active among men. In no par-
ticular is the contrast between the canonical and non-
canonical literature more striking than in the teaching
as to the Spirit of God.

Jos has a number of references to the Holy Spirit, but


nearly always they have to do with the long-past history
of Israel. He refers to 22 books of the OT


1. The which are of the utmost reliahility. There

Spirit i are other books, but none ‘of like author-
pirit in ity,” because there has ‘‘not heen an

Josephus — exact_ succession of prophets” (CA


, 1,
.. Samuel is described as having a faree
place in the affairs of the kingdom because he is a prophet


(Ant, VI, v, 6). God appears to Solomon in sleep and
teaches hlm wisdom (ib, VITI, li); Balaam propnesios
through the Spirit’s power (1b, IV, v, 6); and Moses was
such a prophet that his words were God’s words (lh,
IV, vili, 49). In Jos we have then simply a testimony
to the inspiration and power of the prophets and the
books written by them, in so far as we have in him teach-
ings regarding the Spirit of God. Even here the action

of the Spirit is usually implied rather than expressed.
In the pseudeplgraphic writings the Spirit of God ls
usually referred to as acting in the long-past history of
Israel or In the future Messianic age. In


2. The the apocalyptic books, the past age of
ae eraT powers when the Spirit wrought mightlly,
Spirit in ecomes the ground of the hopes of the
the Pseude- future. The past is glorified, and out of It
iorapha arises the hope of a future kingdom of
pigrap and power. Enoch says to Methuse-


lory
ati: “The word calls me and the Spirit
4s poured ont upon me’’ (En 91 1). In 49 1-4 the
Messiah has the Spirit of wisdom, understanding and
might. Enoch is represented as describing his own
translation. ‘'He was carried aloft in the chariots of the
Spirlt’’ (En 70 2). In Jub 81 16 Isaac Is represented
as prophesying, and in 25 13 it is said of Rehekah that
the “ Holy Spirit descended into her mouth.’”’ Sometimes
the actlon of the Spirit Is closely connected with the
moral life, although this is rare. ‘The pul of God
rests’’ on the man of pure and loving heart (XII P, Benj.
. In Simeon 4 it is declared that Joseph was a good
man and that the Spirit of God rested on him. There
appears at times a lament for the departed age of proph-
ecy (1 Macc 9 27; 14 41). The future is depicted in
glowing colors: The Spirit is to come in a future judg-
ment (XII P, Levi 18); and the spirit of holiness shall
rest upon the redeemed in Paradise (Levi 18); and in
Levi 2 the spirit of insight is given, and the vision of the
sinful world and its salvation follows. Generally speak-
ing, this literature is far below that of the OT, both in
moral tone and religious insight. Much of it seems
childish, although at times we encounter noble passages.
There is lacking in it the prevailing OT mood which is
hest described as prophetic, in which the writer feels
constrained by the power of God’s Spirit to speak or
write. The OT literature thus possesses a vitality and
power which accounts for the strength of its appeal to
our religious consciousness.


We note in the next place a few teachings as to
the Spirit of God in Wied. Here the ethical ele-
ment in character is a condition of the

3. The Spirit’s indwelling. ‘Into a malicious
Spirit in the soul wisdom shall not enter: nor dwell
Wisdom of in the body that is subject unto sin.
Solomon For the holy spirit of discipline will
flee deceit, and will not abide when
unrighteousness cometh in” (Wisd 1 4f). This
“holy spirit of discipline’ is evidently God’s Holy
Spirit, for in ver 7 the writer proceeds to assert,
“For the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world,” and
in vs 8.9 there is a return to the conception of un-
righteousness as a hindrance to right speaking.
In Wisd 7 7 the Spirit of Wisdom comes in response
to prayer. In 7 22-30 is an elaborate and very
beautiful description of wisdom: ‘In her is an under-
standing spirit, holy, one only, manifold, subtil,
lively, clear, undefiled, plain, not subject to hurt,
loving the thing that 13 good, quick, which cannot
be letted, ready to do good, kind to man, stedfast,
sure,’ etc. ‘She is the brightness of the ever-
lasting light, the unspotted mirror of the power of
God, and the image of his goodness,”’ etc. No one
can know God’s counsel except by the Holy Spirit
(9 17). The writer of Wisd was deeply possessed
of the sense of the omnipresence of the Spirit of God,
asseeninl 7andin12 1. Inthe latter passage we
read: ‘For thine incorruptible spirit is in all things.”
In Philo we have what is almost wholly wanting in
other Jewish literature, viz. analytic and reflective
thought upon the work of the Spirit of


4, The God. The interest in Philo is primari-
Spirit in ly philosophic, and his teachings on
Philo the Spirit possess special interest on


this account in contrast with Bib.
and other extra-Bib. literature. In his Questions
and Solutions, 27, 28, he explains the expression in
Gen 8 1: “Te brought a breath over the earth and
the wind ceased.” He argues that water is not
diminished by wind, but only agitated and dis-


Holy Spirit


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1410


turbed. Hence there must be a reference to God’s
Spirit or breath by which the whole universe obtains
security. He has a similar discussion of the
point why the word “Spirit” is not. used instead
of ‘‘breath”’ in Gen in the account of man’s creation,
and concludes that ‘to breathe into” here means to
‘Gnspire,” and that God by His Spirit imparted to
man mental and moral life and capacity for Divine
things (Allegories, xiii). In several passages
Philo discusses prophecy and the prophetic office.
One of the most interesting relates to the prophetic
office of Moses (Life of Moses, xxiiiff), He also
describes a false prophet who claims to be ‘inspired
and possessed by the Holy Spirit’? (On Those Who
Offer Sacrifice, xi). In a very notable passage,
Philo describes in detail his own subjective experi-
ences under the influence of the Holy Spirit, and his
language is that of the intellectual mystic. He says
that at times he found himself devoid of impulse
or capacity for mental activity, when suddenly by
the coming of the Spirit of God, his intellect was
rendered very fruitful: ‘and sometimes when J
have come to my work empty I have suddenly
become full, ideas being, in an invisible manner,
showered upon me and implanted in me from on high;
so that through the influence of Divine inspiration
I have become greatly excited and have known
neither the place in which I was, nor those who were
present, nor myself, nor what I was saying, nor what
I was writing,” etc (Migrations of Abraham, vii).

In Philo, as in the non-canonical literature gener-
ally, we find little metaphysical teaching as to the
Spirit and His relations to the Godhead. On this
point there is no material advance over the OT
teaching. The agency of the Holy Spirit in shaping
and maintaining the physical universe and as the
source of man’s capacities and powers is clearly
recognized in Philo. In Philo, as in Jos, the con-
ception of inspiration as the complete occupation
and domination of the prophet’s mind by the
Spirit of God, even to the extent of suspending
the operation of the natural powers, comes clearly
into view. This is rather in contrast with, than
in conformity to, the OT and NT conception of
inspiration, in which the personality of the prophet
remains intensely active while under the influence
of the Spirit, except possibly in cases of vision and
trance.

Ill. The Holy Spirit in the NT.—In the NT there
js unusual symmetry and completeness of teaching
as to the work of the Spirit of God in relation to the
Messiah Himself, and to the founding of the Mes-
sianic kingdom. The simplest mode of presenta-
tion will be to trace the course of the progressive
activities of the Spirit, or teachings regarding these
activities, as these are presented to us in the NT
literature as we now have it, so far as the nature of
the subject will permit. This will, of course, dis-
turb to some extent the chronological order in which
the NT books were written, since in some cases, as
jn John’s Gospel, a very late book contains early
teachings as to the Spirit.

(1) The birth of Jesus—In Mt 118 Mary is
found with child “of the Holy Spirit” (é« rvedparos

aylov, ek pneimatos hagiou); an angel


1. The tells Joseph that that “which is con-
Spirit in ceived in her is of the Holy Spirit’
Relation to (1 20), all of which is declared to be in
the Person fulfilment of the prophecy that a virgin
and Work _ shall bring forth a son whose name
of Christ shall be called Immanuel (Isa 7 14).


In Lk 1 35 the angel says to Mary that
the Holy Spirit (pneuma hagion) shall come upon
her, and the power of the Most High (dvvayus
‘Yyicrov, diunamis Hupsisiou) shall overshadow
her. Here “Holy Spirit’’ and “power of the Most
High” are || expressions meaning the same thing;


in the one case emphasizing the Divine source and
in the other the holiness of “the holy thing which is
begotten” (1 35). In connection with the pres-
entation of the babe in the temple, Simeon is
described as one upon whom the Holy Spirit rested,
to whom revelation was made through the Spirit
and who came into the temple in the Spirit (Lk 2
25-28). So also Anna the prophetess speaks con-
cerning the babe, evidently in Luke’s thought, under
the influence of the Holy Spirit (Lk 2 36 ff). :

It is clear from the foregoing that the passages in
Mt and Lk mean to set forth, first, the super-
natural origin, and secondly, the sinlessness of the
babe born of Mary. The act of the Holy Spirit is
regarded as creative, although the words employed
signify “begotten” or “born” (yevyndév, gennéthén,
Mt 1 20; and yerrduevor, genndmenon, Lk 1 385).
There is no hint in the stories of the nativity con-
cerning the pretemporal existence of Christ. This
doctrine was developed later. Nor is there any
suggestion of the immaculate conception or sinless-
ness of Mary, the mother of Our Lord. Dr. C. A.
Briggs has set forth a theory of the sinlessness of
Mary somewhat different from the Roman Catholic
view, to the effect that the OT prophecies foretell
the purification of the Davidic line, and that Mary
was the culminating point in the purifying process,
who thereby became sinless (Incarnation of the Lord,
230-34). This, however, is speculative and without
substantial Bib. warrant. The sinlessness of Jesus
was not due to the sinlessness of His mother, but to
the Divine origin of His human nature, the Spirit
of God.

In He 10 5 ff the writer makes reference to the
sinless body of Christ as affording a perfect offering
for sins. No direct reference is made to the birth
of Jesus, but the origin of His body is ascribed to
ae (He 10 5), though not specifically to the Holy

irit.

FO) The baptism of Jesus—The NT records give:
us very little information regarding the growth of
Jesus to manhood. In Lk 2 40ff a picture is given
of the boyhood, exceedingly brief, but full of signifi-
cance. The “child grew, and waxed strong, filled
with wisdom [m “becoming full of wisdom’’]: and
the grace of God was upon him.”’ Then follows the
account of the visit to the temple. Evidently in
all these experiences, the boy is under the influence
and guidance of the Spirit. This alone would
supply an adequate explanation, although Luke
does not expressly name the Spirit as the source of
these particular experiences. The Spirit’s action is
rather assumed.

Great emphasis, however, is given to the descent
of the Spirit upon Jesus at His baptism. Mt 3 16
declares that after His baptism ‘the heavens were
opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending as a dove, aud coming upon him.”
Mk 1 10 repeats the statement in substantially
equivalent terms. Lk 8 22 declares that the
Spirit descended in “bodily form, as a dove”
(cwyartk@ elder as mepicrepdy, somatikd eidei hos
peristerdn). In Jn 1 32.33 the Baptist testifies that
he saw the Spirit descending upon Jesus as a dove
out of heaven, and that it abode upon Him, and,
further, that this descent of the Spirit was the
mark by which he was to recognize Jesus as “he
that baptizeth in the Holy Spirit.”

We gather from these passages that at the baptism
there was a new communication of the Spirit to
Jesus in great fulness, as a special anointing for His
Messianic vocation. The account declares that the
dovelike appearance was seen by Jesus as well as
John, which is scarcely compatible with a subjec-
tive experience merely. Of course, the dove here is
to be taken as a symbol, and not as an assertion that
God’s Spirit assumed the form of a dove actually.


1411


Various meanings have been assigned to the symbol.
One connects it with the creative power, according
to a gentile usage; others with the speculative
philosophy of Alexandrian Judaism, according to
which the dove symbolized the Divine wisdom or
reason. But the most natural explanation con-
nects the symbolism of the dove with the brooding or
hovering of the Spirit in Gen 1 3. In this new
spiritual creation of humanity, asin the first physical
creation, the Spirit of God is the energy through
which the work is carried on. Possibly the dove,
as a living organism, complete in itself, may sug-
gest the totality and fulness of the gift of the
Spirit to Jesus. At Pentecost, on the contrary,
the Spirit is bestowed distributively and partially
at least to individuals as such, as suggested by the
cloven tongues as of fire which ‘‘sat upon each one
of them’ (Acts 2 3). Jn 3 34 emphasizes the
fulness of the bestowal upon Jesus: “For he whom
God hath sent speaketh the words of God: for
he giveth not the Spirit by measure.’”’ In the wit-
ness of the Baptist the permanence of the anoint-
ing of Jesus is declared: “Upon whomsoever thou
shalt see the Spirit descending, and abiding’’ (1 33).

It is probable that the connection of the bestowal
of the Spirit with water baptism, as seen later in
the Book of Acts, is traceable to the reception of the
Spirit by Jesus at His own baptism. Baptism in
the Spirit did not supersede water baptism.

The gift of the Spirit in fulness to Jesus at His
baptism was no doubt His formal and public anoint-
ing for His Messianic work (Acts 10 38). The
baptism of Jesus could not have the same signifi-
cance with that of sinful men. For the symbolic
cleansing from sin had no meaning for the sinless
one. Yet as an act of formal public consecration
it was appropriate to the Messiah. It brought to a
close His private life and introduced Him to His
public Messianic career. The conception of an
anointing for public service was a familiar one in
the OT writings and applied to the priest (Ex 28
41; 40 18; Lev 4 3.5.16; 6 20.22); to kings (1 8
9 16; 10 1; 15 1; 16 3.13); sometimes to prophets
(1 K 19 16; cf Isa G1 1; Ps 22; 206). These
anointings were with oil, and the oil came to be
regarded as a symbol of the Spirit of God.

The anointing of Jesus with the Holy Spirit
qualified Him in two particulars for His Messianic
office. (a) It was the source of His own endow-
ments of power for the endurance of temptation,
for teaching, for casting out demons, and healing
the sick, for His sufferings and death, for His
resurrection and ascension. The question is often
raised, why Jesus, the Divine one, should have
needed the Holy Spirit for His Messianic vocation.
The reply is that, His human nature, which was real,
required tHe Spirit’s presence. Man, made in
God’s image, is constituted in dependence upon the
Spirit of God. Apart from God’s Spirit man fails
of his true destiny, simply because our nature is
constituted as dependent upon the indwelling Spirit
of God for the performance of our true functions.
Jesus as human, therefore, required the presence of
God’s Spirit, notwithstanding His Divine-human
consciousness. (b) The Holy Spirit’s coming upon
Jesus in fulness also qualified Him to bestow the
Holy Spirit upon His disciples. John the Baptist
esp. predicts that it is He who shall baptize in the
Holy Spirit (Mt 3 11; Mk 18; Lk 3 16; see
also Jn 20 22; Acts 15). It was esp. true of
the king that He was anointed for His office, and
the term Messiah (7°W2, mashieh, equivalent to
the Gr 6 Xpiorés, ho Chrisiés), meaning the Anointed
One, points to this fact.

(3) The temptation of Jesus —The facts as to the
temptation are as follows: In Mt 4 1 we are told


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Holy Spirit


that Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness
to be tempted of the devil. Mk 1 12 declares in
his graphic way that after the baptism “straight-
way the Spirit driveth [é«Bdéd\e, ekbdllei] him
forth into the wilderness.’ Lk 41 more fully
declares that Jesus was “full of the Holy Spirit,”
and that He was “led in the Spirit in the wilderness
during 40 days.” The impression which the nar-
ratives of the temptation give is of energetic spiritual
conflict. As the Messiah confronted His life task
He was subject to the ordinary conditions of other
men in an evil world. Not by sheer divinity and
acting from without as God, but as human also
and a part of the world, He must overcome, so that
while He was sinless, it was nevertheless true that
the righteousness of Jesus was also an achieved
righteousness. The temptations were no doubt
such as were peculiar to His Messianic vocation,
the misuse of power, the presumption of faith and
the appeal of temporal splendor. To these He
opposes the restraint of power, the poise of faith
and the conception of a kingdom wholly spiritual
in its origin, means and ends. Jesus is hurled, as
it were, by the Spirit into this terrific conflict with
the powers of evil, and His conquest, like the
temptations themselves, was not final, but typical
and representative. It is a mistake to suppose
that the temptations of Jesus ended at the close of
the forty days. Later in His ministry, He refers to
the disciples as those who had been with Him in His
temptations (Lk 22 28). The temptations con-
tinued throughout His life, though, of course, the
wilderness temptations were the severest test of all,
and the victory there contained in principle and by
anticipation later victories. Comment has been
made upon the absence of reference to the Holy
Spirit’s influence upon Jesus in certain remarkable
experiences, which in the case of others would ordi-
narily have been traced directly to the Spirit, as
in Lk 11 14 ff, ete (cf art. by James Denney in
DCG, 1, 732, 734). Is it not true, however, that
the point of view of the writers of the Gospels is
that Jesus is always under the power of the Spirit?
At His baptism, in the temptation, and at the
beginning of His public ministry (Lk 4 14) very
special stress is placed upon the fact. Thence-
forward the Spirit’s presence and action are assumed.
From time to time, reference is made to the Spirit
for special reasons, but the action of the Spirit in and
through Jesus is always assumed.

(4) The public ministry of Jesus—Here we can
select only a few points to illustrate a much larger
truth. The writers of the Gospels, and esp. Luke,
conceived of the entire ministry of Jesus as under
the power of the Holy Spirit. After declaring that
Jesus was “full of the Holy Spirit” and that He was
led about by the Spirit in the wilderness forty days
in 4 1, he declares, in 4 14, that Jesus “returned in
the power of the Spirit into Galilee.” This is
followed in the next verse by a general summary of
His activities: “And he taught in their synagogues,
being glorified of all.’ Then, as if to complete his
teaching as to the relation of the Spirit to Jesus,
he narrates the visit to Nazareth and the citation by
Jesus in the synagogue there 6f Isaiah’s words
beginning, ‘“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,”
with the detailed description of His Messianic
activity, viz. preaching to the poor, announcement
of release to the captives, recovering of sight to the
blind, and to proclaim the acceptable year of the
Lord (Isa 61 1f). Jesus proclaims the fulfilment
of this prophecy in Himself (Lk 4 21). In Mt
12 18 ff a citation from Isa 42 1-3 is given in
connection with the miraculous healing work of
Jesus. It is a passage of exquisite beauty and
describes the Messiah as a quiet and unobtrusive
and tender minister to human needs, possessed of


Holy Spirit


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1412


irresistible power and infinite patience. Thus the
highest OT ideals as to the operations of the Spirit
of God come to realization, esp. in the public minis-
try of Jesus. The comprehensive terms of the
description make it incontestably clear that the
NT writers thought of the entire public life of Jesus
as directed by the Spirit of God. We need only to
read the evangelic records in order to fill in the
details.

The miracles of Jesus were wrought through the
power of the Holy Spirit. Occasionally He is
selzed as it were by a sense of the urgency of His
work in some such way as to impress beholders with
the presence of a strange power working in Him.
In one case men think He is beside Himself (Mk
3 21); in another they are impressed with the
authoritativeness of His teaching (Mk 1 22);
in another His intense devotion to His task makes
Him forget bodily needs (Jn 4 31); again men think
He has a demon (Jn 8 48); at one time He is
seized with a rapturous joy when the 70 return
from their successful evangelistic tour, and Luke
declares that at that hour Jesus rejoiced in the
Holy Spirit (Lk 10 21; cf Mt 11 25). This
whole passage is a remarkable one, containing
elements which point to the Johannine conception
of Jesus, on which account Harnack is disposed
to discredit it at certain points (Sayings of Jesus,
302). One of the most impressive aspects of this
activity of Jesus in the Spirit is its suppressed
intensity. Nowhere is there lack of self-control.
Nowhere is there evidence of a coldly didactic
attitude, on the one hand, or of a loose rein upon
the will, on the other. Jesus is always an intensely
human Master wrapped in Divine power. The
miracles contrast strikingly with the miracles of
the apocryphal gospels. In the latter all sorts of
capricious deeds of power are ascribed to Jesus as a
boy. In our Gospels, on the contrary, no miracle
is wrought until after His anointing with the Spirit
at baptism.

A topic of especial interest is that of blasphemy
against the Holy Spirit. Jesus cast out demons by
the power of God’s Spirit. In Mt 12 31; Mk 3
28f; Lk 12 10, we have the declaration that
blasphemy against the Holy Spirit is an unpardon-
able sin. Mark particularizes the offence of the
accusers of Jesus by saying that they said of Jesus,
“He hath an unclean spirit.’ The blasphemy
against the Spirit seems to have been not merely
rejection of Jesus and His words, which might be
due to various causes. It was rather the sin of
ascribing works of Divine mercy and power—
works which had all the marks of their origin in
the goodness of God—to a diabolic source. The
charge was that He cast out devils by Beelzebub
the prince of devils. We are not to suppose that
the unpardonable nature of the sin against the
Holy Spirit was due to anything arbitrary in God’s
arrangements regarding sin. The moral and
spiritual attitude involved in the charge against
Jesus was simply a hopeless one. It presupposed a
warping or wrenching of the moral nature from the
truth in such degree, a deep-seated malignity and
insusceptibility to Divine influences so complete,
that no moral nucleus remained on which the
forgiving love of God might work. See Buas-
PHEMY.

(5) Death, resurrection and Pentecostal gift—
It is not possible to give here a complete outline
of the activities of Jesus in the Holy Spirit. We
observe one or two additional points as to the
relations of the Holy Spirit to Him. In He 9 14
it is declared that Christ “through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without blemish unto God,”
and in Rom 1 4, Paul says He was ‘declared to be
the Son of God with power, according to the spirit


of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead’
(cf also Rom 8 11). .

As already noted, John the Baptist gave as a
particular designation of Jesus that it was He who
should baptize with the Holy Spirit, in contrast
with his own baptism in water. In Jn 20 22, after
the resurrection and before the ascension, Jesus
breathed on the disciples and said ‘Receive ye the
Holy Spirit”’ There was probably a real com-
munication of the Spirit in this act of Jesus in
anticipation of the outpouring in fulness on the day
of Pentecost. In Acts 1 2 it is declared that He
gave commandment through the Holy Spirit, and
in 1 5 it is predicted by Him that the disciples
should “be baptized in the Holy Spirit not man:
days hence’; and in 1 8 it is declared, “Ye shall
receive power, when the Holy Spirit is come upon.
you.’

It is clear from the preceding that in the thought
of the NT writers Jesus is completely endued with
the power of the Holy Spirit. It is in large measure
the OT view of the Spirit; that is to say, the opera-
tion of the Spirit in and through Jesus is chiefly
with a view to His official Messianic work, the
charismatic Spirit imparting power rather than the
Spirit for holy living merely. Yet there is a differ-
ence between the OT and NT representations here.
In the OT the agency of the Spirit is made very
prominent when mighty works are performed by
His power. In the Gospels the view is concen-
trated less upon the Spirit than upon Jesus Him-
self, though it is always assumed that He is acting
in the power of the Spirit. In the case of Jesus also,
the moral quality of His words and deeds is always
assumed.

Our next topic in setting forth the NT teaching
is the Holy Spirit in relation to the kingdom of God.

Quite in harmony with the plenary
2. The enduement of Jesus, the founder
Spirit in the of the kingdom, with the power of the
Kingdom Spirit, is the communication of the
of God Spirit to the agents employed by

Providence in the conduct of the
affairs of the kingdom. We need, at all points, in
considering the subject in the NT to keep in view
the OT background. The covenant relations
between God and Israel were the presupposition of
all the blessings of the OT. In the NT there is not
an identical but an analogous point of view. God
is continuing His work among men. Indeed in a
real sense He has begun a new work, but this new
work is the fulfilment of the old. The new differs
from the old in some very important respects, chiefly
indeed in this, that now the national and theocratic
life is wholly out of sight. Prophecy no longer
deals with political questions. The power of the
Spirit no longer anoints kings and judges for their
duties. The action of the Spirit upon the cosmos
now ceases to receive attention. In short, the
kingdom of God is intensely spiritualized, and the
relation of the Spirit to the individual or the church
is nearly always that which is dealt with.

(1) Synoptic teachings.—We consider briefly the
synoptic teachings as to the Holy Spirit in relation
to the kingdom of God. The forerunner of Jesus
goes before His face in the Spirit and power of
Elijah (Lk 1.17). Of Him it had been predicted
that He should be filled with the Holy Spirit from
His mother’s womb (Lk 115). The Master
expressly predicts that the Holy Spirit will give
the needed wisdom when the disciples are delivered
up. “It is not ye that speak, but the Holy Spirit”
(Mk 13 11). In Lk 12 12 it is also declared that
“The Holy Spirit shall teach you in that very hour
what ye ought to say.”’ Likewise in Mt 10 20,
“It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father that speaketh in you.’ In Lk 11 13 is


1413


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Holy Spirit


a beautiful saying: If we who are evil give good
gifts to our children, how much more shall the
“heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him.” This is a variation from the ||
passage in Mt (7 11), and illustrates Luke’s marked
emphasis upon the operations of the Spirit. In Mt
28 19, the disciples are commanded to baptize in
the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy
Spirit. This passage has been called in question,
but there is not sufficient ground for its rejection.
Hitherto there has been almost no hint directly of
the personality of the Spirit or the Trinitarian im-
plcaiigas in the teaching as to the Spirit. Here,

owever, we have a very suggestive hint toward a
doctrine-of the Spirit which attains more complete
development later.

(2) In the Gospel of John there is a more elaborate
presentation of the office and work of the Holy
Spirit, particularly in chs 14-17. Several earlier
passages, however, must be noticed. The passage
on the new birth in Jn 3 5ff we notice first. The
expression, “‘except one be born of water and the
Spirit,’’ seems to contain a reference to baptism
along with the action of the Spirit of God directly
on the soul. In the light of other NT teachings,
however, we are not warranted in ascribing saving
efficacy to baptism here. The “birth,” in so far
as it relates to baptism, is symbolic simply, not
actual. The outward act is the fitting symbolic
accompaniment of the spiritual regeneration by the
Spirit. Symbolism and spiritual fact move on_||
lines. The entrance into the kingdom is symboli-
cally effected by means of baptism, just as the “new
birth” takes place symbolically by the same means.

In Jn 6 51 ff we have the very difficult words
attributed to Jesus concerning the eating of His
flesh and the drinking of His blood. The disciples
were greatly distressed by these words, and in 6 63
Jesus insists that “it is the spirit that giveth life;
the flesh profiteth nothing.’’ One’s view of the
meaning of this much-discussed passage will turn
largely on his point of view in interpreting it. If
he adopts the view that John is reading back into
the record much that came later in the history, the
inference will probably follow that Jesus is here
referring to the Lord’s Supper. If on the other
hand it is held that John is seeking to reproduce
substantially what was said, and to convey an
impression of the actual situation, the reference to
the Supper will not be inferred.. Certainly the
language fits the later teaching in the establish-
ment of the Supper, although John omits a detailed
account of the Supper. But Jesus was meeting a
very real situation in the carnal spirit of the multi-
tude which followed Him for the loaves and fishes.
His deeply mystical words seem to have been
intended to accomplish the result which followed,
viz. the separation of the true from the false dis-
ciples. There is no necessary reference to the
Lord’s Supper specifically, therefore, in His words.
Spiritual meat and drink, not carnal, are the true
food of man. He Himself was that food, but only
the spiritually susceptible would grasp His meaning.
It is difficult to assign any sufficient reason why
Jesus should have here referred to the Supper, or
why John should have desired to introduce such
reference into the story at this stage.

In Ju 7 37ff we have a saying of Jesus and
its interpretation by John which accords with the
synoptic reference to a future baptism in the Holy
Spirit to be bestowed by Jesus: ‘He that believeth
on me, as the scripture hath said, from within
him shall flow rivers of living water.’’ John adds:
“But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that
believed on him were to receive: for the Spirit was
not yet given; because Jesus was not yet glorified.’’
No doubt John’s Gospel is largely a reproduction


of the facts and teachings of Jesus in the evangel-
ist’s own words. This passage indicates, however,
that John discriminated between his own con-
structions of Christ’s teachings and the teachings
themselves, and warns us against the custom of
many exegetes who broadly assume that John
pup eyed his material with slight regard for careful
and correct statement, passing it through his own
consciousness in such manner as to leave us his
own subjective Gospel, rather than a truly historical
record. The ethical implications of such a process
on John’s part would scarcely harmonize with his
general tone and esp. the teachings of his Epp.
No doubt John’s Gospel contains much meaning
which he could not have put into it prior to the
coming of the Spirit. But what John seeks to give
ie the teaching of Jesus and not his own theory of
esus.

We give next an outline of the teachings in the
great chapters from 14 to 17, the farewell discourse
of Jesus. In 14 16 Jesus says, “I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter’
(mapdxdyros, pardklétos; see PaRacLeTE). Next
Jesus describes this Comforter as one whom the
world cannot receive. Disciples know Him because
He abides in them. The truth of Christianity is
spiritually discerned, i.e. it is discerned by the
power and indwelling of the Holy Spirit. In the
name of ‘reality,’ science sometimes repudiates
these inner experiences as ‘‘mystical.”’ But Chris-
tians cling to them as most real, data of experience
as true and reliable as any other forms of human
experience. To repudiate them would be for them
to repudiate reality itself. The Father and Son
shall make their abode in Christians (14 23).
This is probably another form of assertion of the
Spirit’s presence, and not a distinct line of mystical
teaching. (Cf Woods, The Spirit of God in Bib.
Literature, 243.) For in ver 26 the promise of
the Spirit is repeated. The Father is to send the
Spirit in the name of Christ, and He is to teach the
disciples all things, quickening also their memories.
In the NT generally, and esp. in John’s and Paul’s
writings, there is no sense of conflict between
Father, Son and Spirit in their work in the Chris-
tian. All proceeds from the Father, through the
Son, and is accomplished in the Christian by the
Holy Spirit. As will appear, Christ in the believer
is represented as being practically all that the
Spirit does without identifying Christ with the
Spirit. So far there are several notes suggesting
the personality of the Holy Spirit. The designa-
tion “another Comforter,” taken in connection with
the description of his work, is one. The fact that
He is sent or given is another. And another is seen
in the specific work which the Spirit is to do.
Another is the masculine pronoun employed here
(éxetvos, ekeinos). In ver 26 the function of the
Spirit is indicated. He is to bring to “remembrance
all that I said unto you.” In 15 26 this is made
even more comprehensive: ‘He shall bear witness
of me,’’ and yet more emphatically in 16 14, “He
shall glorify me: for he shall take of mine, and shall
declare it unto you.’ The sphere of the Spirit’s
activity is the heart of the individual believer and
of the ehurch. His chief function is to illumine the
teaching and glorify the person of Jesus. Jn 15
26 is the passage which has been used in support
of the doctrine of the procession of the Spirit. Jesus
says, “I will send” (réuyw, pémpsd), future tense,
referring to the “Spirit of truth which proceedeth
from the Father’ (éxropeveras, ekporetietai), present
tense. The present tense here suggests timeless
action and has been taken to indicate an essential
relation of the Spirit to God the Father (cf Godet,
Comm. on John, in loc.). The hazard of such
an interpretation lies chiefly in the absence of other


Holy Spirit


confirmatory Scriptures and in the possibility of
another and simpler meaning of the word. How-
ever, the language is unusual, and the change of
tense in the course of the sentence is suggestive.
Perhaps it is one of the many instances where we
must admit we do not know the precise import of
the language of Scripture.

In 16 7-15 we have a very important passage.
Jesus declares to the anxious disciples that it is
expedient for Him to go away, because otherwise
the Spirit will not come. ‘He, when he is come,
will convict the world in respect of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment’? (16 8). The
term tr? “convict”? (édéyée, elégkset) involves a
cognitive along with a moral process. The Spirit
who deals in truth, and makes His appeal through
the trnth, shall convict, shall bring the mind on
which He is working into a sense of self-condemna-
tion on account of sm. The word means more than
reprove, or refute, or convince. It signifies up to a
certain point a moral conquest of the mind: “of
sin, because they believe not on me” (16 9).
belief is the root sin. The revelation of God in
Christ is, broadly speaking, His condemnation of all
sin. The Spirit may convict of particular sins, but
they will all be shown to consist essentially in the
rejection of God’s love and righteousness in Christ,
ie. in unbelief. “Of righteousness, because I go to
the Father, and ye behold me no more” (16 10).
What does this mean? Does Jesus mean that His
going to the Father will be the proof of His right-
eonsness to those who put Him to death, or that this
going to the Father will be the consummating or
crowning act of His righteousness which the Spirit
is to carry home to the hearts of men? Or does He
mean that because He goes away the Spirit will take
His place in convicting men of righteousness? The
latter meaning seems implied in the words, “and ye
behold me no more.” _ Probably, however, the mean-
ings are not mutually exclusive. “Of judgment
because the prince of this world hath been judged”
(16 11). In His incarnation and death the prince
of this world, the usurper, is conquered and cast ont.

We may sum up the teachings as to the Spirit in
these four chapters as follows: He is the Spirit of
truth; He guides into all truth; He brings to
memory Christ’s teachings; He shows things to
come; He glorifies Christ; He speaks not of Him-
self but of Christ; He, like believers, bears witness
to Christ; He enables Christians to do greater works
than those of Christ; He convicts the world of sin,
of righteousness, and of judgment; He comes
because Christ goes away; He is “another Com-
forter’; He is to abide with disciples forever.

These teachings cover a very wide range of needs.
The Holy Spirit is the subject of the entire discourse.
In a sense it is the counterpart of the Sermon on
the Mount. There the laws of the kingdom are
expounded. Here the means of realization of all
the ends of that kingdom are presented. The king-
dom now becomes the kingdom of the Spirit. The
historical revelation of truth in the life, death, resur-
rection and glorification of Jesus being completed,
the Spirit of truth comes in fulness. The gospel
as history is now to become the gospel as experience.
The Messiah as a fact is now to become the Messiah
as a life through the Spirit’s action. All the ele-
ments of the Spirit’s action are embraced: the
charismatic for mighty works; the intellectual for
guidance into truth; the moral and spiritual for
producing holy lives. This discourse transfers
the kingdom, so to speak, from the shoulders of the
Master to those of the disciples, but the latter
are empowered for their tasks by the might of the
indwelling and abiding Spirit. The method of the
kingdom’s growth and advance is clearly indicated
as spiritual, conviction of sin, righteousness and


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1414


judgment, and obedient and holy lives of Christ’s
disciples. ; é

Before passing to the next topic, one remark
should be made as to the Trinitarian suggestions
of these chapters in Jn. The personality of the
Spirit is clearly implied in much of the language
here. It is true we have no formal teaching on the
metaphysical side, no ontology in the strict sense
of the word. This fact is made much of by writers
who are slow to recognize the personality of the
Holy Spirit in the light of the teachings of John
and Paul. These writers have no difficulty,
however, in asserting that the NT writers hold that
God is a personal being (see I. F. Woods, The
Spirit of God in Bib. Literature, 256, 268). It
must be insisted, however, that in the N’‘T, as in the
OT, there is little metaphysics, little ontological
teaching as to God. His personality is deduced
from the same kind of sayings as those relating to
the Spirit. From the ontological point of view,
therefore, we should also have to reject the per-
sonality of God on the basis of the Bib. teach-
ings. The Trinitarian formulations may not be
correct at all points, but the NT warrants the
Trinitarian doctrine, Just_as it warrants belief in
the personality of God. We are not insisting on
finding metaphysics in Scripture where it is absent,
but we do insist upon consistency in construing
the popular and practical language of Scripture as
to the second and third as well as the first Person of
the Trinity.

We add a few lines as to John’s teachings in the
Epp. and Revelation. In general they are in
close harmony with the teachings in his Gospel
and do not require extended treatment. The
Spirit imparts assurance (1 Jn 3 24); incites to
confession of Christ (4 2); bears witness to Christ


(6 6ff). In Rev 14 the “seven Spirits’ is an
expression for the completeness of the Spirit. The
Spirit speaks to the churches (2 7.11; 3 6). The


seer is “in the Spirit’? (4 2). The Spirit joins the
church in the invitation of the gospel (22 17).

(3) The Holy Spirit in the Book of Acts—The
Book of Acts contains the record of the beginning
of the Dispensation of the Holy Spirit. There is at
the outset the closest connection with the recorded
predictions of the Holy Spirit in the Gospels.
Particularly does Luke make clear the continuity
of his own thought regarding the Spirit in his
earlier and later writing. Jesus in the first chapter
of Acts gives commandment through the Holy
Spirit and predicts the reception of power as the.
result of the baptism in the Holy Spirit which the
disciples are soon to receive.

The form of the Spirit’s activities in Acts is
chiefly charismatic, that is, the miraculous endow-
ment of disciples with power or wisdom for their
work in extending the Messianic kingdom. As yet
the work of the Spirit within disciples as the chief
sanctifying agency is not fully developed, and is
later described with great fulness in Paul’s writings.
Some recent writers have overemphasized the con-
trast between the earlier and the more developed
view of the Spirit with regard to the moral life.
In Acts the ethical import of the Spirit’s action
appears at several points (see Acts 5 3.9; 7 51;
8 18f; 189; 15 28). The chief interest in Acts
is naturally the Spirit’s agency in founding the
Messianic kingdom, since here is recorded the early
history of the expansion of that kingdom. The
phenomenal rather than the inner moral aspects of
that great movement naturally come chiefly into
view. But everywhere the ethical implications are
present. Gunkel is no doubt correct in the state-
ment that Paul’s conception of the Spirit as inward
and moral and acting in the daily life of the Chris-
tian opens the way for the activity of the Spirit as


1415


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Holy Spirit


a historical principle in subsequent ages. After
all, this is the fundamental and universal import of
the Spirit (see Gunkel, Die Wirkungen des heiligen
Geistes, etc, 76; ef Pfleiderer, Paulinismus, 200).

We now proceed to give a brief summary of the
Holy Spirit’s activities as recorded in Acts, and
follow this with a discussion of one or two special
points. The great event is of course the outpouring
or baptism of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost followed
by the completion of the baptism in the Holy Spirit
by the baptism of the household of Cornelius
(2 1ff; 10 17-48). Speaking with tongues, and
other striking manifestations attended this baptism,
as also witnessing to the gospel with power by the
apostles, See Baptism oF rHe Hoty Spirzit. This
outpouring is declared to be in fulfilment of OT
prophecy, and the assertion is also made that it is
the gift of the exalted Lord Jesus Christ (2 17.33).
Following this baptism of the Holy Spirit the dis-
ciples are endued with miraculous power for their
work. Miracles are wrought (Acts 2 43 ff), and all
necessary gifts of wisdom and Divine guidance are
bestowed. A frequent form of expression describ-
ing the actors in the history is, “filled with the Holy
Spirit.’? It is applied to Peter (4 8); to disciples
(4 31); to the seven deacons (6 3); to Stephen
(6 5; 7 55); to Saul who becomes Paul (13 9).

The presence of the Spirit and His immediate
and direct superintendence of affairs are seen in the
fact that Ananias and Sapphira are represented as
lying to the Holy Spirit (5 3.9); the Jews are
charged by Stephen with resisting the Holy Spirit
(7 51); and Simon Magus is rebuked for attempt-
ing to purchase the Spirit with money (8 18 f).

The Holy Spirit is connected with the act of
baptism, but there does not seem to be any fixed
order as between the two. In Acts 9 17 the Spirit
comes before baptism; and after baptism in 8 17
and 19 6. In these cases the coming of the Spirit
was in connection with the laying on of hands also.
But in 10 44 the Holy Spirit falls upon the hearers
while Peter is speaking prior to baptism and with
no laying on of hands. These instances in which
the order of baptism, the laying on of hands and the
gift of the Spirit seem to be a matter of indifference,
are a striking indication of the non-sacramentarian
character of the teaching of the Book of Acts, and
indeed in the NT generally. Certainly no par-
ticular efficacy seems to be attached to the laying on
of hands or baptism except as symbolic representa-
tions of spiritual facts. Gunkel, m his excellent
work on the Holy Spirit, claims Acts 2 38 as an

‘instance when the Spirit is bestowed during bap-
tism (Die Wirkungen des heiligen Geisies, etc, 7).
The words of Peter, however, may refer to a recep-
tion of the Spirit subsequent to baptism, although
evidently in immediate connection with it. The
baptiam of the Holy Spirit clearly then was not
meant tosupplant water baptism. Moreover, inthe
strict sense the baptism of the Holy Spirit was a
historical event or events completed at the outset
when the extension of the kingdom of God, begin-
ning at Pentecost, began to reach out to the gentile
world. See Baprism or THE Hoxy Srrair.

In Acts the entire historical movement is repre-
sented by Luke as being under the direction of the
Spirit. He guides Philip to the Ethiopian and then
“catches away” Philip (8 29.39). He guides Peter
at Joppa through the vision and then leads him to
Cornelius at Caesarea (10 19f; 1112f). The
Spirit commands the church at Antioch to separate
Saul and Barnabas for missionary work (13 2 ff).
He guides the church at Jerus (15 28). He forbids
the apostle to go to Asia (16 6f). The Spirit
enables Agabus to prophesy that Paul will be bound
by the Jews at Jerus (21 11; cf also 20 23). The
Spirit appointed the elders at Ephesus (20 28).


One or two points require notice before passing
from Acts. The impression we get of the Spirit’s
action here very strongly suggests a Divine purpose
moving on the stage of history in a large and com-
prehensive way. In Jesus that purpose was
individualized. Here the supplementary thought
of a vast historic movement is powerfully suggested.
Gunkel asserts that usually the Spirit’s action is
not conceived by the subjects of it in terms of
means (Mittel) and end (Zweck), but rather as
cause (Ursache) and activity (Wirkung) (see Die
Wirkungen des heiligen Getstes, etc, 20). There is
an element of truth in this, but the idea of purpose
is by no means confined to the historian who later
recorded the Spirit’s action. The actors in the
spiritual drama were everywhere conscious of the
great movement of which they as individuals
were a part. In some passages the existence of
purpose in the Spirit’s action is clearly recognized,
as in His restraining of Paul at certain points and in
the appointment of Saul and Barnabas as mission-
aries. Divine purpose is indeed implied at all
points, and while the particular end in view was
not always clear in a given instance, the subjects of
the Spirit’s working were scarcely so naive in their
apprehension of the matter as to think of their expe-
riences merely as so many extraordinary phe-
nomena caused in a particular way.

We note next the glossolalia, or speaking with
tongues, recorded in Acts 2, as well as in later
chapters and in Paul’s Epp. The prevailing view
at present is that “speaking with tongues” does not
mean speaking actual intelligible words in a foreign
language, but rather the utterance of meaningless
sounds, as was customary among the heathen and
as is sometimes witnessed today where religious
life becomes highly emotional in its manifestation.
To support this view the account in Acts 2 is
questioned, and Paul’s instructions in 1 Cor 14
are cited. Of course a man’s world-view will be
likely to influence his interpretation in this as in
other matters. Philosophically an antisupernatural
world-view makes it easy to question the glossolalia
of the NT. Candid exegesis, however, rather
requires the recognition of the presence in the
apostolic church of a speaking in foreign tongues,
even if alongside of it there existed (which is open
to serious doubt) the other phenomenon mentioned
above. Acts 2 3ff is absolutely conclusive taken
by itself, and no valid critical grounds have been
found for rejecting the passage. 1 Cor 14 con-
firms this view when its most natural meaning is
sought. Paul is here insisting upon the orderly
conduct of worship and upon edification as the
important thing. To this end he insists that they
who speak with tongues pray that they may also
interpret (1 Cor 14 5; ch 13). It is difficult to
conceive what he means by “interpret” if the
speaking with tongues was a meaningless jargon
of sounds uttered under emotional excitement,
and nothing more. Paul’s whole exposition in this
chapter implies that “tongues” may be used for
edification. He ranks it below prophecy simply
because without an interpreter ‘‘tongues’’ would not
edify the hearer. Paul himself spoke with tongues
more than they all (14 18). It seems scarcely in
keeping with Paul’s character to suppose that he
refers ‘lets to a merely emotional volubility in
meaningless and disconnected sounds. See Tonauzs,
GIFT oF.

(4) The Holy Spirit in Paul’s writings —The
teachings of Paul on the Holy Spirit are so rich and
abundant that space forbids an exhaustive presenta~-
tion. In his writings the Bib. representations reach
their climax. Mr. Wood says correctly that Paul
grasped the idea of the unity of the Christian life.
All the parts exist in a living whole and the Holy


Holy Spirit = - THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 1416
Spirit constitutes and maintains it (Wood, The | aspects as well as in its charismatic forms. It isa


Spirit of God in Bib. Literature, 268). In fact a
careful study of Paul’s teachings discloses three ||
lines, one relating to faith, another to Christ, and
the third to the Holy Spirit. That is to say, his
teachings coalesce, as it were, point by point, in
reference to these three subjects. Faith is the
human side of the Divine activity carried on by
the Holy Spirit. Faith is therefore implied in
the Spirit’s action and is the result of or response
to it in its various forms. But faith is primarily
and essentially faith in Jesus Christ. Hence we
find in Paul that Christ is represented as doing sub-
stantially everything that the Spirit does. Now
we are not to see in this any conflicting conceptions
as to Christ and the Spirit, but rather Paul’s intense
feeling of the unity of the work of Christ and the
Spirit. The “law’’ of the Spirit’s action is the
revelation and glorification of Christ. In his Gos-
pel, which came later, John, as we have seen, defined
the Spirit’s function in precisely these terms.
Whether or not John was influenced by Paul in the
matter we need not here consider.

(a) We begin with a brief reference to the con-
nection in Paul’s thought between the Spirit and
Jesus. The Holy Spirit is described as the Spirit of
God’s Son (Rom 8 14 ff; Gal 4 6), as the Spirit of
Christ (Rom 8 9). He who confesses Jesus does
so by the Holy Spirit, and no one can say that Jesus
is anathema in the Holy Spirit (1 Cor 12 3).
Christ is called a life-giving Spirit (16 45); and in
2 Cor 317 the statement appears, “Now the
Lord is the Spirit.” All of this shows how com-
pletely one Paul regarded the work of Christ and
the Spirit, not because they were identical in the
sense in which Beyschlag has contended, but
because their task and aim being identical, there
was no sense of discord in Paul’s mind in explaining
their activities in similar terms.

(6) The Spirit appears in Paul as in Acts impart-
ing all kinds of charismatic gifts for the ends of
the Messianic kingdom. He enumerates a long
list of spiritual gifts which cannot receive separate
treatment here, such as prophecy (1 Thess 5 19f);
tongues (1 Cor 12-14); wisdom (2 6 ff); knowl-
edge (12 8); power to work miracles (12 9f);
discerning of spirits (12 10); interpretation of
tongues (12 10); faith (12 9); boldness in Chris-
tian testimony (2 Cor 3 17f); charismata gen-
erally (1 Thess 1 5; 48, etc). See SprriruaL
Grrts. In addition to the above list, Paul esp.
emphasizes the Spirit’s action in revealing to himself
and to Christians the mind of God (1 Cor 2 10-12;
Eph 3 5). He speaks in words taught by the
Spirit (1 Cor 2 13). He preaches in demonstra-
tion of the Spirit and of power (1 Cor 2 4; 1 Thess
1 5).

4 the above manifestations of the Spirit, as
enumerated in Paul’s writings, we have presented
in very large measure what we have already seen in
Acts, but with some additions. In 1 Cor 14 and
elsewhere Paul gives a new view as to the charis-
matic gifts which was greatly needed in view of the
tendency to extravagant and intemperate indul-
gence in emotional excitement, due to the mighty
action of God’s Spirit in the Corinthian church.
He insists that all things be done unto edification,
that spiritual growth is the true aim of all spiritual
endowments. This may be regarded as the con-
necting link between the earlier and later NT
teaching as to the Holy Spirit, between the charis-
matic and moral-religious significance of the Spirit.
To the latter we now direct attention.

(c) We note the Spirit in the beginnings of the
Christian life. From beginning to end the Chris-
tian life is regarded by Paul as under the power
of the Holy Spirit, in its inner mora! and religious


singular fact that Paul does not anywhere expressly
declare that the Holy Spirit originates the Chris-
tian life. Gunkel is correct in this so far as specific
and direct teaching is concerned. But Wood who
asserts the contrary is also right, if regard is had to
clear implications and legitimate inferences from
Paul’s statements (op. cit., 202). Rom 8 2 does not
perhaps refer to the act of regeneration, and yet
it is hard to conceive of the Christian life as thus
constituted by the “law of the Spirit of life” apart
from its origin through the Spirit. There are other
passages which seem to imply very clearly, if they
do not directly assert, that the Christian life 1s
originated by the Holy Spirit (1 Thess 1 6; Rom
6 5; 89; 1 Cor 2 4; 611; Tit 3 5). aoe

The Holy Spirit in the beginnings of the Christian
life itself is set forth in many forms of statement.
They who have the Spirit belong to Christ (Rom
8 9). We received not the Spirit of bondage but
of adoption, “whereby we cry, Abba, Father” (Rom
815). “The Spirit himself beareth witness with
our spirit, that we are children of God” (Rom
8 16). The Spirit is received by the hearing of
faith (Gal 3 2). See also Rom 5 5; 8 2; 1 Cor
16 11; Gal 3 3.14; Eph 2 18. There are two
or three expressions employed by Paul which express
some particular aspect of the Spirit’s work in be-
lievers. One of these is “first-fruits’’ (Rom 8 23,
drapx%, aparché), which means that the present
possession of the Spirit by the believer is the
guarantee of the full redemption which is to come,
as the first-fruits were the guarantee of the full
harvest. Another of these words is “earnest” (2
Cor 1 22; & 5, éppa8dv, arrabin), which also means
a pledge or guarantee. Paul also speaks of the
“sealing” of the Christians with the Holy Spirit of
promise, as in Eph 1 13 (éc¢payloOnre, esphragis-
théte, ‘“‘ye were sealed”). This refers to the seal
by which a king stamped his mark of authorization
or ownership upon a document.

(d) Paul gives a great variety of expressions indi-
cating the presence and activity of the Holy Spirit
in the religious and moral life of the Christian. In
fact at every point that lifeis under the guidance and
sustaining energy of the Spirit. If we live after the


flesh, we die; if after the Spirit, we live (Rom 8 6).


The Spirit helps the Christian to pray (Rom 8
26f). The kingdom of God is righteousness and
peace and joy in the Holy Spirit (Rom 14 17).
Christians are to abound in hope through the
Holy Spirit (Rom 16 13). “The fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness,
goodness, faithfulness, meekness, self-control’ (Gal
6 22). Christians are warned to grieve not the
Holy Spirit (Eph 4 30), and are urged to take the
sword of the Spirit (6 17). The flesh is contrasted
with the Spirit at a number of points in Paul’s
writings (e.g. Rom 8 5f; Gal 6 17 ff). The Spirit
in these passages probably means either the Spirit
of God or man’s spirit as under the influence of the
Spirit of God. Flesh is a difficult word to define,
as it seems to be used in several somewhat different
senses. When the flesh is represented as lusting
against the Spirit, however, it seems equivalent to
the “carnal mind,” i.e. the mind of the sinful natural
man as distinct from the mind of the spiritual man.
This carnal or fleshly mind is thus described because
the flesh is thought of as the sphere in which the
sinful impulses in large part, though not altogether
(Gal 6 19ff), take their rise.

Paul contrasts the Spirit with the letter (2 Cor 3
6) and puts strong emphasis on the Spirit as the
source of Christian liberty. As Gunkel points out,
spirit ahd freedom with Paul are correlatives, like
spirit and life. Freedom must needs come of the
Spirit’s presence because He is superior to all other


1417


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Holy Spirit
Home


authorities and powers (Die Wirkungen des heiligen
Geistes, etc, 95). See also an excellent passage
on the freedom of the Christian from statutory
religious requirements in DCG, art. ‘Holy Spirit”
by Dr. James Denney, I, 739.

(e) The Holy Spirit inthe church. Toward the end
of his ministry and in his later group of epp., Paul
devoted much thought to the subject of the church,
and one of his favorite figures was of the church as
the body of Christ. The Holy Spirit is represented
as animating this body, as communicating to it life,
and directing all its affairs. As in the case of the
individual believer, so also in the body of believers
the Spirit is the sovereign energy which rules com-
pletely. By one Spirit all are baptized into one

ody and made to drink of one Spirit (1 Cor 12
13). All the gifts of the church, charismatic and
otherwise, are from the Spirit (12 4.8-11). All
spiritual gifts in the church are for edification (14
12). Prayer is to be in the Spirit (14 15). The
church is to preserve the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace (Eph 4 3). Love (Col 1 8); fellow-
ship (Phil 2 1); worship (3 3) are in the Spirit.
The church is the habitation of the Spirit (Eph 2
22). The church is an epistle of Christ written by
the Spirit (2 Cor 3 3). Thus the whole life of the
church falls under the operation of the Holy Spirit.

(f) The Spirit also carries on His work in believers
in raising the body from the dead. In Rom 8 11
Paul asserts that the present indwelling in believers
of the Spirit that raised up Jesus from the dead is
the guarantee of the quickening of their_mortal
bodies by the power of the same Spirit. See also
1 Cor 15 44f; Gal 6 5.

We have thus exhibited Paul’s teachings as to
the Holy Spirit in some detail in order to make
clear their scope and comprehensiveness. And
we have not exhausted the material supplied by
his writings. I+ will be observed that Paul nowhere
elaborates a doctrine of the Spirit, as he does in a
number of instances his doctrine of the person of
Christ. The references to the Spirit are in con-
nection with other subjects usually. This, however,
only serves to indicate how very fundamental the
work of the Spirit wasin Paul’s assumptions as to
the Christian life. The Spirit is the Christian life,
just as Christ is that life.

The personality of the Spirit appears in Paul as
in John. The benediction in 2 Cor 13 14 distin-
guishes clearly Father, Son and Spirit (cf also Eph
4 4), In many connections the Spirit is distim-
guished from the Son and Father, and the work of
the Spirit is set forth in personal terms. It is true
references are often made to the Holy Spirit by Paul
as if the Spirit were an impersonal influence, or at
least without clearly personal attributes. This dis-
tinguishes his usage as to the Spirit from that as to
Christ and God, who are always personal. It is a
natural explanation of this fact if we hold that
in the case of the impersonal references we have a
survival of the current OT conception of the Spirit,
while in those which are personal we have the
developed conception as found in both Paul and
John. Personal attributes are ascribed to the
Spirit in so many instances, it would seem unwar-
ranted in us to make the earlier and lower con-
ception determinative of the later and higher.

In Paul’s writings we have the crowning factor
in the Bib. doctrine of the Holy Spirit. He gathers
up most of the preceding elements, and adds to
them his own distinctive teaching or emphasis.
Some of the earlier OT elements are lacking, but all
those which came earlier in the NT are found in
Paul. The three points which Paul esp. brought
into full expression were first, the law of edification
in the use of spiritual gifts, second, the Holy Spirit
in the moral life of the believer, and third, the


Holy Spirit in the church. Thus Paul enables us
to make an important distinction as to the work of
the Spirit in founding the kingdom of God, viz.
the distinction between means and ends. Charis-
matic gifts of the Spirit were, after all, means to
ethical ends. God’s kingdom is moral in its pur-

ose, ‘righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy

pirit.” Christianity is, according to Paul, inher-
ently and essentially supernatural. But its per-
manent and abiding significance is to be found, not
in extraordinary phenomena in the form of “mighty
works,’’ “wonders,” “tongues”? and other miracles
in the ordinary sense, but in the creation of a new
moral order in time and eternity. The super-
natural is to become normal and “natural” in human
history, therefore, in the building up of this ethical
kingdom on the basis of a redemption that is in and
through Jesus Christ, and wrought out im all its
details by the power of the Holy Spirit.

(5) The Holy Spirit in other NT writings.—
There is little to add to the NT teaching as to the
Holy Spirit. Paul and John practically cover all
the aspects of His work which are presented. There
are a few passages, however, we may note in con-
cluding our general survey. In He the Holy Spirit
is referred to a number of times as inspiring the
OT Scriptures {He 3 7; 9 8; 10 15). We have
already referred to the remarkable statement in
He 9 14 to the effect that the blood of Christ was
offered through the eternal Spirit. In 10 29
doing ‘‘despite unto the Spirit of grace’ seems to be
closely akin to the sin against the Holy Spirit in the
Gospels. In He 4 12 there is a very remarkable
description of the “word of God” in personal
terms, as having all the energy and activity of an
actual personal presence of the Spirit, and recalls
Paul’s language in Eph 6 17. In 1 Pet we need
only refer to 1 11 in which Peter declares that the
“Spirit of Christ’? was in the OT prophets, pointing
forward to the sufferings and glories of Christ.

Lireratore.—t. F. Wood, The Spirit of God in Bib.
Literature; art. ‘‘ Spiritual Gifts’’ in HB; Gunkel, Die
Wirkungen des heiligen Getstes; Gloel, Der hetlige Geist
in der Hetlsverkiindigung des Paulus; Wendt, Die Be-
griffe Fleisch und Geist tm btblischen Sprachgebrauch;
Weinel, Die Wirkungen des Geistes und der Geister; Dick-
son, St. Paul's Use of the Terms Flesh and Spirit; Smea-
ton, Doctrine of the Holy Spirit; Walker, The Spirit and
the Incarnation; Denio, The Supreme Leader; Moberly,
Administration of the Holy Spirit in the Body of Christ;
Hutchings, Person and Work of the Holy Spirit; Owen,
Pneumatologia; Webb, Person and Office of the Holy
Spirit; Hare, The Mission of the Comforter; Candlish,
The Work of the Holy Spirit; Wirgman, The Sevenfold


- Gifts; Heber, Personality and Offices of the Holy Spvrit;


Swete, The Hol
Johnson, The
Work of the Holy Spirit;


Spirit in the NT; Moule, Vent Creator;
oly Spirit Then and Now; Kuyper, The
Bib. Theologies of Schultz,
Davidson, Weiss, Beyschlag, Stevens; list appended
to art. on ae in HDB and DCG; extensive
bibliography in Denio’s The Supreme Leader, 239 ff.
. . Y. MuLuiins

HOMAM, hi’mam (DIN, homam, “destruc-
tion’): A Horite descendant of Esau (1 Ch 1 39).
The name appears in Gen 36 22 as ‘““Heman.”


HOME, him (73, bayith, “house,” Bip’,
makom, “place,” DON, ’ohel, “tent” [Jgs 19 9],
37D, shabh, “to cause to turn back,” JIM, tawekh,
iM, tdkh, “middle,” “midst? [Dt 21 12]; otkos,
otkos, “house,” “household,” ev8ypéo, endéméd,
“to be among one’s people,” ofkos idios, ‘one’s own
proper [house]”): This term in Scripture does not
stand for a single specific word of the original, but
for a variety of phrases. Most commonly it is a
tr of the Heb bayith, Gr oles, “house,’’ which means
either the building or the persons occupying it. In
Gen 43 26 “home” and “into the house”’ represent
the same phrase, “to the house” (ha-bay*thah).
In Ruth 1 21, “hath brought me home again”
means “has caused me to return.” In 2 Ch 25 10


Home-born
Hope


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1418


“home again” means “to their place.” In Eccl 12
5 “long home,” RV “everlasting home,” means
“eternal house.” In Jn 19 27 “unto his own
home’’ means “unto his own things” (so Jn 1 11).
In 2 Cor 5 6 (and RV vs 8.9) “be at home” is a
tr of endémeé, “to be among one’s own people,” as
opposed to ekdéméé, ‘‘to be or live abroad.”
BenJsaMin Reno DowNER
HOME-BORN, him’bérn (TTR, ezrah): A
native-born Heb, as contrasted with a foreigner of
different blood. The same Heb word is found in
Lev 16 29; 18 26 and elsewhere, but is tr? differ-
ently. Home-born in Jer 2 14 is a tr of the phrase


ma Tet, ylidh bayith, where it means a person
free-born as contrasted with a slave.


HOMER, hi’mér (WAM, homer): A dry measure
containing about 11 bushels. It was equal to 10
ephas. See WricuTs anD MEAsuREs.


HOMICIDE, hom’‘i-sid (3X4, rd¢éh): Heb has
no word for killing or murder; rd¢éh is the word
for manslayer. The Gr for murder is ¢6v0s,
phénos. Homicide was every conscious violent
action against a human being with the immediate
result of death. It was always to be punished by
death, being considered a crime against the image
of God. Killing is definitely forbidden in the sixth
commandment (Gen 9 5f; Ex 20 13; 21 12;
Lev 24 17.21; Nu 35 16-21; Dt 19 11-13). The
penalty of death was not inflicted when the killing
was unintentional or unpremeditated (Ex 21 13;
Nu 35 22-25; Josh 20 3-5; cf Mish, Makkaith, xi.
5). Cities of Refuge were founded to which the
manslayer could escape from the “avenger of blood.’
There he had to abide till after the death of the
officiating high priest. If he left the city hefore
that event, the avenger who should kill him was
free from punishment (Ex 21 13; Nu 36 10-15.
25-28.32; Dt 19 1-138; Josh 20 2 ff). See Crrms
oF Rerucs. Killing a thief who broke in during
the night was not accounted murder (Ex 22 2).
Unintentional killing of the pregnant woman in a
fray was punished according to the lex talionis, i.e.
the husband of the woman killed could kill the wife
of the man who committed the offence without being
punished (Ex 21 227). This was not usually
carried out, but it gave the judge a standard by
which to fine the offender. If a man failed to build
a battlement to his house, and anyone fell over and
was killed, blood-guiltiness came upon that man’s
house (Dt 22 8). He who killed a thief in the
daytime was guilty in the same way (Ex 22 3; cf
AV). Where a body was found, but the murderer
was unknown, the elders of the city nearest to the
place where it was found were ordered by a pre-
scribed ceremony to declare that they were not
guilty of neglecting their duties, and were therefore
innocent of the man’s blood (Dt 21 1-9). Two
witnesses were necessary for a conviction of murder
(Nu 35 30). If a slave died under chastisement,
the master was to be punished according to the
principle that “he that smiteth a man, so that he
dieth, shall surely be put to death” (Ex 21 20; cf
Ex 21 12). According to the rabbis the master
was to be killed by the sword. Since in this pas-
sage the phrase “he shall die’ is not used, some
have supposed that punishment by death is not
indicated. If the slave punished by the master
died after one or two days, the master was not
liable to punishment (Ex 21 21). Because of the
words, ‘for he is his money,” the rabbis held that
non-Israelitish slaves were meant. In ancient
times the avenger of blood was himself to be the
executioner of the murderer (Nu 35 19.21). Ac-
cording to Sanhedhrin 9 1 the murderer was to


be beheaded. Nothing is said in the law about
suicide. Paut LEVERTOFF


HONEST, on’est, HONESTY, on’es-ti: The
word “honest’’ in the NT in AV generally represents
the adj. «adds, kalés, “good,’’ “excellent,” ‘“‘hon-
orable,”’ and, with the exception of Lk 8 15,
“honest and good heart,” is changed in RV into
the more correct “honorable’ (Rom 12 17; 2 Cor
8 21; 18 7; Phil 4 8); inl Pet 2 12, into “seem-
ly.” In ARV “honestly” in He 13 18 is rendered
“honorably,” and in 1 Thess 4 12 (here eusché-
ménés) is rendered “becomingly.” The noun
“honesty”? occurs but once in AV as the tr of oeu-
vorys, semnotés (1 Tim 2 2), and in RV is more
appropriately rendered “gravity.” James ORR


HONEY, hun’i (W2, debhash; pA, méli): One
familiar with life in Pal will recognize in d*bhash
the Arab. dibs, which is the usual term for a sweet
syrup made by boiling down the juice of grapes,
raisins, carob beans, or dates. Dibs is seldom, if
ever, used as a name for honey (cf Arab. ’asal),
whereas in the OT d‘bhash probably had only that
meaning. The honey referred to was in most cases
wild honey (Dt 32 18; Jgs 148.9; 18 14 25.
26.29.43), although the offering of honey with the
first-fruits would seem to indicate that the bees
were also domesticated (2 Ch 31 5). The bees
constructed their honeycomb and deposited their
honey in holes in the ground (1 8 14 25); under
rocks or in crevices between the rocks (Dt 32 13;
Ps 81 16). They do the same today. When do-
mesticated they are kept in cylindrical basket hives
which are plastered on the outside with mud. The
Syrian bee is an esp. hardy type and a good honey
producer. It is carried to Europe and America for
breeding purposes.

In OT times, as at. present, honey was rare enough
to be considered a luxury (Gen 43 11; 1 K 14 8).
Honey was used in baking sweets (Ex 16 31). It
was forbidden to be offered with the meal offering


(Lev 211), perhaps because it was fermentable,


but was presented with the fruit offering (2 Ch 31
5). Honey was offered to David’s army (2 8S 17
29). It was sometimes stored in the fields (Jer 41
8). It was also exchanged as merchandise (Ezk
27.17). In NT times wild honey was an article of
food among the lowly (Mt 3 4; Mk 1 6).
Figurative: “A land flowing with milk and
honey” suggested a land filled with abundance of
good things (Ex 3 8.17; Lev 20 24; Nu 183 27;
Dt 6 3; Josh 6 6; Jer 11 5; Ezk 206.15). «
land of olive trees and honey” had the same mean-
ing (Dt 8 8; 2 K 18 32), and similarly “streams of
honey and butter” (Job 20 17). Honey was a
standard of sweetness (Cant 4 11; Ezk 3 3; Rev
10 9.10). It typified sumptuous fare (Cant 5 1;
Isa 7 15.22; Ezk 16 13.19). The ordinances of
Jeh were ‘‘sweeter than honey and the droppings of
the honeycomb” (Ps 19 10; 119 103). “Thou
didst eat... . honey” (Ezk 16 138) expressed
Jeh’s goodness to Jerusalem. James A. Patcu


HONORABLE, on’ér-a-b’l (333, kabhédh; ed-
oxhpov, euschémén): In the OT “honorable” is for
the most part the tr of ka@bhédh, properly, “to be
heavy,” “weighty” (Gen 34 19, RV “honored”;
Nu 22 15; 1896; Isa 35, etc); kabhadh,
“weight,” “heaviness,” etc, occurs in Isa 6 13;
hodh, “beauty,” “majesty,’’ “honor” (Ps 111 3,
RV “honor’’); ’ddhar, ‘to make honorable,” “illus-
trious” (Isa 42 21, “magnify the law, and make it
honorable,” RVm “make the teaching great and
glorious’); yakar, “precious” (Ps 45 9); nasa’
panim, “lifted up of face’ (2 K 5 1; Isa 8 3;
9 15); nse phanim (Job 22 8, RVm “he whose


1419


person is accepted”); euschémén, lit. “well fash-
ioned,” is tr! Mk 15 48, AV “honorable,” RV “of
honorable estate”; ef Acts 13 50; 17 12; éndozos,
“in glory,” occurs 1 Cor 4 10, RV “glory”; timios,
“weighty” (He 13 4, RV “had in honor”); déimos,
“without weight or honor’ (1 Cor 12 23, “ess
honorable’);  éntimos, “in honor’ (Lk 14 8),
“more honorable.”

RV gives for ‘honorable’ (1 § 9 6), “held in honor”;
for "Yet shall I be glorious’’ (Isa 49 5), ‘‘I am honor-
able’’; ‘“‘honorable”’ for ‘‘honest’’ (Rom 12 17; 2 Cor
13 7; Phil 4 8, m ‘'reverend’’); for ‘‘honestly'’ (He
13_18) ARV has “honorably."’ :

In Apoc we have endézés tr4‘‘ honorable" (Tob 12 7,
RV ‘‘gloriously’’); endoros (Jth 16 21), timios (Wisd 4
8), dordz6 (Ecclus 24 12, RV ‘‘glorified’’), déza (29
27, RV ‘‘honor"’), etc.

: W_ L. Waker

HOOD, hééd (MDT, zentphoth): The ladies’
“hoods” of Isa 3 23 AV appear as “turbans’’ RV;
and “mitre” of Zee 3 5 is “turban, or diadem’
ERVm. The word is from the vb. zdnaph, “to wrap


round.” Jt connotes a head-covering, not a per-
manent article of dress. See Drauss, 5; Har.
HOOF, hoof. See Cozw; Cioven.


HOOK, hook: (1) M30, hakkah, is rendered
“Fishhook” in Job 41 1 RV (AV “hook”). RV is
correct here and should have used the same tr for
the same word in Jsa 19 8; Hab 1 15, instead of
retaining AV’s “angle.” Similarly in Am 4 2,
May, cinnah, and M17 NINO, stroth daghah, appear
to be synonyms for “fishhook,” although the former
may mean the barb of a fisher’s spear. In the NT
“fishhook”’ occurs in Mt 17 27 (dyxtorpor, dgkis-
tron). (2) The “flesh-hook” aera, mazlégh,
mT, mizlaghah) of Ex 27 3, etc, was probably
a small pitchfork, with two or three tines. (3) The
“pruning-hook” (VAT, mazmérah), used in the
culture of the vine (Isa 18 5), was a sickle-shaped
knife, small enough to be made from the metal of a
spear-point (Isa 2 4; Joel 3 10; Mic 4 3). (4)
‘}, waw, is the name given the supports of certain
hangings of the tabernacle (Ex 26 32, etc). Their
form is entirely obscure. (5) M1, hah, is rendered
“hook”? in 2 K 19 28=Isa 37 29; Ezk 29 4;
38 4, and Ezk 19 4.9 RV (AV “chain’”). <A ring
(cf Ex 85 22), put in the nose of a tamed beast and
through which a rope is passed to lead him, is
probably meant. (6) 71438, ’aghmon, is rendered
“hook” in Job 41 2 AV, but should be “a rope” of
rushes or rush-fiber as in RV, or, simply, ‘a rush”
(on which small fish are strung). (7) DM, h6h, is
“hook” in Job 41 2 RV (AV “thorn,” perhaps
right) and 2 Ch 33 11 RVm (text “chains,” AV
“thorns”). On both vssee tbe comms. (8) D°9DW,
sh*phatiayim, is “hooks’ in Ezk 40 43 (RVm
“ledges’’), but the meaning of this word is com-
pletely unknown, and “hook” is a mere guess.

Burron Scorr Haston

HOOPOE, hoops; -poo (MD 1, dukhiphath;
tno, épops; Lat Upupa epops): One of the pecul-
iar and famous birds of Pal, having a curved bill
and beautiful plumage. It is about the size of a
thrush. Its back is a rich cinnamon color, its head
golden buff with a crest of feathers of gold, banded
with white and tipped with black, that gradually
lengthen as they cover the head until, when
folded, they lie in lines of black and white, and,
when erect, each feather shows its exquisite mark-
ing. Jts wings and tail are black banded with
white and buff. It nests in holes and hollow trees.
All ornithologists agree that it is a “nasty, filthy
bird” in its feeding and breeding habits. The
nest, being paid no attention by the elders, soon be-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Home-born
ope


comes soiled and evil smelling. ‘The bird is men~
tioned only in the lists of abomination (Lev 11 19;
and Dt 14 18). One reason why Moses thought
it unfit for food was on account of its habits. Quite
as strong a one lay in the fact that it was one of the


Hoopoe (Upupe epops).


sacred birds of Egypt. There the belief was preva-
lent that it could detect water and indicate where to
dig a well; that it could hear secrets and cure dis-
eases. Its head was a part of the charms used by
witches. The hoopoe was believed to have wonder-
ful medicinal powers and was called the ‘Doctor
Bird” by the Arabs. Because it is almost the
size of a hoopoe and somewhat suggestive of it in its
golden plumage, the lapwing was used in the carly
translations of the Bible instead of hoopoe. But
when it was remembered that the lapwing is a
plover, its flesh and eggs esp. dainty food, that it
was eaten everywhere it was known, modern com-
mentators rightly decided that the hoopoe was the
bird intended by the Mosaic law. It must be put
on record, however, that where no superstition
attaches to the hoopoe and where its nesting habits
are unknown and its feeding propensities little
understood, as it passes in migration it is killed,
eaten and considered delicious, esp. by residents of
Southern Europe. Gene Srratron-PorTER


HOPE, hip: In RV the NT “hope’”’ represents the
noun éArls, elpis (52 t), and the vb. éAml{w, elpizd


(381t). AV, however, renders the
1. Inthe noun in He 10 23 by “faith,” and for
OT the vb. gives ‘‘trust’? in 18 cases


(apparently without much system, e.g.
in Phil 2 ef vs 19 and 23; see Trust), while in
Lk 6 35 it translates dwedkrifw, apelpizd, by “hoping
for nothing again” (RV “never despairing’). But
in the OT there is no Heb word that has the exact
force of “expectation of some good thing,” so that
in AV “hope” (noun and vb.) stands for some 15
Heb words, nearly all of which in other places are
given other tr*® (e.g. MOIRA, mibhiah, is rendered
“hope” in Jer 17 17, “‘trust” in Ps 40 4, “con-
fidence” in Ps 65 5). RV has attempted to be
more systematic and has, for the most part, kept
“hope” for the noun M1pm\, tkwah, and the vb.
Pha yahal, but complete consistency was not
possible (e.g. Prov 10 28; 11 23; 23 18). This
Jack of a specific word for hope has nothing to do
with any undervaluation of the virtue among the
Hebrews. For the religion of the OT is of all things
a religion of hope, centered in God, from whom all
deliverance and blessings are confidently expected
(Jer 17 17; Joel 3 16; Ps 31 24; 33 18.22; 39


Hope
Horite, Horim


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1420


7, etc). The varieties of this hope are countless
(see ISRAEL, RELIGION oF; SaLvaTION, etc), but
the form most perfected and with fundamental sig-
nificance for the NT is the firm trust that at a time
appointed God, in person or through His repre-
sentative (see Mass1ag), will establish a kingdom of
righteousness.

(1) The proclamation of this coming kingdom of
God was the central element in the teaching of

Jesus, and the message of its near ad-
2. Inthe vent (Mk 1 15, etc), with the cer-
NT tainty of admission to it for those who
: accepted His teaching (Lk 12 32, etc),
is the substance of His teaching as to hope. This
teaching, though, is delivered in the language of
One to whom the realities of the next world and of
the future are perfectly familiar; the tone is not
that of prediction so much as it is that of the state-
ment of obvious facts. In other words, “hope” to
Christ is “certainty,” and the word “hope” is never
on His lips (Lk 6 34 and Jn 5 45 are naturally not
exceptions). For the details see Kinapom oF
Gop; Faira; Foreivensss, etc. And however
far He may have taught that the kingdom was
present in His lifetime, none the less the full con-
summation of that kingdom, with Himself as Mes-
siah, was made by Him a matter of the future (see
EscHatoLocy or THE NT; Parovsta).

(2) Hence after the ascension the early church
was left with an eschatological expectation that was
primarily and almost technically the “hope” of the
NT—“looking for the blessed hope and appearing
of the glory of the great God and our Saviour Jesus
Christ” (Tit 2 13), ‘unto a living hope....,
unto ap inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,
; . reserved in heaven for you, who by the
power of God are guarded through faith unto a sal-
vation ready to be revealed in the last time” (1 Pet
1 3-5; cf Rom 5 2; 8 20-24; 2 Cor 3 12; Eph
1 18-21; Col 15.23.27; Tit 12; 37; 1 Jn 3
2.3). The foundations of this hope were many:
(a) Primarily, of course, the promises of the OT,
which were the basis of Christ’s teaching. Such
are often quoted at length (Acts 2 16, etc), while
they underlie countless other passages. These
promises are the “anchor of hope” that holds the
soul fast (He 6 18-20). In part, then, the earliest
Christian expectations coincided with the Jewish,
and the “hope of Israel” (Acts 28 20; cf 26 6.7;
Eph 2 12, and esp. Rom 11 25-32) was a common
ground on which Jew and Christian might meet.
Still, through the confidence of forgiveness and
purification given in the atonement (He 9 14, ete)
the Christian felt himself to have a “better hope’
(He 7 19), which the Jew could not know. (6)
Specifically Christian, however, was the pledge
given in the resurrection of Christ. This sealed
His Messiahship and proved His lordship (Rom 1
4; Eph 1 18-20; 1 Pet 3 21, etc), so sending forth
His followers with the certainty of victory. In
addition, Christ’s resurrection was felt to be the
first step in the general resurrection, and hence a
proof that the consummation of all things had
begun (1 Cor 15 23; cf Acts 23 6; 24 15; 26
6.7; 1 Thess 4 13.14, etc). (c) But more than all,
devotion to Christ produced a religious experience
that gave certainty to hope. ‘Hope putteth not
to shame; because the love of God hath been shed
abroad in our hearts through the Holy Spirit which
was given unto us” (Rom 6 5; ef 8 16.17; 2 Cor
1 22; 6 5; Eph 1 14, etc, and see Hony Sprrrr).
Even visible miracles were wrought by the Spirit
that were signs of the end (Acts 2 17) as well as
of the individual’s certainty of partaking in the
final happiness (Acts 10 47; 19 6, etc). .

(3) Yet, certain though the hope might be, it
was not yet attained, and the interim was an oppor-


tunity to develop faith, “the substance of the things
hoped for’ (He 11 1). . Indeed, hope is simply
faith directed toward the future, and no sharp dis-
tinction between faith and hope is attainable. It
is easy enough to see how the AV felt “confession
of our faith” clearer than ‘‘confession of our hope
in He 10 23, although the rendition of elpis by
“faith” was arbitrary. Soin Rom 8 20-24, “hope
is scarcely more than “faith” in this specialized
aspect. In particular, in ver 24 we have as the most
natural tr (cf Eph 2 5.8), a hope we were saved”
(so AV, ERV, ARVm), and only a pedantic in-
sistence on words can find in this any departure
from the strictest Pauline theology (cf the essen-
tial outlook on the future of the classic example of
“saving faith” in Rom 4 18-22, esp. ver 18). Still,
the combination is unusual, and the Gr may be
rendered equally well “For hope we were saved
(“in hope” of the ARV is not so good); i.e. our sal-
vation, in so far as it is past, is but to prepare us for
what is to come (cf Eph 4 4; 1 Pet 13). But
this postponement of the full attainment, through
developing faith, gives stedfastness (Rom 8 25;
cf 1 Thess 1 3; 5 8; He $ 6; 6 11), which could
be gained in no other way. On the other hand this
stedfastness, produced by hope, reacts again on
hope and increases it (Rom 6 4; 15 4). And so
on. But no attempt is made in the NT to give a
catalogue of the “fruits of hope,” and, indeed, such
lists are inevitably artificial. F ;

(4) One passage that deserves special attention
is 1 Cor 13 13, ‘Now abideth faith, hope, love,
these three.” ‘‘Abideth” is in contrast to ‘shall
be done away” in vs 8.9, and the time of the abiding
is consequently after the Parousia; i.e. while many
gifts are for the present world only, faith, hope and
love are eternal and endure in the next world.
1 Cor 18 is evidently a very carefully written sec-
tion, and the permanence of faith and hope cannot
be set down to any mere carelessness on St. Paul’s
part, but the meaning is not very clear. Probably
he felt that the triad of virtues was so essentially
a part of the Christian’s character that the existence
of the individual without them was unthinkable,
without trying to define what the object of faith
and hope would be in the glorified state. If any
answer is to be given, it must be found in the doc-
trine that even in heaven life will not be static but
will have opportunities of unlimited growth. Never
will the finite soul be able to dispense entirely with
faith, while at each stage the growth into the next
can be anticipated through hope.

Only Adventist bodies can use all the NT prom-
ises literally, and the tr of the eschatological lan-

guage into modern practical terms is
3. Practical not alwayseasy. The simplest method
is that already well developed in the

Fourth Gospel, where the phrase “kingdom of God”
is usually replaced by the words “eternal life,” i.e.
for a temporal relation between this world and the
next is substituted a local, so that the accent is laid
on the hope that awaits the individual beyond the
grave. On the other hand, the cataclysmic im-
agery of the NT may be interpreted in evolutionary
form. God, by sending into the world the super-
natural power seen in the Christian church, is work-
ing for the race as well as for the individual, and has
for His whole creation, as well as for individual
souls, a goal in store. The individual has for his
support the motives of the early church and, in
particular, learns through the cross that even his
own sins shall not disappoint him of his hope. But
both of the above interpretations are needed if
religion is fairly to represent the spirit of the NT.
A pure individualism that looks only beyond the
grave for its hope empties the phrase “‘kingdom of
God” of its meaning and tends inevitably to asceti-


1421


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hope
Horite, Horim


cism. And, in contrast, the religion of Jesus cannot
be reduced to a mere hope of ethical advance for
the present world. A Christianity that loses a
transcendent, eschatological hope ceases to be
Christianity. Burton Scott Easton


HOPHNI, hof’ni, and PHINEHAS, fin’é-as, -az
(3D, hophni, “pugilist’’ [?], OFS , pin*has, prob.
“face of brass’’): Sons of Eli, priests of the sanc-
tuary at Shiloh. Their character was wicked
enough to merit the donble designation ‘sons of
Eli” and (AV) “sons of Belial” (RVm ‘base men,”’
1S 2 12). Their evil practices are described (vs
12-17). Twice is Eli warned concerning them,
once by an unknown prophet (1 8 2 27 ff) and again
by the lips of the young Samuel (1 S 3 11-18).
The curse fell at the battle of Aphek (1 8 4 1-18)
at which the brothers were slain, the ark was taken
and the disaster occurred which caused Eli’s death.
Phinehas was father of the posthumous Ichabod,
whose name marks the ealamity (sce IcHasop).
A remoter sequel to the prophetic warnings is seen
in the deposition of Abiathar, of the house of Eli,
from the priestly office (1 K 2 26.27.35).

Henry WALLACE

HOPHRA, hof’ra. See PHARAOH-HOPHRA.

HOR, hér, MOUNT (A070, hor ha-har; lit.
“Hor, the mountain’):

(1) A tradition identifying this mountain with
Jebel Neby Haran may be traced from the time of

Jos (Ant, IV, iv, 7) downward. Onom
1. Not (s.v. ‘Qe, Hor) favors this identifica-
Jebel Neby tion, which has been accepted by many
Harun travelers and scholars. In HDB,

while noting the fact that it has been
questioned, Professor Hull devotes all the space at
his disposal to a description of Jebel Neby Hariin.
It is now recognized, however, that this identifica-
tion is impossible. Niebuhr (Reise nach Arab.,
938), Pocoke (Description of the East, I, 157),
Robinson (BR, I, 185), Ewald (Hist. of Israel,
II, 201, n.), and others had pointed out difficulties
in the way, but the careful discussion of Dr. H.
Clay Trumbull (Kadesh Barnea, 127 ff) finally
disposed of the claims of Jebel Neby Harin.

From Nu 20 22; 33 37 we may perhaps infer
that Mt. Hor, “in the edge of the land of Edom,”

was about a day’s journey from
2. Suggest- Kadesh. The name “Hor the moun-
ed Identifi- tain’? suggests a prominent feature
cation of the landscape. Aaron was buried

there (Nu 20 28; Dt 32 50). It was
thereforenotin Mt. Seir (Dt 2 5), of which not even
a foot-breadth was given to Israel. Jebel Neby
Haran is certainly a prominent feature of the land-
scape, towering over the tumbled hills that form the
western edges of the Edom plateau to a height of
4,800 ft. But it is much more than a day’s journey
from Kadesh, while it is well within the boundary
of Mt. Seir. The king of Arad was alarmed at the
march to Mt. Hor. Had Israel marched toward
Jebel Neby Harun, away to the 8.E., it could have
caused him no anxiety, as he dwelt in the north.
This points to some eminence to the N. or N.E. of
Kadesh. A hill mecting sufficiently all these condi-
tions is Jebel Maderah (see Hatax, Mount), which

rises to the N.E. of ‘Azn kadis (Kadesh-
8. Jebel barnea). It stands at the extreme
Maderah N.W. boundary of the land of Edom,

yet not within that boundary. Above
the barrenness of the surrounding plain this “large,
singular-looking, isolated chalk hill’ rises ‘alone
like a lofty citadel,” ‘“‘steep-sided” and ‘quite
naked.’ Here the solemn transactions described
in Nu 20 22 ff could have been carried out lit. “in
the sight of all the congregation.’’ While certainty


-30f).


is topes ble no more likely suggestion has been
made.

(2) A mountain named only in Nu 34 7f as on
the N. boundary of the land of Israel. No success
has attended the various attempts made to identify
this particular height. Some wonld make it Mt.
Hermon (Hull, HDB, s.v.); others Jebel ‘Akkar,
an outrunner on the N.E. of Lebanon (Furrer, ZDPV
VIII, 27), and others the mountain at the “knee of? ;
Nahr el-Kasimiyeh (van Kasteren, Rev. Bib., 1895,
In Ezk 47 15 JVI, ha-derekh, should cer-
tainly be amended to FI3G, hadhrakh, a proper
namne, instead of “the way.’ Possibly then Mt.
Hor should disappear from Nu 34 7f, and we
should read, with slight emendation, “From the
great sea ye shall draw a line for you as far as Had-
rach, and from Hadrach ... .” W. Ewina


HORAM, hd’ram man , horam, “height’’”): A
king of Gezer defeated by Joshua when he came to


the help of Lachish, which Joshua was besieging
(Josh 10 33).


HOREB, ho’reb. See SInal.


HOREM, ho’rem (O77), hérém, “consecrated’’):
One of the fenced cities in the territory of Naphtali
(Josh 19 38), named with Iron and Migdal-el. It
may possibly be identified with the modern Hérah,
which lies on a mound at theS. end of Wady el-‘Ain,
to the W. of Kedes.


HORESH, hid’resh (WOON, héreshah, 18 23
15.18, m only; LXX év rf Kaw§, en té Kainé,
“in the New’; EV “in the wood” [TW 7M, ba-
hérshah), the particle “in’’ being combined with the
article): Hédresh in other passages is tr? “forest’’
(ef 2 Ch 27 4; Isa 17 9; Ezk 81 3) and it is most
probable that it should be so tr* here.


HOR-HAGGIDGAD, hér-ha-gid’gad (3793 AN,
hor ha-gidhgadh): A desert camp of the Israelites
between Beeroth Bene-jaakan and Jotbathah (Nu
33 32f). In Dt 10 7 it is called Gudgodah. See
WANDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


HORI, bo’ri (IN, NN, hori, “cave-dweller”):

(1) A Horite descendant of Esau (Gen 36 22;
1 Ch 1 39).

(2) A Simeonite, father of Shaphat, one of the
twelve spies (Nu 13 5).


HORITE, ho’rit, HORIM, hé‘rim (OO, hari,
DN, hérim; Koppaio, Chorraiot): Denoted the
inhabitants of Mt. Seir before its occupation by
the Edomites (Dt 2 12). Seir is accordingly called
Horite in Gen 36 20.30, where a list of his de-
scendants is given, who afterward mixed with the
invading Edomites. Esau himself married the
daughter of the Horite chieftain Anah (Gen 36 25;
see ver 2, where ‘“Hivite”’ must be corrected into
“Horite’), The ‘Horites” in their “Mt. Seir’’ were
among the nations defeated by the army of Chedor-
laomer in the age of Abraham (Gen 14 6). The
Heb Horite, however, is the Khar of the Egyp
inscriptions, a name given to the whole of Southern
Palestine and Edom as well as to the adjacent sea.
In accordance with this we find in the OT also traces
of the existence of the Horites in other parts of the
country besides Mt. Seir. In Gen 34 2; Josh 9
7, the LXX (Cod. A) more correctly reads ‘‘Horite”’
instead of ‘‘Hivite’’ for the inhabitants of Shechem
and Gibeon, and Caleb is said to be “the son of Hur,
the first-born of Ephratah” or Bethlehem (1 Ch 2
50; 4 4). Hor or Horite has sometimes been ex-
plained to mean “cave-dweller’’; it more probably,


Hormah
Horse, Red


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1422


however, denotes the “white” race. The Horites
were Semites, and consequently are distinguished
in Dé 2 12 from the tall race of Rephaim.
A. H. Sayce

HORMAB, hér’ma (MAN, hormah): A city first
mentioned in connection with the defeat of the
Israelites by the Amalekites and the Canaanites,
when, after the ten spies who brought an evil report
of the land had died of plague, the people persisted,
against the will of Moses, in going “up unto the
place which Jehovah hath promised”’ (Nu 14 45;
Dt 1 44). After the injury done them by the king
of Arad, Israel took the city, utterly destroyed it,
and called it Hormah, i.e. “accursed” (Nu 21 3).
To this event probably the reference isin Jgs 1 17,
where Judah and Simeon are credited with the work.
In Josh 12 14 it is named between Geder and Arad;
in Josh 15 30 between Chesil and Ziklag, among
the uttermost cities toward the border of Edom in
the S.; and in Josh 19 4 between Bethul and Zik-
lag (cf 1 Ch 4 30). To it David sent a share of
the spoil taken from the Amalekites who had raided
Ziklag (1 S 80 30). The city must have lain not
far from Kadesh, probably to the N.E. No name
resembling Hormah has been recovered in that dis-
trict. The ancient name was Zephath (Jgs 1 17).
It is not unlikely that in popular nse this name out-
lived Hormah: and in some form it may survive
to this day. In that case it may be represented by
the modern es-Sabaita between el-Khalasa in the
N. and ‘Ain Kadis in the S., about 23 miles from the
latter. If we may identify Ziklag with ‘Asli,
about 14 miles N. of es-Sabaita, the probability is
heightened. Robinson (BR, 11I, 150) compares
the name Zephath with that of Nakb es-Safa, to the
N. of Wady el-Fikrah; but this appears to be too
far—about 40 miles—from Kadesh. W. Ewrna


HORN, hérn (Heb and Aram. 77p , keren; wépas,
kéras; for the “ram’s horn” [D3‘P, yobhal] of Josh
6 see Music, and for the ‘Gnkhorn” of Ezk 9 [NOPp,
keseth] see separate art.):

(1) Keren and keras represent the Eng. “horn”
exactly, whether on the animal (Gen 22 13), or
used for musical purposes (Josh 6 5; 1 Ch 26 5),
or for containing a liquid (1 S 16 1.13; 1 K 1 39),
but in Ezk 27 15 the “horns of ivory” are of course
tusks and the “horns” of ebony are small (pointed?)
logs. Consequently most of the usages require
no explanation.

(2) Both the altar of burnt offering (Ex 27 2;
38 2; cf Ezk 43 15) and the incense altar (Ex 30
2; 37 25.26; cf Rev 9 13) had “horns,” which are
explained to be projections “of one piece with” the
wooden framework and covered with the brass (or
gold) that covered the altar. They formed the
most sacred part of the altar and were anointed
with the blood of the most solemn sacrifices (only)
(Ex 80 10; Lev 4 7.18.25.30.34; 16 18; cf Ezk
43 20), and according to Lev 8 15; 9 9, the first
official sacrifices began by anointing them. Con-
sequently cutting off the horns effectually dese-
crated the altar (Am 3 14), while “sin graven on
them” (Jer 17 1) took all efficacy from the sacri-
fice. On the other hand they offered the highest
sanctuary (1 K 1 50.51; 2 28). Of their symbol-
ism nothing whatever is said, and the eventual
origin is quite obscure. ‘Remnants of a bull-cult”
and “miniature sacred towers” have been suggested,
but are wholly uncertain. A more likely origin is
from an old custom of draping the altar with skins
of sacrificed animals (RS, 436). That, however, the
“horns” were mere conveniences for binding the
sacrificial animals (Ps 118 27, a custom referred to
nowhere else in the OT), is most unlikely. See
ALTAR.


(3) The common figurative use of “horn” is taken
from the image of battling animals (literal use in
Dnl 8 7, etc) to denote aggressive strength. So
Zedekiah ben Chenaanah illustrates the predicted
defeat of the enemies by pushing with iron horns
(1 K 22 11; 2 Ch 18 10), while “horns of the wild-
ox” (Dt 33 17; Ps 22 21; 92 10, AV “unicorn’’)
represent the magnitnde of power, and in Zec 1
18-21 “horns” stand for power in general. In Hab
8 4 the “horns coming out of his hand” denote
the potency of Jeh’s gesture (RV “rays” may be
smoother, but is weak). So to “exalt the horn” (18
2 1.10; Ps 76 4, etc) is to clothe with strength, and
to “cut off the horn” (not to be explained by Am
3 14) is to rob of power (Ps 75 10; Jer 48 25).
Hence the “horn of salvation” in 2 S 22 3; Ps 18
2; Lk 1 69.is a means of active defence and not
a place of sanctuary as in 1 K 1 50. When, in
Dnl 7 7-24; 8 3.8.9.20.21; Rev 13 1; 17 3.7.12.
16, many horns are given to the same animal, they
figure successive nations or rulers. But the seven
horns in Rev 6 6; 12 3 denote the completeness of
the malevolent or righteous power. In Rev 13 11,
however, the two horns point only to the external
imitation of the harmless lamb, the “horns” being
mere stubs. Burton Scorr Easton


HORNS OF THE ALTAR (Maran mp, kare-
noth ha-mizbéh): These projections at the four
corners of the altar of burnt offering


1. The were of one piece with the altar, and
Brazen were made of acacia wood overlaid
Altar with brass (Ex 27 2, “bronze’’). In


Ezekiel’s altar-specifications their posi-
tion is described as being on a level with the altar
hearth (43 15). Fugitives seeking asylum might
cling to the horns of the altar, as did Adonijah
(1 K 1 50), which is one proof among many that
worshippers had at all times access to the neighbor-
hood of the altar. On certain occasions, as at the
consecration of Aaron and his sons (Ex 29 12),
and a sin offering for one of the people of the land
aes 30), the horns were touched with sacrificial

ood.
The altar of incense, standing in the onter
chamber of the sanctuary, had also four horns,

which were covered with gold (Ex 37


2. The 25). These were touched with blood
Golden in the case of a sin offering for a high
Altar priest, or for the whole congregation,

if they had sinned unwittingly (Lev
4 7.18). See Arran; Horn.


W. SHaw CaLpecorr
HORNS, RAMS’. See Music.


HORNET, hér'net (MIW, cér'ah; of MPW,
gor‘adh, “Zorah” [Jgs 18 2, ete]; also ef ny,
cara‘ath, “leprosy” [Lev 18 2, etc]; from root
VS, cara‘, “to smite”; LXX odbykla, sphekia,
lit. “‘wasp’s nest”): Hornets are mentioned only
in Ex 23 28; Dt 7 20; Josh 2412. All three
references are to the miraculous interposition of
God in driving out before the Israelites the original
inhabitants of the promised land. There has been
much speculation as to whether hornets are lit-
erally meant. The following seems +o throw some
light on this question (Ex 23 20.27.28): ‘Behold
I send an angel before thee, to keep thee by the
way, and to bring thee into the place which I have
prepared. . . . . I will send my terror before thee,
and will discomfit all the people to whom thou
shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn
their backs unto thee. And I will send the hornet
before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the
Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.”
The “terror” of ver 27 may well be considered to be


1423


typified by the “hornet” of ver 28, the care for the


Israelites (ver 20) being thrown into marked con-
trast with the confusion of their enemies. Cf Isa
7 18, where the fly and the bee symbolize the mili-
tary forces of Egypt and Assyria: “And it shall
come to pass in that day, that Jeh will hiss for the
fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of
Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.”’

Hornets and wasps belong to the family Vespidae
of the order Hymenoptera. Both belong to the
genus Vespa, the hornets being distinguished by
their large size. Both hornets and wasps are
abundant in Pal (ef Zorah, which may mean “‘town
of hornets”). A large kind is called in Arab. debbir,
which recalls the Heb d*bhérah, “bee.” They sting
fiercely, but not unless molested.

Aurrep Exy Day

HORONAIM, hor-é-na’im (O90, DWN, b6-
ronayim; ‘Apavely, Arédnieim; in Jer 'Opevalp,
Orénaim, “the two hollows’): An unidentified
place in the S. of Moab. It is named in Jer 48 5.
Isaiah (15 5) and Jeremiah (48 3) speak of ‘‘the
way to Horonaim’’; and Jeremiah (48 5) of the
“descent,” or “going down’ of Horonaim. Mesha
(MS) says he was bidden by Chemosh to “go down”’
and fight against Horoném. Probably, therefore,
it lay on one of the roads leading down from the
Moabite plateau to the Arabah. It is mentioned by
Jos as having been taken by Alexander Jannaeus
(Ant, XIII, xv, 4). Hyrcanus promised to restore it
and the rest to Aretas (XIV, i, 4). There is no
indication that in early times it was ever possessed
by Israel. Buhl (GAP, 272f) thinks it may be
represented by some significant ruins near Wady
ed-Dera‘a (Wady Kerak). W. Ewine


HORONITE, hor'é-nit, ho'ré-nit CUAD,
ha-hor6nt): An appellation of Sanballat (Neh 2 10.
19; 18 28), as an inhabitant of BrTs-soRoN (q.v.).


HORRIBLE, hor'i-b’'l (WWD, shatdrar, “YY,
sha‘drari): In Jer 5 30 sha‘drar, “vile,” “horrible,”
is tr “horrible,” ‘a wonderful and horrible thing,”
RVm “astonishment and horror’; also 23 14; in
18 13; Hos 6 10 it is sha‘dérdr7; in Ps 11 6 we
have zil‘aphah, “heat,” RV “burning wind”; in
Ps 40 2 sha’dn, “noise,” “tumult,” “He brought
meup.... outof a horrible pit,” RVm “a pit of
tumult’? (or destruction). Horribly is the tr of
sa‘ar, “to shudder,” ‘to be whirled away,” in Jer
212, and of sa‘ar, “fear,” “trembling,” in Ezk
32 10; in Ezk 27 35 RV has “horribly afraid”
(sa‘ar) for “sore afraid.’ ‘Horrible’ occurs fre-
quently in Apoc (2 Esd 11 45; 16 28.34; Wisd
3 19, “For horrible [chalepés] is the end of the un-
righteous generation,’ RV “grievous,” etc).

W. L. Waker

HORROR, hor’ér (WAN, ’émah, NDB, palla-
gath): InGen 15 12’&@mah (often rendered “terror’’)
is tr? “horror,” ‘a horror of great darkness’; pal-
lacath, “trembling,” “horror’’ (Ps 55 5; Ezk 7 18);
zal’‘aphah, “glow,” “heat” (Ps 119 53, RV “hot in-
dignation,”’ m “horror’’); ef Ps 116; Lam 5 10.
For “trembling” (Job 21 6) and for “fearfulness’’
(Isa 21 4) RV has “horror.” “Horror” does not
occur in the NT, but in 2 Macc 3 17 we have “The
man was so compassed with horror” (phrikasmés),
RV “shuddering,”


HORSE, hérs: The common names are (1) O10,
gig, and (2) twos, hippos. (3) The word U2,
pardsh, “horseman,” occurs often, and
in several cases is tr? “horse” or ‘“war-
horse” (Isa 28 28; Ezk 27 14; Joel
2 4RVm); also in 2 8 1 6, where the “horsemen”


1. Names


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hormah
Horse, Red


of EVis OW HT "OVA, batdle ha-pardshim, “own-


we


ers of horses’; ef Arab. us , féris, “horseman,”
and Umyd  Joras, “horse.” (4) The fem. form M70 ,


gasah, occurs in Cant 1 9, and is rendered as
follows: LXX 4 twos, hz hippos; Vulg equitatum;
AV “company of horses,’ RV “steed.” It is not
clear why EV does not have ‘‘mare.” (5) The word
DAN, ’abbirim, “strong ones,” is used for horses
in Jgs 5 22; Jer 8 16; 47 3; 50 11 (AV “bulls”).
In Ps 22 12 the same word is tr? “strong bulls”


(of Bashan). (6) For WD, rekhesh (cf Arab. dS;


rakag, ‘‘to run’’), in I K 4 28; Est 8 10.14; Mic
113, RV has “swift steeds,” while AV gives
“dromedaries’ in I K and “mules” in Est. (7)
For M22, kirkaroth (Isa 66 20), AV and ERV
have “swift beasts’; ERVm and ARV ‘‘drome-
daries”; LXX conidia, skiddia, perhaps “‘covered
carriages.” In Est,8 10.14 we find the doubtful
words (8) BXTNDON, ‘dhasht'réntm, and (9)
DWAIN WR, bene ha-rammakhim, which have
been variously tr’. AV has respectively “camels”
and “young dromedaries,” RV “used in the king’s
service” and “bred of the stud,” RVm ‘“‘mules” and
“young dromedaries.” See CaMEL.

The Heb and Egyp names for the horse are alike
akin to the Assyr. The Jews may have obtained
horses from Egypt (Dt 17 16), but
the Canaanites before them had horses
(Josh 17 16), and in looking toward
the N.E. for the origin of the horse, philologists
are in agreement with zodlogists who consider that
the plains of Central Asia, and also of Europe, were
the original home of the horse. At least one species
of wild horse is still found in Central Asia.

The horses of the Bible are almost exclusively
war-horses, or at least the property of kings and

not of the common people. A doubt-

ful reference to the use of horses in
. threshing grain is found in Isa 28 28.
Horses are among the property which the Egyp-
tians gave to Joseph in exchange for grain (Gen 47
17). In Dt 17 16 it is enjoined that the king
“shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the
people to return to Egypt, to the end that he may
multiply horses.” This and other injunctions failed
to prevent the Jews from borrowing from the
neighboring civilizations their customs, idolatries,
and vices. Solomon’s horses are enumerated in
1 K 4, and the s*trim and tebhen of 1 K 4 28
(5 8) are identical with the sha‘ir (‘‘barley’’) and
tibn (“straw”) with which the Arab feeds his horse
today. In war, horses were ridden and were driven
in chariots (Ex 14 9; Josh 11 4; 2 S 165 1, etc).

The horse is referred to figuratively chiefly in Zec
and Rev. A chariot and horses of fire take Elijah

up to heaven (2 K 2 11f). In Ps

4. Figura- 207; 3317; and 76 6, the great

tive and strength of the horse is recalled as a

Descriptive reminder of the greater strength of

God. In Jas 3 3, the small bridle by

which the horse can be managed is compared to the

tongue (cf Ps 32 9). In Job 39 19-25 we have
a magnificent description of a spirited war-horse.
Aurrep Exy Day

HORSE, BLACK (tmros péhas, hippos mélas):
Symbolic of famine (“balance . .. . measure of
wheat for a shilling,” etc, Rev 6 5.6; ef Zec 6 2.6).
See REVELATION, Boox or.


HORSE GATE.


HORSE, RED (iwwos tuppés, hippos purrés):
Symbolic of war, bloodshed (“slay one another,”


2. Origin


3. Uses


See JERUSALEM.


Hae, White THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 1424
etc, Rev 6 4; ef Zec 18; 6 2). See Revexa- | ’@nndh YHWH hoshi'ah nna’, “Save now, pray”


Tion, Book oF.


HORSE, WHITE (irmos deunds, hippos leukés):
Symbolic of victory, conquest (“bow ... . con-
quering and to conquer,’ Rev 6 2; 19 11.14; ef
Zec 1 8; 6 3.6). See Revevation, Boox or.


HORSELEACH, hérs’léch (APD, ‘alakah; ef
Arab. site, ‘alitkah, “ghoul,” and xale , ‘alakah,
“leech,” from root wike » ‘altk, “to cling”; LXX


B8AAAa, bdélla, ‘“leech’’): The word occurs only
once, in Prov 30 15, RVm “vampire.” In ‘Arab.
‘alakah is a leech of any kind, not only a horse-leeeh.
The Arab. ‘ala@kah, which, it may be noted, is almost
identical with the Heb form, is a ghoul (Arab. ghal),
an evil spirit which seeks to injure men and which
preys upon the dead. The mythical vampire is
similar to the ghoul. In zoédlogy the name ‘‘vam-
pire” is applied to a family of bats inhabiting
tropical Ameriea, some, but not all, of which suck
blood. In the passage cited the Arab. Bible has
‘alakah, “ghoul.” If leeeh is meant, there can be
no good reason for specifying “‘horseleach.” At
least six speeies of leech are known in Pal and
Syria, and doubtless others exist. They are com-
mon in streams, pools, and fountains where animals
drink. They enter the mouth, attach themselves
to the interior of the mouth or pharynx, and are
removed only with difficulty.


Aurrep ELy Day
HORSEMAN, hirs’man.


See Army,

HORSES OF THE SUN (2 K 23 11): In con-
nection with the sun-worship practised by idola-
trous kings in the temple at Jerns (2 K 23 5; ef
Ezk 8 16), horses dedicated to the sun, with char-
iots, had been placed at the entrance of the sacred
edifice. These Josiah, in his great reformation,
“took away,’ and burned the chariots with fire.
Horses sacred to the sun were common among
oriental peoples (Bochart, Heiroz., I, 2, 10).


HOSAH, hié’sa (OM, hdsah): A city on the
border of Asher, in the neighborhood of Tyre (Josh
19 29). LXX reads Iasetph, which might suggest
identification with Kefr Yasif, to the N.E. of Acre.
Possibly, however, as Sayee (HCM, 429) and
Moore (Judges, 51) suggest, Hosah may represent
the Assyr Usu. Some seholars think that Usu was
the Assyr name for Palaetyrus. If “the fenced city
of Tyre’’ were that on the island, while the eity on
the mainland lay at Ras el-‘Ain, 30 stadia to the S.
(Strabo xvi.758), this identification is not im-
probable.


HOSANNA, hié-zan’a (écavva, hisannd): This
Gr transliteration of a Heb word occurs 6 t in the
Gospels as the ery of the people when Our Lord
entered Jerus as the Messiah represented by Zee
(9 9), and of ‘‘the children” when He cleansed the
temple (Mt 219 bis.15; Mk 11 9f; Jn_12 13).
In Mt 21 9 it is “Hosanna to the son of David!”
followed by ‘‘Blessed is he that cometh in the name
of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest!’”’; in ver 15 it
is also “Hosanna to the Son of David!’’; in Mk 11
9f itis “Hosanna; Blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the Lord; Blessed is the kingdom that
cometh, the kingdom of our father David: Ho-
sanna in the highest’; and in Jn 12 13 it is ‘““Ho-
sanna: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the
Lord, even the King of Israel.” Thus in all the
evangelists it is an aeclamation or ascription of
praise. his has raised the question whether the
supposed derivation from Ps 118 25, beginning with


(which is followed [ver 26] by “Blessed be he that
cometh [RVm “or entereth’’] in the name of Jeh’’)
is correct. (See Thayer, HDB; Cheyne, EB;
Dalman, Words of Jesus.) Various other explana-
tions have been suggested. Thayer remarks, “Tt
is most natural to regard the word Hosanna, as
respects its form, as neither syncopated nor con-
tracted, but the shorter Hiphil imperative with
the appended euclitic” (hdsha‘'na’; cf Ps 86 2; Jer
31 7), for which there is Talmudic warrant. “As
respects its force, we must for... . contextual
reasons, assume that it had already lost its pri-
mary supplicatory sense and become an ejaculation
of joy or shout of welcome.’ It is said to have
been so used in this sense at the joyous Feast of
Tabernacles, the 7th day of which came to be called
“the Great Hosanna,” or ‘Hosanna Day.” But,
while the word is certainly an ejaculation of praise
and not one of supplication, the idea of salvation
need not be excluded. Asin Rev 7 10 (cf 19 1), we
have the acclamation, ‘Salvation unto God....
and unto the Lamb,” so we might have the cry,
“Salvation to the son of David’; and “Hosanna in
the Highest,” might be the equivalent of “Salvation
unto our God!” “He who was ‘“‘coming in the name
of the Lord” was the king who was bringing salva-.
tion from God to the people. W. L. WaLKER


HOSEA, hi-zé’a:
. THE PropHer
1. Name
2. Native Place
3. Date
4, Personal History (Marriage)
(1) Allegorical View
(2) Literal View
II. Tuer Boox
1. Style and Scope
2. Historical Background
3. Contents and Divisions
(1) Chs 1-8
(2) Chs 4-14
4. Testimony to Earlier History
5. Testimony to Law
6. Affinity with Deuteronomy
LireRaTuURE
I. The Prophet.—The name (JWIM, héshe';
LXX ’Nené, Oséé; for other forms vide note in DB),
probably meaning “help,’’? seems to
have been not uncommon, being derived
from the auspicious vb. from which we
have the frequently recurring word “salvation.”
It may be a eontraction of a larger form of which
the Divine name or its abbreviation formed a part,
so as to signify “God is help,” or “Help, God.”
According to Nu 13 8.16 that was the original
name of Joshua son of Nun, till Moses gave him the


longer name (compounded with the name of Jeh)
which he continued to bear (JWW", yhdshu'),
“Jeh is salvation.” The last king of the Northern
Kingdom was also named Hosea (2 K 16 30), and
we find the same name borne by a chief of the
tribe of Ephraim under David (1 Ch 27 20) and by
a chief under Nehemiah (Neh 10 23).
Although it is not directly stated in the book,
there can be little doubt that he exereised his min-
istry in the kingdom of the Ten
2. Native Tribes. Whereas his references to
Place Judah are of a general kind, Ephraim
f : or Samaria being sometimes men-
tioned in the same connection or more frequently
alone, the situation implied throughout and the
whole tone of the addresses agree with what we
know of the Northern Kingdom at the time, and his
references to places and events in that kingdom are
so numerous and minute as to lead to the conclusion
that he not only prophesied there, but that he was
a native of that part of the country. Gilead, e.g.
a district little named in the prophets, is twice men-


I


1. Name


1425


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Horse, White


tioned (6 8; 12 11) and in such a manner as to
suggest that he knew it by personal observation;
and, Mizpah (mentioned in 6 1) is no doubt the
Mizpah in Gilead (Jgs 10 17). Then we find
Tabor (6 1), Shechem (6 9 RV), Gilgal and Bethel
(4 15; 9 15; 10 5.8.15; 12 11). Even Lebanon
in the distant N. is spoken of with a minuteness of
detail which could be expected only from one very
familiar with Northern Pal (14 5-8). In a stricter
sense, therefore, than Amos who, though a native of
Tekoah, had a prophetic mission to the N., Hosea
may be called the prophet of Northern Israel, and
his book, as Ewald has said, is the prophetic voice
wrung from the bosom of the kingdom itself.

All that we are told directly as to the time when
Hosea prophesied is the statement in the first verse

that the word of the Lord came to
3. Date him “in the days of Uzziah, Jotham,
; Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah,
and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king
of Israel.’”” It is quite evident that his ministry
did not extend over the combined reigns of all these
kings; for, from the beginning of the reign of Uzziah
to the beginning of that of Hezekiah, according to
the now usually received chronology (Kautzsch,
Literature of the OT, ET), there is a period of 52
years, and Jeroboam came to his throne a few years
before the accession of Uzziah.

When we examine the book itself for more precise indi-
cations of date, we find that the prophet threatens in
God's name that in ‘‘a little while’’ He will ‘‘ avenge the
blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.'' Now Jero-
boam was the great-grandson of Jehu, and his son Zech-
ariah,who succeeded him,reigned only six months and
was the last of the line of Jehu. Wemay, therefore,
piece the beginning of Hosea’s ministry a short time

efore the death of Jercboam which took place 743 BO.
As to the other limit, it is to be observed that, though
the downfall of ‘‘the kingdom of the house of Israel'’ is
threatened (1 4), the catastrophe had not occurred when
the prophet ceased his ministry. The date of that
event is fixed in the year 722 BC, and it is said to have
happened in the 6th year of King Hezekiah. This does
not give too long a time for Hosea's activity, and it
leaves the accuracy of the superscription unchallenged,
whoever may have written it. If itis the work of a later
editor, it may be that Hosea’s ministry ceased before
the reign of Hezekiah, though he may have lived on
into that king's reign. It should be added, however,
that there seems to be no reference to another event
which might have been expected to find an echo in the
book, viz. the conspiracy in the reign of Ahaz (735 BC)
by Pekah of Isracl and Rezin of Damascus against the
kingdom of Judah (2 K 16 5; Isa 7 1).

Briefly we may say that, though there is uncer-
tainty as to the precise dates of the beginning and
end of his activity, he began his work before the
middle of the 8th cent., and that he saw the rise
and fall of several kings. He would thus be a
younger contemporary of Amos whose activity
seems to have been confined to the reign of Jero-
boam.

Hosea is described as the son of Beeri, who is
otherwise unknown. Of his personal history we

are told either absolutely nothing or
4. Personal else a very great deal, according as we
History interpret chs 1 and 3 of his book. In
(Marriage) ancient and in modern times, opinions

have been divided as to whether in
these chapters we have a recital of actual facts, or
the presentation of prophetic teaching in the form
of parable or allegory. ‘ :

(1) Allegorical view—The Jewish_ interpreters
as a rule took the allegorical view, and Jerome, in the
early Christian church, no doubt following Origen
-the great allegorizer, states it at length, and sees
an intimation of the view in the closing words of
‘Hosea’s book: ‘Who is wise, that he may under-
stand these things? prudent, that he may know
them?” (14 9).

It is a mystery, he says; for it is a scandal to think of
Hosea being commanded to take an uuchaste wife and
without any reluctance obeying the command. It is


a figure, like that of Jeremiah going to the Euphrates
(when Jerus was closely besieged) and hiding a girdle
in the bed of the river (Jer 18). So Ezekiel is com-
manded to represent, by means of a tile, the siege of
Jerus, and to lie 390 days on his side to Indlcate the
pene of their iniquity (Ezk 4); and there are other sym-
olical acts. Jerome then proceeds to apply the allegory
first to Isracl, which is the Gomer of ch 1, and then to
Judah, the wife in ch 8, and finally to Christ and the
pray the representations being types from beginning
o end. :


Calvin took the same view. Among modern
commentators we find holding the allegorical view
not only Hengstenberg, Hivernick and Keil, but
also Eichhorn, Rosenmiiller and Hitzig. Reuss
also (Das AT, II, 88 ff) protests against the literal
interpretation as impossible, and that on no moral
or reverential considerations, but entirely on exe-
getical grounds. He thinks it enough to say that,
when the prophet calls his children “children of
whoredom,” he indicates quite clearly that he uses
the words in a figurative sense; and he explains the
allegory as follows: The prophet is the representa-
tive of Jeh; Israel is the wife of Jeb, but faithless
to her husband, going after other gods; the children
are the Israelites, who are therefore called children
of whoredoms because they practise the idolatry
of the nation. So they receive names which denote
the consequences of their sin. In accordance with
the allegory, the children are called the children of
the prophet (for {srael is God’s own) but this is
not the main point; the essential thing 1s the naming
of the children as they are named. In the third
chapter, according to this interpretation, allegory
again appears, but with a modification and for
another purpose. Idolatrous Israel is again the
unfaithful wife of the prophet as the representative
of Jeh. This relation can again be understood only
as figurative; for, if the prophet stands for Jeh, the
marriage of Israel to the prophet cannot indicate
infidelity to Jeh. The sense is evident: the mar-
riage still subsists; God does not give His people
up, but they are for the present divorced “from bed
and board’’; it is a prophecy of the time when Jeh
will leave the people to their fate, till the day of
reconciliation comes.

(2) Literal view.—The literal interpretation,
adopted by Theodore of Mopsuestia in the ancient
church, was followed, after the Reformation, by
the chief theologians of the Lutheran church, and
has been held, in modern times, by many leading
expositors, including Delitzsch, Kurtz, Hofmann,
Wellhausen, Cheyne, Robertson Smith, G. A. Smith
and others. In this view, as generally held, chs 1
and 3 go together and refer to the same person.
The idea is that Hosea married a woman named
Gomer, who had the three children here named.
Whether it was that she was known to be a worth-
less woman before the marriage and that the prophet
hoped to reclaim her, or that she proved faithless
after the marriage, she finally left him and sank
deeper and deeper into sin, until, at some future
time, the prophet bought her from her paramour
and brought her to his own house, keeping her se-
cluded, however, and deprived of ali the privileges
of a wife. In support of this view it is urged that


- the details are related in so matter-of-fact a manner


that they must be matters of fact. Though the
children receive symbolical names (as Isaiah gave
such names to his children), the meanings of these
are clear and are explained, whereas the name of the
wife cannot thus be explained. Then there are
details, such as the weaning of one child before the
conception of another (1 8) and the precise price
paid for the erring wife (3 2), which are not needed
to keep up the allegory, and are not invested with
symbolical meaning by the prophet. What is con-
sidered a still stronger argument is relied on by
modern advocates of this view, the psychological


Hosea


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1426


argument that there is always a proportion between | the birth of the second child, as Robertson Smith
a revelation vouchsafed and the mental state of the | and G. A. Smith suppose. The names given to the


person receiving it. Hosea dates the beginning of
his prophetic work from the time of his marriage;
it was the unfaithfulness of his wife that brought
home to him the apostasy of Israel; and, as his heart
went after his wayward wife, so the Divine love was
stronger than Israel’s sin; and thus through his
own domestic experience he was prepared to be a
prophet to his people.

The great difficulty in the way of accepting the
literal interpretation lies, as Reuss has pointed out,
in the statement at the beginning, that the prophet
was commanded to take a wife of whoredoms and
children of whoredoms. And the advocates of the
view meet the difficulties in some way like this:
The narrative as it stands is manifestly later than
the events. On looking back, the prophet describes
his wife as she turned out to be, not as she was at
the beginning of the history. It is urged with some
force that it was necessary to the analogy (even
if the story is only a parable) that the wife should
have been first of all chaste; for, in Hosea’s repre-
sentation, Isracl at the time of its election in the
wilderness was faithful and fell away only after-
ward (2 15; 9 10; 11 1). The narrative does not
require us to assume that Gomer was an immoral
person or that she was the mother of children before
her marriage. The children receive symbolic
names, but these names do not reflect upon Gomer
but upon Israel. Why, then, is she described as a
woman of whoredoms? , It is answered that the ex-
pression ’asheth z°niinim is a class-descriptive, and
is different from the expression ‘‘a woman who is a
harlot”? (ishshah zonah). A Jewish interpreter
quoted by Aben Ezra says: ‘Hosea was commanded
to take a wife of whoredoms because an honest
woman was not te be had. The whole people had
gone astray—was an ‘adulterous generation’; and
she as one of them was a typical example, and the
children were involved in the common declension
(see 4 1f).”’ The comment of Umbreit is worthy of
notice: “As the covenant of Jeh with Israel is viewed
as a marriage bond, so is the prophetic bond with
Israel a marriage, for he is the messenger and medi-
ator. Therefore, if he feels an irresistible impulse
to enter into the marriage-bond with Israel, he is
bound to unite himself with a bride of an unchaste
character. Yea, his own wife Gomer is involved
in the universal guilt” (Prak. Comm. wiber die
Propheien, Hamburg, 1844). It is considered, then,
on this view, that Gomer, after her marriage, being
in heart addicted to the prevailing idolatry, which
we know was often associated with gross immoral-
ity (see4 13), felt the irksomeness of restraint in the
prophet’s house, left him and sank into open profli-
gacy, from which (ch 3) the prophet reclaimed her
so far as to bring her back and keep her secluded in
his own house.


Quite recently this view has been advocated by Riedel
(Alttest. Untersuchungen, Leipzig, 1902), who endeavors
to enforce it by giving a symbolic meaning to Gomer's
name, Bath-Diblaim. The word is the dual (or might
he pointed as a pl.) of a word, debhélah, meaning a fruit-
cake, i.e. raisins or figs pressed together. It is the word
used in the story of ‘Herekiah’s illness (2 K 20 7), and
js found in the list of things furnished by Ahigall to
David (1 S 25 18). See also 1.8 3012; 1 Ch TS
40. Another name for the same thing, ‘dshishah, occurs
in Hos 3 1, rendered in AV ‘‘flagons of wine,” but in RV
“cakes of Taisins."’ It seems clear that this word, at
least. here, denotes fruit-cakes offered to the beathen
deities, as was the custom in Jeremiah's time (Jer 7 18;
44 17). So Riedel argues that Gomer may have been
described as a ‘‘daughter of fruit-cakes"’ according to
the Heb idiom in such expressions as ‘‘daughters of
song,”’ ete (Eccl 12 4; Prov 31 2; 28 7 10; Gen 387
3, ete).


It will be perceived that the literal interpretation
as thus stated does not involve the supposition that
Hosea became aware of his wife’s infidelity before


children all refer to the infidelity of Israel as a
people; and the renderings of Lo ~ruhamah, she
that never knew a father’s love,” and of Lé-‘ammi,
“no kin of mine,’’ are too violent in this connection.
Nor does the interpretation demand that it was
first through his marriage and subsequent experience
that the prophet received his call; although no
doubt the experience through which he passed
deepened the conviction of Israel’s apostasy in his
mind. :

IL The Book.—Scarcely any book in the OT is
more difficult of exposition than the Book of Hos.
This does not seem to be owing to any
exceptional defect in the transmitted
text, but rather to the peculiarity of
the style; and partly also, no doubt, to
the fact that the historical situation of the prophet
was one of bewildering and sudden change of a
violent kind, which seems to reflect itself in the
book. The style here is preéminently the man.
Whatever view we may take of his personal history,
it is evident that he is deeply affected by the situa-
tion in which he is placed. He is controlled by his
subject, instead of controlling it. It is his heart
that speaks; he is not careful to concentrate his
thoughts or to mark his transitions; the sentences
fall from him like the sobs of a broken heart.
Mournful as Jeremiah, he does not indulge in the
pleasure of melancholy as that prophet seems to do.
Jeremiah broods over his sorrow, nurses it, and
tells us he is weeping. Hosea does not say he is
weeping, but we hear it in his broken utterances.
Instead of laying out his plaint in measured form,
he ejaculates it in short, sharp sentences, as the
stabs of his people’s sin pierce his heart.

The result is the absence of that rhythmic flow and
studied parallelism which are such common features of
Heb oratory, and are often so helpful to the expositor.
His imagery, while highly poetical, is not elaborated; his
figures are not so much carried out as thrown out; nor
does he dwell long on the same figure. His sentences are
like utterances of an oracle, and he forgets himself in
identifying himself with the God in whose name he
speaks—a feature which is not without significance in
its bearing on the question of his personal history. The
standing expression ‘‘Thus saith the Lord’’ (‘‘It is the
utterance of Jeh"’ RV), so characteristic of the prophetic
style, very rarely occurs (only in 2 13.16.21; 1] 11);
whereas the words that he speaks are the very words of
the Lord; and without any formal indication of the fact,
he passes from speaking in his own name to speaking in
the name of Jeh (see, e.g. 6 4; 7 12; 8 13; 9.10.14—
17, etc). Never was speaker so absorbed in his theme,
or more identified with Him for whom he speaks. He
seems to he oblivious of his hearers, if indeed his chapters
are the transcript or summary of spoken addresses.
They certainly want to a great extent the directness and
point which are so marked a feature of prophetic diction,
so much so that some (e.g. Reuss and: arti) suppose


they are the production of one who had readers and not
hearers in view.


1. Style
and Scope


But, though the style appears in this abrupt
form, there is one clear note on divers strings sound-
ing through the whole. The theme is twofold: the
love of Jehovah, and the indifference of Israel to
that love; and it would be hard to say which of the
two is more vividly conceived and more forcibly
expressed. Under the figures of the tenderest affec-
tion, sometimes that of the pitying, solicitous care
of the parent (11 1.3.8; 14 3), but more promi-
nently as the affection of the husband (chs 1, 3), the
Divine love is represented as ever enduring in spite
of all indifference and opposition; and, on the other
hand, the waywardness, unblushing faithlessness of
the loved one_is painted in colors so repulsive as
almost to shock the moral sense, but giving thereby
evidence of the painful abhorrence it had produced
on the prophet’s mind. Thus early does he take
the sacred bond of husband and wife as the type of
the Divine electing love—a similitude found else-


1427


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hosea


where in prophetic literature, and most fully elab-
orated by Ezekiel (Ezk 16; cf Jer 3). Hosea is
the prophet of love, and not without propriety has
been called the St. John of the OT.

For the reasons just stated, it is very difficult to
give a systematic analysis of the Book of Hos. It

may, however, be helpful to that end
2. Historical to recall the situation of the time as
Background furnishing a historical setting for the
several sections of the book.

At the commencement of the prophet’s ministry,
the Northern Kingdom was enjoying the prosperity
and running into the excesses conscquent on the
victories of Jeroboam JI. The glaring social cor-
ruptions of the times are exhibited and castigated
by Amos, as they would most impress a stranger
from the 8.; but Hosea, a native, as we are led to
suppose, of the Northern Kingdom, saw more deeply
into the malady, and traced all the crime and vice
of the nation to the fundamental evil of idolatry
and apostasy from the true God. What he describes
under the repulsive figure of whoredom was the
rampant worship of the b*dlim, which had practi-
cally obscured the recognition of the sole claims to
worship of the national Jeh. This worship of the
b“alim is to be distinguished from that of which
we read at the earlier time of Elijah. Ahab’s
Tyrian wife Jezebel had introduced the worship of
her native country, that of the Sidonian Baal,
which amounted to the setting up of a foreign deity;
and Elijah’s contention that it must be a choice
between Jeh and Baal appealed to the sense of pa-
_triotism and the sentiment of national existence.
The worship of the da‘als, however, was an older
and more insidious form of idolatry. The worship
of the Can tribes, among whom the Israelites found
themselves on the occupation of Pal, was a reverence
of local divinities, known by the names of the places
where each had his shrine or influence. The generic
name of ba‘al or ‘lord’ was applied naturally as a
common word to each of these, with the addition
of the name of place or potency to distinguish them.
Thus we have Baal-hermon, Baal-gad, Baal-berith,
etc. The insidiousness of this kind of worship is

roved by its wide prevalence, esp. among people at a
ee stage of intelligence, when the untutored mind is
brought face to face with the mysterious and unseen
forces of Nature. And the tenacity of the feeling is
proved by the prevalence of such worship, even
among people whose professed religion condemns
idolatry of every kind. The veneration of local
shrines among Christians of the East and in many
parts of Europe is well known; and Mohammedans
make pilgrimages to the tombs of saints who, though
not formally worshipped as deities, are believed to
have the power to confer such benefits as the
Canaanites expected from the ba‘als. The very
name ba‘al, originally meaning simply lord and
master, a8 in such expressions as “master of a
house,” “lord of a wife,” “owner of an ox,” would
be misleading; for the Israelites could quite inno-
cently call Jeh their ba‘al or Lord, as we can see
they did in the formation of proper names. We
can, without much difficulty, conceive what would
happen among a people like the Israelite tribes, of
no high grade of religious intelligence, and with
the prevailing superstitions in their blood, when
they found themselves in Pal. From a nomad and
pastoral people they became, and had to become,
agriculturists; the natives of the land would be their
instructors, in many or in most cases the actual
labor would be done by them. The Book of Jgs
tells us emphatically that several of the Israelite
tribes “did not drive out” the native inhabitants;
the northern tribes in particular, where the land
was most fertile, tolerated a large native admixture.
We are also told (Jgs 2 7) that the people served


the Lord all the days of Joshua and of the elders
who outlived Joshua; and this hint of a gradual
declension no doubt points to what actually took
place. For a time they remembered and thought
of Jeh as the God who had done for them great
things in Egypt and in the wilderness; and then,
as time went on, they had to think of Him as the
giver of the land in which they found themselves,
with all its varicd produce. But this was the very
thing the Canaanites ascribed to their ba‘als. And
so, imperceptibly, by naming places as the natives
named them, by observing the customs which the
natives followed, and celebrating the festivals of the
agricultural year, they were gliding into conformity
with the religion of their neighbors; for, in such a
state of society, custom is more or less based on
religion and passes for religion. Almost before
they were aware, they were doing homage to the
various ba‘als in celebrating their festival days and
offering to them the produce of the ground.

Such was the condition which Hosea describes
as an absence of the knowledge of God (4 1). And
the consequence cannot be better described than in
the words of St. Paul: “As they refused to have
God in their knowledge, God gave them up unto a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
fitting’? (Rom 1 28). Both Hosea and Amos tell
us in no ambiguous terms how the devotees of the
impure worship gave themselves up ‘‘to work all
uncleanness with greediness” (Eph 4 19; cf Am 2
7{; Hos 4 14); and how deeply the canker had
worked into the body politic is proved by the rapid
collapse and irretrievable ruin which followed soon
after the strong hand of Jeroboam was removed.
The 21 years that followed his death in 743 BC saw
no fewer than six successive occupants of the throne,
and the final disappearance of the kingdom of the
ten tribes. Zechariah, his son, had reigned only
six months when “Shallum the son of Jabesh con-
spired against him. . . . and slew him, and reigned
in his stead” (2K 16 10). Shallum himself
reigned only a month when he was in the same
bloody manner removed by Menahem. After a
reign of 10 years, according to 2 K 16 17 (although
the chronology here is uncertain), he was succeeded
by his son Pekahiah (2 K 16 22), and after two
years Pekah “his captain” conspired against him
and reigned in his stead (2 K 15 25). This king
also was assassinated, and was succeeded by Hoshea
(2 K 16 30), the last king of the ten tribes, for the
kingdom came to an end in 722 BC. Hosea must
have lived during a great part of those troublous
times; and we may expect to hear echoes of the
events in his book.

(1) Chs 1-3.—We should naturally expect that
the order of the chapters would correspond in the

main with the progress of events; and
8. Contents there is at least a general agreement
and among expositors that chs 1-3 refer
Divisions to an earlier period than those that

follow. Jn favor of this is the reference
in 1 2 to the commencement of the prophet’s min-
istry, as also the threatening of the impending
extirpation of the house of Jehu (1 4), implying
that it was still in existence; and finally the hints
of the abundance amounting to luxury which
marked the prosperous time of Jeroboam’s reign.
These three chapters are to be regarded as going
together; and, however they may be viewed as
reflecting the prophet’s personal experience, they
leave no room for doubt in regard to the national
apostasy that weighed so heavily on his heart.
And this, in effect, is what he says: Just as the wife,
espoused to a loving husband, enjoys the pro-
tection of home and owes all her provision to her
husband, so Israel, chosen by Jeh and brought by
Him into a fertile land, has received all she has from


Hosea


Him alone. The giving of recognition to the ba‘als
for material prosperity was tantamount to a wife’s
bestowing her affection on another; the accepting
of these blessings as bestowed on condition of
homage rendered to the ba‘als was tantamount to
the receiving of hire by an abandoned woman.
This being so, the prophet, speaking in God’s name,
declares what He will do, in a series of a thrice
repeated ‘‘therefore’ (2 6.9.14), marking three
stages of His discipline. First of all, changing the
metaphor to that of a straying heifer, the prophet
in God’s name declares (vs 6 ff) that He will hedge
up her way with thorns, so that she will not be able
to reach her lovers—meaning, no doubt, that
whether by drought or blight, or some national
misfortune, there would be such a disturbance of
the processes of Nature that the usual rites of hom-
age to the ba‘als would prove ineffectual. The
people would fail to find the “law of the god of the
jand’”’ (2 KK 17 26). In their perplexity they
would bethink themselves, begin to doubt the
power of the ba‘als, and resolve to pay to Jeh the
homage they had been giving to the local gods.
But this is still the same low conception of Jeh that
had led them astray. To exchange one God for
another simply in the hope of enjoying material
prosperity is not the service which He requires.
And then comes the second “therefore” (vs 9 ff).
Instead of allowing them to enjoy their corn and
wine and oil on the terms of a mere lip allegiance
or ritual service, Jeh will take these away, will
reduce Israe] to her original poverty, causing all the
mirth of her festival days to cease, and giving gar-
ments of mourning for festal attire. Her lovers
will no longer own her, her own busband’s hand is
heavy upon her, and what remains? The third
“therefore” tells us (vs 14 ff). Israel, now bereft
of all, helpless, homeless, is at last convinced that,
as her God could take away all, so it was from Him
she had received all: she is shut up to His love and
His mercy alone. And here the prophet’s thoughts
clothe themselves in language referring to the early
betrothal period of national life. A new beginning
will be made, she will again lead the wilderness life
of daily dependence on God, cheerfully and joyfully
she will begin a new journey, out of trouble will
come a new hope, and the very recollection of the
past will be a pain toher. As all the associations of
the name ba‘al have been degrading, she shall think
of her Lord in a different relation, not as the mere
giver of material blessing, but as the husband and
desire of her heart, the One Source of all good, as
distinguished from one of many benefactors. In all
this Hosea does not make it clear how he expected
these changes to be brought about, nor do we detect
any references to the political history of the time.
He mentions no foreign enemy at this stage, or, at
most, hints at war in a vague manner (1 4f). In
the second chapter the thing that is emphasized is
the heavy hand of God laid on the things through
which Israel had been led astray, the paralyzing of
Nature’s operations, so as to cut at the root of
Nature-worship; but the closing stage of the Di-
vine discipline (ch 3), when Israel, like the wife kept
in seclusion, neither enjoying the privileges of the
lawful spouse nor able to follow after idols, seems
to point to, and certainly was not reached till, the
captivity when the people, ou a foreign soil, could
not exercise their ancestral worship, but yet were
finally cured of idolatry.

The references to Judah in these chapters are not
to be overlooked. Having said (1 6) that Israel
would be utterly taken away (which seems to point
to exile), the prophet adds that Judah would be
saved from that fate, though not by warlike means.
Farther down (ver 11) he predicts the union of
Israel and Judah under one head, and finally in


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1428


ch 3 it is said that in the latter day the children
of Israel would seek the Lord their God and David
their king. Many critics suppose that 1 10f are
out of place (though they cannot find a better place
for them); and not a few declare that all the refer-
ences to Judah must be taken as from a later hand,
the usual reason for this conclusion being that the
words “disturb the connection.” In the case of
a writer like Hosea, however, whose transitions are
so sharp and sudden, we are not safe in speaking of
disturbing the connection: what may to us appear
abrupt, because we are not expecting it, may have
flashed across the mind of the original writer; and
Hosea, in forecasting the future of his people, can
searcely be debarred from having thought of the
whole nation. It was Israel as a whole that was
the original bride of Jeh, and surely therefore the
united Israel would be the partaker of the final
glory. Asa matter of fact, Judah was at the time
in better case than Israel, and the old promise to
the Davidic house (2 S 7 16) was deeply cherished
to the end. ;

(2) Chs 4-14.—If it is admissible to consider
chs 1-8 as one related piece (though possibly the
written deposit of several addresses) it is quite
otherwise with chs 4-14. These are, in a manner,
a counterpart of the history. When the strong
hand of Jeroboam was relaxed, the kingdom rapidly
fell to pieces; a scries of military usurpers follows
with bewildering rapidity; but who can tell how
much political disorder and social disintegration lie
behind those brief and grim notices: So and So
“conspired against him and slew him and reigned.
in his stead’? So with these chapters. The wail
of grief, the echo of violence and excess, is heard
through all, but it is very difficult to assign each
lament, each reproof, each denunciation to the pri-
mary occasion that called it forth. The chapters
seem like the recital of the confused, hideous
dream through which the nation passed till its rude
awakening by the sharp shock of the Assyr invasion
and the exile that followed. The political condition
of the time was one of party strife and national
impotence. Sometimes Assyria or Egypt is men-
tioned alone (6 13; 8 9.13; 9 6; 10 6; 14 3), at
other times Assyria and Egypt together (7 11;
9 3; 141 5.11; 12 1); but in such a way as to show
too plainly that the spirit of self-reliance—not to
speak of reliance on Jeh—had departed from a race
that was worm-eaten with social sins and rendered
selfish and eallous by the indulgence of every vice.
These foreign powers, which figure as false refuges,
are also in the view of the prophet destined to be
future scourges (see 5 13; 8 9f; 7 11; 12 1); and
we know, from the Book of K and-also from the
Assyr monuments, how much the kings of Israel
at this time were at the mercy of the great conquer-
ing empires of the East. Such passages as speak
of Assyria and Egypt in the same breath may pomt
to the riva] policies which were in vogue in the
Northern Kingdom (as they appeared also somewhat
later in Judah) of making alliances with one or
other of these great rival powers. It was in fact
the Egyptianizing policy of Hoshea that finally
occasioned the ruin of the kingdom (2 K 17 4).
Thus it is that, in the last chapter, when the prophet
indulges in hope no more mixed with boding fear,
he puts into the mouth of repentant Ephraim the
words: “Assyria shall not save us; we will not ride
upon horses’’ (14 3), thus alluding to the two for-
eign powers between which Israel had lost its
independence.

It is not possible to give a satisfactory analysis
of the chapters under consideration. They are not
marked off, as certain sections of other prophetical
books are, by headings or refrains, nor are the refer-
ences to current events sufficiently clear to enable


1429


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hosea


us to assign different parts to different times, nor,
in fine, is the matter so distinctly laid out that we
can arrange the book under subjects treated. Most
expositors accordingly content themselves with
indicating the chief topics or lines of thought, and
arranging the chapters according to the tone per-
vading them.


Keil, e.g., would divide all these chapters into three
prose sectlons, each forming a kind of prophetical cycle,
In which the three great prophetic tones of reproof,
threatening, and promise, are heard in succession. His
first sectlon embraces ch 4 to 6 3, ending with the gra-
cious promise: ‘‘Come, and let us return unto Jeh,"
etc. The second section, 6 4 to 11 11, ends with the
promise: ‘‘They shall come trembling as a hird....
and I will make them to dwell in their houses, saith Jeh."’
The third section, 11 12 to 14 9, ends: ‘Take with you
words,and return unto Jeh,”’ etc. Ewald's arrangement
proceeds on the idea that the whole book consists of one
narrative piece (chs 1-3) and one long address (chs 4-
14), which, however, is marked off by resting points into
smaller sections or addresses. The progress of thought
ls marked by the three great items of arraignment,
punishment, and consolation. Thus: from 4 1—6 11
there is arraignment; from 6 11 to 9 9 punishment, and
from 9 10—14 10 exhortation and comfort. Driver says
of chs 4-14: ‘These chapters consist of a series of dis-
courses, & Summary arranged prohahly by the prophet
himself at the close of his ministry, of the prophecies de-
livered_by him in the years following the death of Jero-
boam II. Though the argument is not continuous, or
systematically developed, they may be divided into three
sections: (¢) chs 4-8, in which the thought of Israel's
guilt predominates; (b) ch 9-11 11, in which the pre-
vailing thought is that of Israel’s punishment; (c) 11 12-
ch 14 in which these two lines of thought are both con-
tinued (chs 12, 13), but are followed (in ch 14) by a
gance at the brighter future which may ensue provided
srael repents.'’ Davidson, after mentioning the
proposed analyses of Ewald and Driver, adds: *‘But in
truth the passage is scarcely divisible; it consists of a
multitude of variations all executed on one theme,
Israel’s apostasy or unfaithfulness to her God. This
unfaithfulness is a conditlon of the mind, a ‘spirit of
whoredoms,’ and is revealed in all the aspects of Israel's
life, though Perea in three things: (1) the cultus,
which, though ostensibly service of Jeh, is In truth wor-
ship of a being altogether different from Him; (2) the
internal political disorders, the changes of dynasty, all of
which have heen effected with no thought of Jeh in the
people’s minds; and (3) the foreign politics, the making
of covenants with Egypt and Assyria, in the hope
that they might heal the internal hurt of the people
instead of relying on Jeh their God. The three things,’
he adds, ‘‘are not independent; the one leads to the
other. ‘The fundamental evil is that there is no knowl-
edge of God in the land, no true concer en of Deity.
He is thought of as a Nature-god, and His conception
exercises no restraint on the passions or life of the people:
hence the social immoralities, and the furious struggles
of rival factions, and these again lead to the appeal for
foreign intervention.”


Some expositors, however (e.g. Maurer, Hitzig,
Delitzsch and Volck), recognizing what they con-
sider as direct references or brief allusions to certain
outstanding events in the history, perceive a chrono-
logical order in the chapters. Volek, who has at-
tempted a full analysis on this line (PRE?) thinks
that chs 4-14 arrange themselves into 6 consecu-
tive sections as follows: (1) ch 4 constitutes a section
by itself, determined by the introductory words
“Hear the word of Jeh’’ (4 1), and a similar call at
the beginning of ch 6. He assigns this chapter to
the reign of Zechariah, as a description of the low
condition to which the nation had fallen, the priests,
the leaders, being involved in the guilt and reproof
(ver 6). (2) The second section extends from 6 1
to 6 3, and is addressed directly to' the priests and
the royal house, who ought to have been guides but
were snares. The prophet in the spirit sees Divine
judgment already breaking over the devoted land
(5 8). This prophecy, which Hitzig referred to the
time of Zechariah, and Maurer to the reign of
Pekah, is assigned by Volck to the one month’s
reign of Shallum, on the ground of 6 7: ‘Now
shall a month [AV and RVm, but RV “the new
moon’’] devour them.” It is by inference from this
that Volck puts ch 4 in the preceding reign of Zech-
ariah. (3) The third section, 6 4—7 16, is marked
off by the new beginning made at 8 1: “Set the


trumpet to thy mouth.’’ The passage which de-
termines its date is7 7: ‘All their kings are fallen,”
which, agreeing with Hitzig, he thinks could not
have been said after the fall of one king, Zechariah,
and so he assigns it to the beginning of the reign of
Menahem who killed Shallum. (4) The next halt-
ing place, giving a fourth section, is at 9 9, at the
end of which there is a break in the MT, and a new
subject begins. Accordingly, the section embraces
8 1 to 9 9, and Volck, agreemg with Hitzig, assigns
it to the reign of Menahem, on the ground of 8 4:
“They have set up kings, but not by me,” referring
to the support given to Menahem by the king of
Assyria (2 K 16 19). (5) The fifth section extends
from 9 10to 11 11, and ismarked by the peculiarity
that the prophet three times refers to the early his-
tory of Israel (9 10; 101; 111). Identifying
Shalman in 10 14 with Shalmaneser, Volck refers
the section to the opening years of the reign of
Hoshea, against whom (as stated in 2 K 17 3)
Shalmaneser came up and Hoshea became his serv-
ant. (6) Lastly there is a sixth section, extend-
ing from 12 1 to the end, which looks to the future
recovery of the people (13 14) and closes with words
of gracious promise. This portion also Volck
assigns to the reign of Hoshea, just as the ruin of
Samaria was impending, and there was no prospect
of any earthly hope. In this way Volck thinks
that the statement in the superscription of the Book
of Hos is confirmed, and that we have before us,
in chronological order if not in precisely their original
oral form, the utterances of the prophet during his
ministry. Ewald also was strongly of opinion that
the book (in its second part at least) has come down
to us substantially in the form in which the prophet
himself left it.

The impression one receives from this whole sec-
tion is one of sadness, for the prevailing tone is one
of denunciation and doom. d yet Hosea is not
a prophet of despair; and, in fact, he bursts forth
into hope just at the point where, humanly speak-
ing, there is no ground of hope. But this hope is
produced, not by what he sees in the condition of
the people: it is enkindled and sustained by his
confident faith in the unfailing love of Jeh. And
so he ends on the theme on which he began, the love
of God prevailing over man’s sin.

The references in Hos to the earlier period of his-
tory are valuable, seeing that we know his date,

and that the dates of the books record-


4. Testi-- ing that history are so much in dispute.
mony to These references are particularly val-
Earlier uable from the way in which they
History occur; for it is the manner of the


prophet to introduce them indirectly,
and allusively, without dwelling on particulars.
Thus every single reference can be understood only
by assuming its implications; and, taken together,
they do not merely amount to a number of isolated
testimonies to single events, but are rather dis-
severed links of a continuous chain of history. For
they do not occur by way of rhetorical illustration
of some theme that may be in hand, they are of the
very essence of the prophet’s address. The events
of the past are, in the prophet’s view, so many ele-
ments in the arraignment or threatening, or what-
ever it may be that is the subject of address for the
moment: in a word, the whole history is regarded
by him, not as a series of episodes, strung together
in a collection of popular stories, but a course of
Divine discipline with a moral and religious sig-
nificance, and recorded or referred to for a high
purpose. There is this also to be remembered: that,
in referring briefly and by way of allusion to past
events, the prophet is taking for granted that his
hearers understand what he is referring to, and will
not call in question the facts to which he alludes.


Hosea
Hoshea


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1480


This implies that the mass of the people, even in
degenerate Israel, were well acquainted with such
incidents or episodes as the prophet introduces into
his discourses, as well as the links which were neces-
sary to bind them into a connected whole. It is
necessary to bear all this in mind in forming an
estimate of the historical value of other books. It
seems to be taken by many modern writers as certain
that those parts of the Pent (JE) which deal with
the earlier history were not written till a compara-
tively short time hefore Hosea. It is plain, how-
ever, that the accounts must be of much earlier
date, before they could have become, in an age
when books could not have been numerous, the
general possession of the national consciousness.
Further, the homiletic manner in which Hosea
handles these ancient stories makes one suspicious
of the modern theory that a number of popular
stories were supplied with didactic “frameworks”
by later Deuteronomic or other ‘redactors,’’ and
makes it more probable that these accounts were
invested with a moral and religious meaning from
the beginning. With these considerations in mind,
and particularly in view of the use he makes of his
references, it is interesting to note the wide range
of the prophet’s historical survey. If we read with
RV ‘“‘Adam”’ for ‘men’ (AV 6 7), we have a clear
allusion to the Fall, implying in its connection the
view which, as all admit, Hosea held of the reli-
gious history of his people as a declension and not
an upward evolution. This view is more clearly
brought out in the reference to the period of the
exodus and the desert life (2 15; 910; 11 1).
Equally suggestive are the allusions to the patriar-
chal history, as the references to Admah and Ze-
hoiim (11 8), and the repeated references to the
weak and the strong points in the character of
Jacob (12 3.12). Repeatedly he declares that Jeh
is the God of Israel “from the land of Egypt” (12
9; 18 4), alludes to the sin of Achan and the valley
of Achor (2 15), asserts that God had in time past
“spoken unto the prophets” (12 10), “hewed’’ His
cople by prophets (6 5), and by a prophet brought
His people out of Egypt (12 13). There are also
references to incidents nearer to the prophet’s
time, some of them not very clear (1 4; 5 1; 9 5.
15; 10 9); and if, as seems probable, “the sin of
Israel”? (10 8) refers to the schism of the ten tribes,
the prominence given to the Davidic kingship,
which, along with the references to Judah, some
critics reject on merely subjective grounds, is quite
intelligible (8 5; 4 15). a
We do not expect to find in a prophetic writing
the same frequency of reference to the law as to the


history; for it is of the essence of
6. Testi- prophecy to appeal to history and to
mony to interpret it. Of course, the moral and
the Law social aspects of the law are as much


the province of the prophet as of the
priest; but the ceremonial part of the law, which
was under the care of the priests, though it was
designed to he the expression of the same ideas that
lay at the foundation of prophecy, is mainly touched
upon by the prophets when, as was too frequently
the case, it ceased to express those ideas and hecame
an offence. The words of the prophets on this
subject, when fairly interpreted, are not opposed to
law in any of its authorized forms, but only to its
abuses; and there are expressions and allusions in
Hosea, although he spoke to the Northern Kingdom,
where from the time of the schism there had been a
wide departure from the authorized law, which
recognize its ancient existence and its Divine sanc-
tion. The much-debated passage (8 12), ‘“Though
I write for him my law in ten thousand precepts”
(RV or RVm “I wrote for him the ten thousand
things of my law’’), on any understanding of the


words or with any reasonable emendation of the
text (for which see the comm.), points to written
law, and that of considerable compass, and seems
hardly consistent with the supposition that in the
prophet’s time the whole of the written law was
confined to a few chapters in Ex, the so-called Book
of the Covenant. And the very next verse (8 13),
“As for the sacrifices of mine offerings, they sacri-
fice flesh and eat it; but Jeh accepteth them not,’
is at once an acknowledgment of the Divine insti-
tution of sacrifice, and an illustration of the kind
of opposition the prophets entertained to sacrificial
service as it was practised. So when it is said, “I will
also cause all her mirth to cease, her feasts, her new
moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn assem-
blies”’ (2 11; ef 9 5), the reference, as the context
shows, is to a deprivation of what were national
distinctive privileges; and the allusions to trans-
gressions and trespasses against the law (8 1; ef
Dt 17 2) point in the same direction. We have
a plain reference to the Feast of Tabernacles (12 9):
“T will yet again make thee to dwell in tents, as
in the days of the solemn feast’’ (cf Lev 23 89-43);
and there are phrases which are either in the express
language of the law-books or evident allusions to
them, as “Thy people are as they that strive with
the priest” (4 4; ef Dit 17 12); “The princes of
Judah are like them that remove the landmark”
(65 10; cf Dt 19 14); “Their sacrifices shall be unto
them as the bread of mourners” (9 4; cf Dt 26 14);
“They [the priests] feed on the sin of my people’
(48; cf Lev 6 25f; 1017). In one verse the
prophet combines the fundamental fact in the na-
tion’s history and the fundamental principle of the
law: “I am Jeh thy God from the land of Egypt;
and thou shalt know no god but me” (13 4; ef
Ex 20 3).
It is, however, with the Book of Dt more than
with any other portion of the Pent that the Book of
Hos shows affinity; and the resem-
6. Affinity blances here are so striking, that the
with Deu- critics who hold to the late date of Dt
teronomy speak of the author of that book as
“the spiritual heir of Hosea’”’ (Driver,
Comm. on Di, Intro, xxvii), or of Hosea as “the
great spiritual predecessor of the Deuteronomist’’
(Cheyne, Jeremiah, His Life and Times, 66). The
resemblance is seen, not only in the homiletical
manner in which historical events are treated, but
chiefly in the great underlying principles implied
or insisted upon in both books. The choice of
Israel to be a peculiar people is the fundamental
note in both (Dt 4 37; 7 6; 10 15; 14 2; 26 18;
Hos 12 9; 13 4). God’s tender care and fatherly
discipline are central ideas in hoth (Dt 8 2.3.5.16;
Hos 9 15; 111-4; 14 4); and, conversely, the
supreme duty of love to God, or reproof of the want
of it, is everywhere emphasized (Dt 6 5; 10 12;
11 1.13.22; 13 3; 199; 30 6.16.20; Hos 4 1;
6 4.6). Now, when points of resemblance are
found in two different books, it is not always easy
to say on merely literary grounds which has the
claim to priority. But it does seem remarkable,
on the one hand, that a writer so late as the time of
Josiah should take his keynote from one of the
very earliest of the writing prophets two centuries
before him; and, on the other hand, that these
so-called “prophetic ideas,’’ so suitable to the time
of ‘the kindness of youth and love of espousals’
(Jer 2 2), should have found no place in the mind
of that “‘prophet’’ by whom the Lord brought Israel
out of Egypt (Hos 12 13). The ministry of Moses
was to enforce the duty of whole-hearted allegiance
to the God who had made special choice of Israel
and claimed them as Hisown. Nor was Hosea the
first, as it is sometimes alleged, to represent the
religious history of Israel as a defection. Moses


1431


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hosea
Hoshea


had experience of their apostasy under the very
shadow of Sinai, and all his life long had to bear with


a stiff-necked and rehellious people. Then, again,
if these ““Deuteronomic’”’ ideas are found so clearly
expressed in Hosea, why should it be necessary
to postulate a late Deuteronomist going back upon
older books, and editing and supplementing them
with Deuteronomic matter? If Moses sustained
anything like the function which all tradition as-
signed to him, and if, as all confess, he was the in-
strument of molding the tribes into one people,
those addresses contained in the Book of Dt are
precisely in the tone which would be adopted by a
great leader in taking farewell of the people. And,
if he did so, it is quite conceivable that his words
would be treasured by the God-fearing men among
his followers and successors, in that unbroken line
of prophetic men to whose existence both Amos
and Hosea appealed, and that they should be found
coming to expression at the very dawn of written
prophecy. Undoubtedly these two prophets took
such a view, and regarded Moses as the first and
greatest Deuteronomist.

Lirerarurse.—Harper, ‘Minor Prophets,” in ICC;
Keil, ‘‘Minor Prophets,"’ in Clark’s For. Theol. Library;
Huxtable, ‘‘Hosea,’’ in Speaker's Comm.; Cheyne, ‘‘Ho-
sea,”’in Cambridge Bible; Pusey, Minor Prophets; Robert-
son Smith, Prophets of Israel; G. A. Smith, ‘‘The Book of
the Twelve,” in Expositor’'s Bible; Horton, ‘‘Hosea,"’ in
Century Bible; Farrar, ‘‘Minor Prophets,'' in Men of the
Bible; A. B. Davidson, art. ‘‘Hosea” in HDB; Cornill,
The Prophets of Israel, H'T , Chicago, 1897; Valeton, Amos
en Hosea; Nowack, ‘‘Die kleinen Propheten,''in Hand-
ne z. AT; Marti, Dodekapropheton in Kurz. Hand-

omm.


HOSEN, ho’z’n.


HOSHAIAH, hé-shi/ya (VDI, hdsha‘yah,
‘“whom,Jeh helpeth’’):

(1) Father of Jezaniah (probably =Azariah, so
LXX; ef Jer 42 1 and 43 2 with 2 K 26 23 and
note similar letters in names in Heb), who with
other leaders antagonized the policy and counsel
of Jeremiah after the fall of Jerus (Jer 42 1—43 7).

(2) A man, probably of Judah, who led half of
the princes of Judah in procession at the dedication
of the wall of Jerus (Neh 12 32).


James RoBeRTSON
See BREECHES.


HOSHAMA, hosh’a-ma, hé-sha’ma (ADT,


hashama‘, abbreviated from DQWN, y*hdshama’,
‘“s7hom Jeh heareth’’): One of the sons or descend-
ants o Jeconiah, the captive king of Judah (1 Ch
3 18).


HOSHEA, hé-shé’a (VWIN, héshé", “‘salvation’’;
‘Ooie, Hosée, 2 K 17 1-9): Son of Elah, the 19th
and last king of Israel. The time was

1. A Satrap one of social revolution and dynastic


of Assyria change. Of the last five kings of
Israel, four had met their deaths by
violence. Hoshea himself was one of these assassins


(2 K 15 30), and the nominee of Tiglath-pileser
III, whose annals read, ‘‘Pekah I slew, Hoshea I
appointed over them.” Though called king,
Hoshea was thus really a satrap of Assyria and held
his appointment only during good behavior. The
realm which he administered was but the shadow
of its former self. Tiglath-pileser had already
carried into captivity the northern tribes of Zebulun,
Naphtali, Asher and Dan; as also the two and a
half tribes E. of the Jordan (2 K 15 29). Apart

from those forming the kingdom of


2. The Judah, there remained only Ephraim,
Reduced §Issachar, and the half-tribe of Manas-
Kingdom seh. Isaiah refers to the fall of Syria
of Israel in the words, ‘Damascus is taken


away from being a city” (Isa 17 1),
and to the foreign occupations of Northern Israel


in the words, “He brought into contempt the land
of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali . ... by the
way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the

nations” (Isa 9 1).
But Hosea is the prophet in whose writings we
see most clearly the reflection of the politics of the
day, and the altered condition of things


8. Hosea in Israel. In the 2d division of his
and book, chs 4-14, Hosea deals with a
Ephraim _—_ state of things which can only be suh-


sequent to the first great deportation
of Israelites, and therefore belongs to the reigns of
Pekah and Hoshea. The larger part of the nation
being removed, he addresses his utterances no longer
to all Israel, hut to Ephraim, the chief of the remain-
ing tribes. This name he uses no less than 35 t,
though not to the total exclusion of the term
“Tsrael,”’ as in 11 1, “When Israel was a child, then
I loved him,” the whole nation in such cases being
meant. Of the 35 uses of “Ephraim,” the first is,
“Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone’ (4 17),
and the last, ‘Ephraim shall say, What have I to
do any more with idols?” (14 8), showing that, in
the prophet’s estimation, the idolatrous worship of
Jeh, as associated with the golden calves of Dan and
Bethel, lay at the root of the nation’s calamities.
Over this shrunken and weakened kingdom—
corresponding generally with the Samaritan dis-
trict of the NT—Hoshea was placed
4. Hoshea’s as the viceroy of a foreign power. The
Dependent first official year of his governorship
Position was 729, though he may have been
appointed a few months earlier.
Tiglath-pileser III died in 727, so that three years’
tribute was probably paid to Nineveh. There was,
however, a political party in Samaria, which, ground
down by cruel exactions, was for making an alliance
with Egypt, hoping that, in the jealousy and antip-
athies of the two world-powers, it might find some
relief or even a measure of independence. Hosea,
himself a prophet of the north, allows us to see
beneath the surface of court lifeinSamaria. ‘They
eall unto Egypt, they go to Assyria” (7 11), and
again, ‘They make a covenant with Assyria, and
oil is carried into Egypt” (12 1). This political
duplicity from which 1t was the king’s prime duty
to save his people, probably took its
5. His. origin about the time oi Tiglath-
Treasonable pileser’s death in 727. That event
Action either caused or promoted the treason-
able action, and the passage of large
quantities of oil on the southward road was an
object-lesson to be read of all men. On the acces-
sion of Shalmaneser IV—who is the Shalmaneser of
the Bible (2 K 17 3; 18 9)—Hoshea would seem
to have carried, or sent, the annual tribute for 726
to the treasury at Nineveh (2 K 17 3). The text
is not clear as to who was the bearer of this tribute,
but from the statement that Shalmaneser eame up
against him, and Hoshea became his servant, it may
be presumed that the tribute for the first year after
Tiglath-pileser’s death was at first refused, then,
when a military demonstration took place, was
paid, and obedience promised. In such a ease Ho-
shea would be required to attend at his suzerain’s
court and do homage to the sovereign.
This is what probably took place, not without
inquiry into the past. Grave suspicions were thus
aroused as to the loyalty of Hoshea,


6. His and on these being confirmed by the
Final confession or discovery that messen-
Arrest gers had passed to “‘So king of Egypt,”


and the further withholding of the trib-
ute (2 K 17 4), Hoshea was arrested and shut up
in prison. Here he disappears from history. Such
was the ignominious end of a line of kings, not one
of whom had; in all the vicissitudes of two and a


Hospitality
Host of Heaven


quarter centuries, been in harmony with the theo-
cratic spirit, or realized that the true welfare and
diem, of the state lay in the unalloyed worship of
eh.
With Hoshea in his hands, Shalmaneser’s troops
marched, in the spring or summer of 725, to the
completion of Assyria’s work in Pal.
7. Battle of Isaiah has much to say in his 10th and
Beth-arbel 11th chs on the divinely sanctioned
mission of “the Assyrian” and of the
ultimate fate that should befall him for his pride
and cruelty in carrying out his mission. The cam-
paign was not a bloodless one. At Beth-arbel—at
present unidentified—the hostile forces met, with
the result that might have been expected. ‘Shal-
man spoiled Beth-arbel in the day of battle’’ (Hos
10 14). The defeated army took refuge behind the
walls of Samaria, and the siege began. The city
was well placed for purposes of defence, being built
on the summit of a lonely hill, which was Omri’s
reason for moving the capital from Tirzah (1 K 16
24). It was probably during the continuance of the
siege that Isaiah wrote his prophecy, “Woe to the
crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim,” etc
(Isa 28), in which the hill of Samaria with its
coronet of walls is compared to a diadem of flowers
worn in a scene of revelry, which should fade and
die. Micah’s elegy on the fall of Samaria (ch 1) has
the same topographical note, “I will pour down
the stones thereof into the valley, and I will uncover
the foundations thereof” (ver 6).
Shalmaneser’s reign was one of exactly five years,
December, 727 to December, 722, and the city fell
in the lst month of his successor’s


8. Fallof reign. The history of its fall is sum-
Samaria marized in Sargon’s great Khorsabad
in 721 inscription in these words, “Samaria


I besieged, I captured. 27,290 of her
inhabitants I carried away. 50 chariots I collected
from their midst. The rest of their property I
caused to be taken.”

Hoshea’s character is summed up in the qualified
phrase, ‘‘He did evil in the sight of the Lord, yet not
as the kings of Israel that were before
9. Hoshea’s him.” The meaning may be that,
Character while not a high-principled man or of
irreproachable life, he did not give to
the idolatry of Bethel the official sanction and
prominence which each of his 18 predecessors had
done. According to Hos 10 6 the golden calf of
Samaria was to be taken to Assyria, to the shame
of its erstwhile worshippers.
W. Suaw CaupEcotr
HOSPITALITY, hos-pi-tal’i-ti, HOST, hast
(prrotevla, philoxenia, “love of strangers,” £évos,
xénos, “guest,” “friend”; mavboxevs,
1. Among pandochets, ‘innkeeper”): When the
Nomads civilization of a people has advanced
so far that some traveling has become
necessary, but not yet so far that traveling by in-
dividuals is a usual thing, then hospitality is a
virtue indispensable to the life of the people. This
stage of culture was that represented in ancient Pal
and the stage whose customs are still preserved
among thepresent-day Arabs of thedesert. Hospi-
tality is regarded as a right by the traveler, to whom
it never occurs to thank his host as if for a favor.
And hospitality is granted as a duty by the host, who
himself may very soon be dependent on some one
else’s hospitality. But none the less, both in OT
times and today, the granting of that right is sur-
rounded by an etiquette that has made Arabian
hospitality so justly celebrated. The traveler is
made the literal master of the house during his stay;
his host will perform for him the most servile offices,
and will not even sit in his presence without express
request. To the use of the guest is given over all


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1432


that his host possesses, stopping not even short of
the honor of wife or daughter. ‘‘ ‘Be we not all,’
say the poor nomads, ‘guests of Ullah? Has God
given unto them, God’s guest shall partake with
them thereof: if they will not for God render his
own, it should not go well with them’”’ (Doughty,
Arabia Deserta, I, 228). The host is in duty bound
to defend his guest against all comers and to lay
aside any personal hatred—the murderer of a
father is safe as the guest of the son. ;
An exquisite example of the etiquette of hospi-
tality is found in Gen 18 1-8. The very fact that the
three strangers have passed by Abra-

2. Inthe ham’s door gives him the privilege
OT of entertaining them. When he sees
them approaching he runs to beg the
honor of their turning in to him, with oriental cour-
tesy depreciates the feast that he is about to lay
before them as “a morsel of bread,” and stands by
them while they eat. Manoah (Jgs 18 15) is
equally pressing although more_ matter-of-fact,
while Jethro (Ex 2 20) sends out that the stranger
may be brought in. And Job (81 32) repels the
very thought that he could let the sojourner be
unprovided for. The one case where a breach of
hospitality receives praise is that of Jael (Jgs 4-5),
perhaps to be referred to degeneration of customs
in the conflicts with the Canaanites or (perhaps
more plausibly) to literary-critical considerations,
according to which in Jgs 6 Sisera is not represented
as entering Jael’s tent or possibly not as actually
tasting the food, a state of affairs misunderstood in
Jgs 4, written under later circumstances of city life.
(For contrasting opinions see “Jael” in EB and


| HDB.)


It is well to understand that to secure the right
to hospitality it is not necessary, even in modern
times, for the guest to eaé with his
3. The host, still] less to eat salé specifically.
Table-Bond Indeed, guests arriving after sunset
and departing the next morning do
not, as a rule, eat at allin the tent of thehost. It is
sufficient to enter the tent, to grasp a tent-pin, or
even, under certain circumstances, to invoke the
name of a man as host. On the other hand, the
bond of hospitality is certainly strengthened by
eating with one’s host, or the bond may actually be
created by eating food belonging to him, even by
stealth or in an act of theft. Here a quite different
set of motives is at work. The idea here is that of
kinship arising from participation in a common
sacrificial meal, and the modern Arab still terms
the animal killed for his guest the dhabihah or ‘‘sac-
rifice”’ (cf HDB, II, 428). This concept finds its
rather materialistic expression in the theory that
after the processes of digestion are completed (a
time estimated as two nights and the included day),
the bond lapses if it is not renewed. There seem to
be various references in the Bible to some such idea
of a “‘table-bond”’ (Ps 41 9, e.g.), but hardly in con-
nection directly with hospitality. For a discussion
of them see BREap; GuxEsT; SACRIFICE.
In the city, naturally, the exercise of hospitality
was more restricted. Where travel was great,
doubtless commercial provision for the
4. Inthe travelers was made from a very early
City day (cf Lk 10 34 and see INN), and
at all events free hospitality to all
comers would have been unbearably abused. Lot
in Sodom (Gen 19) is the nomad who has preserved
his old ideas, although settled in the city, and who
thinks of the “shadow of his roof” (ver 8) as his
tent. The same is true of the old man in Gibeah
of Jgs 19 16 ff. And the sin of Sodom and of
Gibeah is not that wanderers cannot find hospi-
tality so much as it is that they are unsafe in the
streets at night. Both Lot and “the old man,”


1433


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hospitality
Host of Heaven


however, are firm in their duty and willing to
sacrifice their daughtcrs for the safety of their
guests. (Later ideas as to the position of woman
should not be read back into these narratives.)
However, when the city-dweller Rahab refuses to
surrender her guests (Josh 2), her reason is not
the breach of hospitality involved but her fear of
Jeh (ver 9). When Abraham’s old slave is in
Nahor, and begs a night’s lodging for himself and
his camels, he accompanies the request with a
substantial present, evidently conceived of as pay
for the same (Gen 24 22f). Such also are the
modern conditions; cf Benzinger-Socin in Baede-
ker’s Palestine’, xxxv, who observe that ‘“in-
mates” of private houses ‘are aware that Franks
always pay, and_ therefore receive them gladly.”
None the less, in NT times, if not earlier, and even
at present, a room was set apart in each village for
the use of strangers, whose expenses were borne by
the entire community. Most interpreters consider
that the katélumaof Lk 2 7 was a room of this sort,
but this opinion cannot be regarded as quite certain.
But many of the wealthier city-dwellers still strive
to attain a reputation for hospitality, a zeal that

naturally was found in the ancient world as well.
Christ’s directions to the apostles to “take nothing
for their journey” (Mk 6 8, ete) presupposes that
they were sure of always fading hos-


6. Christ pitality. Indeed, it is assumed that
and Hos- they may even make their own choice
pitality of hosts (Mt 10 11) and may stay


as long as they choose (Lk 10 7). In
this case, however, the claims of the travelers to
hospitality are accentuated by the fact that they are
bearers of good tidings for the people, and it is in
view of this latter fact that hospitality to them
becomes so great a virtue—the ‘‘cup of cold water’’
becomes so highly meritorious because it is given
“in the name of a disciple’ (Mt 10 42; cf ver 41,
and Mk 9 41). Rejection of hospitality to one of
Christ’s “least brethren’ (almost certainly to be
understood as disciples) is equivalent to the rejection
of Christ Himself (Mt 25 43; cf ver 35). It is
not quite clear whether in Mt 10 14 and |!s, simple
refusal of hospitality is the sin in point or refusal
to hear the message or both.
In the Dispersion, the Jew who was traveling
seemed always to be sure of finding entertainment
from the Jews resident in whatever


6. First city he might happen to be passing
Mission- through. The importance of this
aries


fact for the spread of early Christian-
ity is sncalewlable: To be sure, some
of the first missionaries may have bcen men who
were able to bear their own traveling expenses or
who were merchants that taught the new religion
when on business tours. In the case of soldiers or
slaves their opportunity to carry the gospel into
new ficlds came often through the movements of the
army or of their masters. And it was by an ‘‘nfil-
tration’ of this sort, probably, rather than by any
specifie missionary effort that the church of Rome,
at least, was founded. See Romans, EpistLe To
THE. But the ordinary missionary, whether apostle
(in any sense of the word) or evangelist, would have
been helpless if it had not been that he could count
so confidently on the hospitality everywhere. From
this fact comes one reason why St. Paul, for in-
stance, could plan tours of such magnitude with
such assurance: he knew that he would not have
to face any problem of sustenance in a strange city
(Rom 16 23).

As the firat Christian churches were founded, the
exercise of hospitality took on a new aspect, esp.
after the breach with the Jews had begun. Not
only did the traveling Christian look naturally to
his brethren for hospitality, but the individual


churches looked to the traveler for fostering the
sense of the unity of the church throughout the

world. Hospitality became a virtue in-
7. Inthe dispensable to the well-being of the
Churches church—one reason for the emphasis
laid on it (Rom 12 13; 16 1f; He 13
2). Asthe organization of the churches became more
perfected, the exercise of hospitality grew to be an
official duty of the ministry and a reputation for
hospitality was a prerequisite in some cases (1 Tim
3 2; 6 10; Tit 1 8). The exercise of such hos-
pitality must have become burdensome at times
(1 Pet 4 9), and as false teachers began to appear
in the church a new set of problems was created in
discriminating among applicants for hospitality.
2 and 3 Jn reflect-some of the difficulties. ‘or the
later history of hospitality in the church intcresting
matter will be found in the Didache, chs xi, xii,
Apology of Aristides, ch xv, and Lucian’s Death of
Peregrinus, ch xvi. The church certainly preferred
to err by excess of the virtue.

An evaluation of the Bib. directions regarding
hospitality for modern times is extremely difficult
on account of the utterly changed conditions. Be ©
it said at once, esp., that certain well-meant criticism
of modern missionary methods, with their boards,
organized finance, etc, on the basis of Christ’s di-
rections to the Twelve, is a woeful misapplication of
Bib. teaching. The hospitality that an apostle
could count on in his own day is something that the
modern missionary simply cannot expect and some-
thing that it would be arrant folly for him to expect
(Weinel, Die urchristliche und die heutige Mission,
should be read by everyone desirmg to compare
modern missions with the apostolic). In general,
the basis for hospitality has become so altered that
the special virtue has become merged in the larger
field of charitable enterprise of various sorts. The
modern problem nearest related to the old virtue
is the question of providing for the necessities of the
indigent traveler, a distinctly minor problem,
although a very real one, in the general field of
social problems that the modern church has to
study. In so far as the NT exhortations are based
on missionary motives there has been again a merg-
ing into general appeals for missions, perhaps spe-
cialized occasionally as appeals for traveling expense.
The “hospitality’’ of today, by which is meant the
entertainment of friends or relatives, hardly comes
within the Bib. use of the term as denoting a special
virtue.


Litseraturse.—For hospitality in the church, Harnack,
Mission and Expansion of Christianity, I1, ch iv (10).


Burton Scott Easton
HOSTAGE, hos’t&j. See War.

HOST OF HEAVEN (O%AWO NAL, ¢*bha’ ha-
shamayim): The expression is employed in the OT
to denote (1) the stars, frequently as objects of
idolatry (Dt 4.19; 173; 2K 17 16; 21 3.5;
23 4f; Jer 8 2; 19 13; Zeph 1 5), but also as
witnesses in their number, order and splendor, to the
majesty and providential rule and care of Jeh (Isa
34 4; 40 26, “‘calleth them all by name”; 46 12;
Jer 33 22); and (2) the angels (1 K 22 19; 2 Ch
18 18; Neh 9 6; cf Ps 103 21). :

(1) Star-worship seems to have been an entice-
ment to Israel from the first (Dt 4 19; 17 3; Am
5 26; ef Acts 7 42.43), but attained special promi-
nence in the days of the later kings of Judah. The
name of Manassch is particularly connected with it.
This king built altars for ‘all the host of heaven”
in the courts of the temple (2 K 21 3.5). Josiah
destroyed these altars, and cleansed the temple from
the idolatry by putting down the priests and burn-
ing the vessels associated with it (2 K 23 4.5.12).

(2) In the other meaning of the expression, the


Hosts, Lord of
House


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1434


angels are regarded as forming Jeh’s “host” or
army, and He himself is the leader of them—‘‘Jeh
of hosts’’ (Isa 31 4, etc)—though this designation
has a much wider reference. See ANcELs; As-
TRONOMY; Lorp or Hosts; cf Oehler, Theol of OT,
II, 270 ff (ET). JAMES ORR


HOSTS, hésts, LORD OF. See Lorp or Hosts.


HOTHAM, hd’tham, HOTHAN, ho’than (Onn,
hotham, “seal’’):

(1) An Asherite, son of Heber, family of Beriah
(1 Ch 7 32).

(2) An Aroerite, father of two of the mighty
men of David (1 Ch 11 44). AV, following LXX
Xwédv, Chothdn, has, incorrectly, Hothan.


HOTHIR, ho'thir (W104, Aathir, abundance”):
Mentioned in 1 Ch 26 4.28 among the sons of
Heman, and one of those set apart by David for the
musical service of the house of God (cf ver 6).


HOUGH, hok. See Hock.


HOOR, our (ROW, sha’dtha’, NIW, she'a’; Spa,
héra): Hour as a division of the day does not occur
in the OT; the term sh*‘a’ (sha‘dtha’) found in Dnl,
is Aram., and as used there denotes a short period
or point of time of no definite length (Dan 3 6.15;
4 33 [Heb 30]; 5 5). The Gr héra is commonly
used in the NT in the same way, as “that same
hour,” “from that hour,” etc, but it also occurs as
a division of the day, as, “the third hour,” “the
ninth hour,” etc. The Hebrews would seem to have
become acquainted with this division of time through
the Babylonians, but whether before the captivity
we are not certain. The mention of the sun dial of
Ahaz would seem to indicate some such reckoning
of time during the monarchy. See Time.

H. Porter

HOURS OF PRAYER: The Mosaic law did not
regulate the offering of prayer, but fully recognized
its spontaneous character. In what manner or how
far back in Jewish history the sacrificial prayer,
mentioned in Lk 1 10, originated no one knows.
In the days of Christ 1t had evidently become an
institution. But ages before that, stated hours of
prayer were known and religiously observed by all
devout Jews. It evidently belonged to the evolu-
tionary process of Jewish worship, in connec-
tion with the temple-ritual. Devout Jews, living
at Jerus, went to the temple to pray (Lk 18 10;
Acts 31). The pious Jews of the Diaspora
opened their windows ‘toward Jerus’” and prayed
“toward” the place of God’s presence (1 K 8 48;
Dnl 6 10; Ps & 7). The regular hours of prayer,
as we may infer from Ps 56 17 and Dnl 6 10, were
three in number. The first coincided with the
morning sacrifice, at the 3d hour of the morning,
at 9 AM therefore (Acts 2 15). The second was
at the 6th hour, or at noon, and may have coin-
cided with the thanksgiving for the chief meal of
the day, a religious custom apparently universally
observed (Mt 15 36; Acts 27 35). The 3d hour
of prayer coincided with the evening sacrifice, at
the ninth hour (Acts 3 1; 10 30). Thus every day,
as belonging to God, was religiously subdivided, and
regular seasons of prayer were assigned to the devout
believer. Its influence on the development of the
religious spirit must have been incalculable, and it
undoubtedly is, at least in part, the solution of the
riddle of the preservation of the Jewish faith in the
cruel centuries of its bitter persecution. Moham-
medanism borrowed this feature of worship from the
Jews and early Christians, and made it one of the
chief pillars of its faith. Henry E, Dosker


HOUSE, hous (M2, baytth; otkos, ofkos, in classi-
cal Gr generally “an estate,” olkla, otkia, otknpa,
oikéma lit. “habitation’”’], in Acts 12 1, “prison”):

I. Cave Dwes.uines
II. Sronz- and Mup-Bricz-suitt Hovses


1. Details of Plan and Construction
)} Corner-Stone


(5) Hinge
‘8 Lock and Key
7) Threshold
(8) Hearth
(9) Window
(10) Roof
2. Houses of More than One Story
(1) Upper Chambers and Stairs
(2) Palaces and Castles
3. Internal Appearance
(1) Plaster
{2) Paint
(3) Decoration
(4) Cupboards
III. Orner Meanincs
Literature

L. Cave Dwellings.—The earliest permanent habi-
tations of the prehistoric inhabitants of Pal were the
natural caves which abound throughout the country.
As the people increased and grouped themselves
into communities, these abodes were supplemented
by systems of artificial caves which, in some cases,
developed into extensive burrowings of many ad-
joining compartments, having in each system several
entrances. ‘These entrances were usually cut through
the roof down a few steps, or simply dropped to the
floor from the rock surface. Thesinking was shallow
and the headroom low but sufficient for tbe_under-
sized troglodites who were the occupiers. Fig. 1 is
the plan of an elaborate system of cave dwellings
from Gezer, all adjoining and approached by 9 sep-
arate entrances (PHFS, October, 1905).

Hl. Stone- and Mud-Brick-built Houses.—There
are many references to the use of caves as dwellings
in the OT. Lot dwelt with bis two daughters in a
cave (Gen 19 30). Elijah, fleeing from Jezebel,
lodged in a cave (1 K 19 9). The natural suc-
cessor to the cave was the stone-built hut, and just
as the loose field-bowlders and the stones, quarried
from the caves, served their first and most vital
uses in the building of defence walls, so did they
later become material for the first hut. Caves,
during the rainy season, were faulty dwellings, as


‘at the time when protection was most needed, they


were being flooded through the surface openings
which formed their entrances. The rudest cell
built of rough stones in mud and covered with a
roof of brushwood and mud was at first sufficient.
More elaborate plans of several apartments, enter-
ing from what may be called a living-room, followed
as a Matter of course, and these, huddled together,
constituted the homes of the people. Mud-brick
buildings (Job 4 19) of similar plan occur, and to
protect this friable material from the weather, the
walls were sometimes covered with a casing of
stone slabs, as at Lachish. (See Bliss, A Mound
of Many Cities.) Generally speaking, this rude
type of building prevailed, although, in some of the
larger buildings, square dressed and jointed stones
were used. There is little or no sign of improve-
ment until the period of the Hellenistic influence,
and even then the improvement was slight, so far
as the homes of the common people were concerned.
Figs. 2 and 8 are the isometric sketch and plan
showing construction of a typical small house from
, Gezer. The house is protected and

1. Details approached from the street by an open
of Plan and court, on one side of which is a cov-
Con- ered way. The doors enter into a
struction —_ living-room from which the two very
small inner private rooms, bedcham-

bers, are reached. Builders varied the plan to suit


1435


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bests, Lord of


requirements, but in the main, this plan may be
taken as typical. When members of a family mar-
ried, extra accommodation was required. Additions
were made as well as could be arranged on the
cramped site, and in consequence, plans often be-
came such a meaningless jumble that it is impossible
to identify the respective limits of adjoining houses.
The forecourt was absorbed and crushed out of
existence, so that in many of the plans recovered
the arrangement shown in Figs. 2 and 3 is lost.
Fig. 4 shows the elevation of the house from the
court.

(1) Corner-stone (HBB, pinnah, Isa 28 16;
Jer 51 26; AlWos dxpoywviaios, Lithos akrogé-
niatos, 1 Pet 2 6).—In the construction of
rude bowlder walls, more esp. on a sloping
site, as can be seen today in the highlands
of Scotland and Wales, a large projecting
bowlder was built into the lower angle-course.


It tied together the
3 return angles and was
; one of the few bond-
J oe) ¥ stones used in the
Y A building. This most
, fe necessary support claimed
ce chief importance and as
such assumed a figurative
meaning frequently used (Isa 28 16; 1 Pet 2 6;
see CoRNER-STONE). The importance given to the
laying of a sure foundation is further emphasized
by the dedication rites in common practice, evi-
dence of which has been found on various sites
in Pal (see Excavations of Gezer). The discovery
of human remains placed diagonally below the
foundations of the returning angle of the house
gives proof of the exercise of dedication rites both
before and after the conquest. Hiel sacrificed his
firstborn to the foundations of Jericho _and_ his
youngest son to the gates thereof (1 K 16 34).
But this was in a great cause compared with a simi-
lar sacrifice to a private dwelling. The latter mani-
fests a respect scarcely borne out by the miserable
nature of the houses so dedicated. At the same
time, it gives proof of the frequent collapse of
structures which the winter rains made inevitable
and at which superstition trembled. The fear of
pending disaster to the man who failed to make
his sacrifice is recorded in Dt 20 5: “What man
is there that hath built a new house, and hath not
dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest
he die in the battle.” See illustration, p. 550.
(2) Floor (VPP, karka‘)—When houses were
built on the rock outcrop, the floor was roughly
leveled on the rock surface, but it is more common


aN


reer


i


YY Fic. 1.—Pran or ras Cave Dwe.iines at GEZER.


to find floors of beaten clay similar to the native
floor of the present day. Stone slabs were sparingly
used, and only appear in the hcuses of the great.


FI w roa A


It is unlikely
that wood was
ff much used as a
2” flooring to houses, al-
though Solomon used
it for his temple floor
(1 K 6 18). .

(3) Gutter (DE,
cinnor).—The “gutter”
in 28 6 8 AV is ob-
viously difficult to as-
sociate with the gutter
of a house, except in so
far as it may have a
similar meaning to the
water duct or ‘‘water
course” (RV) leading to the private cistern, which
formed part of the plan. Remains of open channels
for this purpose have been found of rough stones set
in clay, sometimes leading through a silt pit into


the cistern.
(4) Door (M21, deleth, MDD , pethah; Pipa, thiira).


a?


—Doorways were simple, square, entering openings
in the wall with a stone or wood lintel (mashképh,
Ex 12 22.23; ’ayil, 1 K 6 31) and a stone thresh-
old raised slightly above the floor.


It is easy to


wy


NG: PORTIONS OF ROOF ARE REMOYED TO SHOW
INTERIOR ANO OOF CONSTRUCTION


Fig. 2.—Isemetric Sketch ef a House at Gezer.


imagine the earliest wooden door as a simple mov-
able boarded cover with back bars, fixed vertically
by a movable bar slipped into sockets in the stone
jambs. Doorposts (saph, Ezk 41 16) appear to
have been in use, but, until locks were introduced,
it is difficult to imagine a reason for them. Posts,
when introduced, were probably let into the stone


House


at top and bottom, and, unlike our present door
frame, had no head-piece. When no wood was
used, the stone jambs of the opening constituted


FORE COURT


&
t
4
&
Y
>
se)
U


Fig. 3.—Plan of House.


the doorposts. To the present day the post retains
its function as commanded in Dt 6 9; 11 20, and
in it is fitted a small case containing a parchment
on which is written the exhortation to obedience.
(5) Hinge (IB, podth, 1K 7 50; WX, gir,
Prov 26 14).—Specimens of sill and head sockets
of stone have been discovered which suggest the


Mune a


Wade
S


—— =


Fig. 4.—Elevation of House from Court.


use of the pivot hinge, the elongated swinging stile
of the door being let into the sockets at top and
bottom. A more advanced form of construction
was necessary to this type of door than in the pre-
vious instance, and some little skill was required to
brace it so that it would hold together. The con-
struction of doors and windows is an interesting
question, as it is in these two details that the joinery


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1436


craft first claimed development.
cation, however, of anything of the nature of ad-


vancement, and it seems probable that there was
r
Al


none.
(6) Lock and key
Za


(“lock,”? man‘al, Neh
3 3ff; Cant 5 5;
“key,” maphiéh, Jgs
3 25; fig. Isa 22 22;
Kiels, kleis, Mt 16
19, etc).—In later
Hellenic times a sort
of primitive lock
and key appeared,
similar to the Arab.
type. See Excava-
tions of Gezer, I, 197,
and illustration in art. Kuy. ;

(7) Threshold (AO , saph, 1 K 14 17; Ezk 40 6ff;
{OD’, miphian, 1 8 6 4.5; Ezk 9 3, etc).—Next
to the corner-stone, the threshold was specially
sacred, and in many instances foundation-sacrifices
have been found buried under the threshold. In
later times, when the Hebrews became weaned of
this unholy practice, the rite remained with the
substitution of a lamp inclosed between two bowls
as a symbol of the life. See Guzzr.

(8) Hearth (MN, ’ah, Jer 36 22.23, RV “brazier’’;
“2, kiyyor)—The references in the OT and the
frequent discovery of hearths make it clear that so
much provision for heating had been made. It is un-
likely, however, that chimneys were provided. The
smoke from the wood or charcoal fuel was allowed
to find its way through the door and windows and
the many interstices occurring in workmanship of
the worst possible description. The “chimney”
referred to (Hos 13 3) is a doubtful tr. The “fire
in the brazier’’ (Jer 36 22 RV) which burned before
the king of Judah in his ‘winter house” was prob-
ably of charcoal. The modern natives, during the
cold season, huddle around and warm their hands
at a tiny glow in much the same way as their an-
cient predecessors. The use of cow and camel
dung for baking-oven (annir) fires appears to have
continued from the earliest time to the present day
(Ezk 4 15). See also Hearra.


Pag ey


Si


Fig. 5.—Window.


ss nt Vie
a ee


Fig. 6.—Living-Room of House.


(9) Window (8vpls, thuris, Acts 209; 2 Cor
11 33).—It would appear that windows were often
simple openings in the wall which were furnished
with some method of closing, such as is suggested


.


14387


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


House


in Fig. 5, which, it may be conjectured, was some-
what the same as the primitive door previously
mentioned. The window of the ark (hallan, Gen 8
6), the references in Gen 26 8; Josh 2 15, and the
window from which Jezebel looked (2 K 9 30),
were presumably of the casement class. Ahaziah
fell through a lattice (s°bhakhah) in the same palace,
and the same word is used for the “networks” (1 K
7 41) “covering the bowls of the capitals,” and
in Cant 2 9, “through the lattice” (hdrakktm). It
would appear, therefore, that some variety of treat-
ment existed, and that the simple window opening
with casement and the opening filled in with a
lattice or grill were distinct. Windows were small,
and, according to the Mish, were kept not less than


the country; see Excavations of Gezer, I, 190;
PEFS, Warren’s letters, 46. ‘They let him down
through the tiles [«épapos, kéramos] with his
couch into the midst before Jesus” (Lk 5 19) refers
to the breaking through of a roof similar to this.
The roof (“housetop,” gagh; Saye, dima) was an
important part of every house and was subjected
tomany uses. It was used for worship (2 K 23 12;
Jer 19 13; 32 29; Zeph 15; Acts 10 9). Ah-
salom spread his tent on the “top of the house”
(2 8 16 22). In the Feast of the Tabernacles
temporary. booths (sukkah) were erected on the
housetops. The people, as is their habit today,


. gathered together on the roof as a common meeting-


place on high days and holidays (Jgs 16 27). The


Mopern ARAB VILLAOE.


6 ft. from floor to sill. The lattice was open, with-
out glass filling, and in this connection there is the
interesting figurative reference in Isa 54 12 AV,
“windows of agates,” tr? in RV “pinnacles of
rubies.” Heaven is spoken of as having “‘windows”
Cdrubbah) for rain (Gen 7 11; 8 2; 2 K 7 2, etc).

(10) Roofs (43, gagh; oréyn, siég2)—These were
flat, and their construction is illustrated in Figs. 2
and 6. Cf ‘The beams of our house are cedars, and
our rafters are firs’ (Cant 117). To get over the
difficulty of the larger spans, a common practice
was to introduce a main beam (kurdh) carried on the
walls and strengthened by one or more interme-
diate posts let into stone sockets laid on the floor.
Smaller timbers as joists (“rafters,” rdadhit) were
spaced out and covered in turn with brushwood;
the final covering, being of mud mixed with chopped
straw, was beaten and rolled. A tiny stone roller
is found on every modern native roof, and is used
to roll the mud into greater solidity every year
on the advent of the first rains. Similar rollers have
been found among the ancient remains throughout


wild wranglings which can be heard in any modern
native village, resulting in vile accusations and ex-
posure of family secrets hurled from the housetops
of the conflicting parties, illustrate the passage,
“And what ye have spoken in the ear in the inner
chambers shall be proclaimed upon the housetops”

(Lk 12 3).
(1) Upper chambers and stairs. —It is certain that
there were upper chambers (‘dliyah; twepdov,
huperbon, Acts 9 37, etc) to some of


2. Houses the houses. Ahaziah was fatally in-
of More jured by falling from the window of
than One his palace, and a somewhat similar fate


befell his mother, Jezebel (2 K 1 2;
9 33). The escape of the spies from
the house on the wall at Jericho (Josh 2 15) and
that of Paul from Damascus (2 Cor 11 38) give sub-
stantial evidence of window openings at a consider-
able height. Elijah carried the son of the widow of
Zarephath “up into the chamber.”’ The Last Supper
was held in an upper chamber (Mk 14 15). Some
sort of stairs (ma‘dlah) of stone or wood must have


Story


Hei THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 1438
existed, and the lack of the remains of stone steps | according to its attitude (Mt 10 13). A divided


suggests that they were wood steps, probably in the
form of ladders.

(2) Palaces and castles Carmén, birah, hékhal;
athy, aulé, mwapepBodh, parembolé)-—These were
part of every city and were more elaborate in plan,
raised in all probability to some considerable height.
The Can. castle discovered by Macalister at Gezer
shows a building of enormously thick walls and
smallrooms. Reisner has unearthed Ahab’s palace
at Samaria, revealing a plan of considerable area.
Solomon’s palace is detailed in 1 K 7 (see TemMPLE).
In this class may also be included the megalithic
fortified residences with the beehive guard towers of
an earlier date, described by Dr. Mackenzie (PE F, I).

Walls were plastered (Lev 14 43.48), and small
fragments of painted (Jer 22 14) plaster discovered

from time to time show that some at-
3. Internal tempt at mural decoration was made,
Appear- usually in the form of crudely painted
ance line ornament. Walls were recessed

here and there into various forms of
cupboards (q.v.) at various levels. The smaller
cuttings in the wall were probably for lamps, and
in the larger and deeper recesses bedmats may have
been kept and garments stored. Fig. 6 shows the
living-room of an ordinary house, as previously
described.

fl. Other Meanings.—The word has often the
sense of “household,” and this term is frequently
substituted in RV for “house” of AV (e.g. Ex 12 3;
2K711; 105; 15 5; Isa 363; 1 Corl 11;
1 Tim 5 14); in certain cases for phrases with
‘house’ RV has “at home’ (Acts 2 46; 5 42).
See Houss or Gop; HovusrHo.p.


Lireraturs.—Macalister, Excavations at Gezer; PEFS;
Sellin, Excavations at Taanach; Schumacher, Excavations
at Tell Mutesellim; Bliss, Mound of Many Cities; arts. in
Dictionaries and Encyclopaedias.

Arcu. C. Dickiz


HOUSE, FATHER’S. See Faruer’s House.
HOUSE, GARDEN. See Garpren Hovss.


HOUSE OF GOD: In Gen 28 17.22=BerTHen
(q.v.).. In Jgs, 1 and 2 Ch, Ezr, Neh, Ps, ete (béth
ha-élohim), a designation of the sanctuary = “house
of Jeh”’ (of the tabernacle, Jgs 18 31; 20 18.26 AV;
of the temple, 1 Ch 9 11; 24 5AV; 2 Ch 5 14; Ps
42 4; Isa 2 3, ete; of the 2d temple, Ezr 6 8.15;
Neh 6 10; 13 11; cf Mt 12 4). Spiritually, in
the NT, the “house of God’ (otkos theots) is
the church .or community of believers (1 Tim 3
15; He 10 21; 1 Pet 417; ef 1 Cor 3 9.16.17;
1 Pet 2 5).


HOUSEHOLD, hous’héld: Three words are
usually found in the Bible where the family is indi-
cated. These three are the Heb word bayiih and
the Gr words otkia and otkos. The unit of the na-
tional life of Israel, from the very beginning, was
found in the family. In the old patriarchal days
each family was complete within itself, the oldest
living sire being the unquestioned head of the whole,
possessed of almost arbitrary powers. The house
and the household are practically synonymous.
God had ealled Abraham “that he might command
his children and household after him’’ (Gen 18 19).
The Passover-lamb was to be eaten by the “‘house-
hold”? (Ex 12 3). The “households” of the rebels
in the camp of Israel shared their doom (Nu 16 31-
33; Dt 11 6). David’s household shares his humil-
iation (2 8 15 16); the children everywhere in the
OT are the bearers of the sins of the fathers. Hu-
man life is not a conglomerate of individuals; the
family is its center and unit.

Nor is it different in the NT. The curse and the
blessing of the apostles are to abide on a house,


house falls (Mk 3 25). The household believes
with the head thereof (Jn 4 53; Acts 16 15.34).
Thus the households became the nuclei for the early
life of the church, e.g. the house of Prisca and
Aquila at Rome (Rom 16 5), of Stephanas (1 Cor
16 15), of Onesiphorus (2 Tim 1 16), etc. No
wonder that the early church made so much of the
family life. And in the midst of all our modern,
rampant individualism, the family is still the throb-
bing heart of the church as well as of the nation.
Henry E. Doskxer

HOUSEHOLD, CAESAR’S. See Cazsar’s

HovusEHOoLp.


HOUSEHOLDER, hous’hél-dér (olxoSeonérys,
otkodespétés): The word occurs in Mt 13 27.52;
20 1; 21 33, for the master or owner of*a_“house-
hold,” i.e. of servants (dowiloi). The Gr word
emphasizes the authority of the master.


HOUSETOP, hous’top. See House.


HOW: Represents various Heb and Gr words,
interrogative, interjectional and relative. Its dif-
ferent uses refer to (1) the manner or way, e.g. Gen
44 34, “How shall I go up to my father?” (ékh); Mt
6 28, “how they grow” (pés); 1 Cor 15 35, “How
are the dead raised?’’; (2) degree, extent, frequently,
“how great” (Dnl 4 3, mah; Mk 5 19, hésos, “how
much”); “how many” .(Mt 27 13, pésos); “how
much” (Acts 9 13, hesos); “how much more” (Mt
7 11, posos; 1S 14 30, ’aph kt); “how oft’’ (Ps 78
40, kammah; Mt 18 21, posdkis); “how long’’ (Job
7:19, kammah; Mt 17 17, héds péte), etc; (8) the
reason, wherefore, etc (Mt 18 12; Lk 2 49, tis);
(4) means—by what means? (Jn 3 4.9, pds); (5) cause
(Jn 12 34; Acts 2 8; 4 21, pds); (6) condition, in
what state, ete (Lk 23 55, hds; Acts 15 36, pos;
Eph 6 21, tis); “how” is sometimes used to empha-
size a statement or exclamation (2 S 1 19.25.27,
“How are the mighty fallen!’’); “how” is also used
for ‘‘that’’ (Gen 30 29, ’éh 'dsher, frequently “how
that”; Ex 9 29, ki most frequently, in the NT,
ee 12 5; 16 12.21; Acts 7 25; Rom 7 1, ete,
in :


V has ‘‘wherefore" for ‘‘how'’ (Gen 38 29, m
se i 12 6; Joh 22


what" Gg

26), O1 13_5); has ‘‘how that"

QS 2 22); ‘that’’ (1 Ch 18 9; Lk 1 58; Gal 4 13:

Jas 2 22; Rey’2 2); has “that even’ for “how that’t

(He 12 17) "What is this?" for ‘‘How is it that?”

(Lk 16 2); omits ‘‘ Howisit?"’ (Mk 2 16, different text):
215!


why 9 28;
‘‘when"’ (Joh 37


_ “How” in compounds gives us Howbeit (how be
it). It is the tr of ’alam, “but,” “truly,” “yet”
(Jgs 18 29); of ’akh, “certainly,” “only” (1°S 8
9); of ’ephes, “‘moreover,’’ ete (28 12 14); of
ken, “so,” “thus” (2 Ch 32 31); of rak, “only,”
“surely,” “nevertheless” (1K 11 13); of alld
“but,” ete (In 7 27; Acts 7 48; 1 Cor 8 7, etc):
of dé, “but,” ete Jn 6 23); of méntoi (In 7 13
AV); many other instances.

go Ce een but” (2 K 12 13,


19),
(Joh 30 24), ‘now’ (J; 1 us Hy
“nay, did” (He 3 1a Uy ed ee GE Oor ta 2h),


1439 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bouse, Father's
ber eae eee to ee for aise" qlev 29 21-80) 22 HUMAN SACRIFICE. See Sacririce, Human.
28; 1K 2243; Mk 14 36:


“ nevertheless” (Nu 13 :
Handing’ Gosh 29 19; Li, 10 20 ERY, “noverthelose™
ARV; Phil 414) for “nay” (Rom 77).
Howsoever (in what manner soever, although,
however) is the tr of kG? ’dsher, ‘‘all that which,” etc
(Zeph 3 7, “howsoever I punished them,” RV “ac-
cording to all that J have appointed concerning
her,” m “howsoever I have punished her’; ERV
omits “have’”); of rak, “only,” “surely,” “never-
theless” (Jgs 19 20); of yhi-mah, “et be what”
(28°18 22.28, RV “but come what may”); in 2 S
24 3 “how” and “soever” are separated (kahém),
“how many soever they may be,’’ lit. “as they and
as they.” W. L. WaLxer


HOZATI, ho’za-i TN, hézay, or as it stands at the
close of the verse in question, 2,Ch 33 19, "TiN,
hézdy; LXX rév dépdvrev, tén hordntén; Vulg
“Hozai”’ j AV the seers; AVm ‘Hosai’; ARV
“Hozai,”” ARVm “the seers.’ LXX not improb-
ably reads O° , ha-hdzim, as in ver 18; an easy
error, since there we find D°FAT WAT), we-dhibheré
ha-hdzim, ‘the words of the seers,’ and here “1
“Tn, dibheré hozay, ‘the words of Hozai.” Kittel,
following Budde, conjectures as the original read-
ing VT, hdzayw, “his [Manasseh’s] seers”): A his-
toriographer of Manasseh, king of Judah. Thought
by many of the Jews, incorrectly, to be the prophet
Isaiah, who, as we learn from 2 Ch 26 22, was his-
toriographer of a preceding king, Uzziah. This
“History of Hozai” fee not come down to us. The
prayer of Manasseh, mentioned in 33 121.18 f and
included in this history, suggested the apocryphal
book, ‘The Prayer of Manasses,” written, probably,
in the 1st cent. BC. See ApocrypHa.

J. Gray McALLIsteR

HUCKSTER, huk’stér: A retailer of small wares,
provisions, or the like; a peddler. “A huckster
shall not be acquitted of sin’’ (Sir 26 29). Neither
a merchant nor a huckster is without sin.


HUKKOK, huk’ok (Ppl, hukkdk): A town on
the border of Naphtali named with Aznoth-tabor
(Josh 19 34). It is _ usuall identified with the
village of yakuk, which stands on the W. of Wady
el--Amid, to the N.W. of Gennesaret, about 4 miles
from the sea. This would fall on the boundary of
Zebulun and Naphtali, between Tabor and Han-
nathon (Josh 19 14). The identification may be
correct; but it seems too far from Tabor.


HUKOK, hi’kok. See HaixaTs.


HUL, hul oan, hil): The name of one of the
“sons of Aram” in the list of nations descended
from Noah, but a people of uncertain identity and
location (Gen 10 23; 1 Ch 1 17).


HULDAH, hul’da (ator , huldah, “weasel”;
"Oba, Hélda): A prophetess who lived in Jerus
during the reign of Josiah. She was the wife of
Shallum, keeper of the wardrobe, and resided in the
“Mishneh” or second part or quarter of Jerus (lo-
cation unknown). Cheyne says it should read,
“She was sitting in the upper part of the gate of the
Old City,” i.e. in a public central place ready to
receive any who wished to inquire of Jeh. He gives
no reason for such a change of text. The standing
and reputation of Huldah in the city are attested
by the fact that she was consulted when the Book
of the Law was discovered. The king, high priest,
counsellors, etc, appealed to her rather than to
Jeremiah, and her word was accepted by all as the
word of Jeh (2 K 22 14-20; 2 Ch 34 22-29).

J. J. REEVE


HUMILIATION, hi-mil-i-a’shun, OF CHRIST
(Acts 8 33; Phil 2 8). See Kunosrs; Person or
Curist.


HUMILITY, hi-mil’i-ti (1939, ‘dndwah; tare-
vodpocivn, iapeinophrosiing):


(1) The noun occurs in the OT only In Prov 15 33;
18 12; 22 4, but the adj. '‘humble" appears frequentl.
as the tr of ‘dnt, ‘dnaw, shaphal, meaning also ‘‘ poor,”
‘afflicted’; the vb., as the tr of ‘dnah, ‘to afflict,”’ ‘‘to
humble," and of kana‘, ‘‘to be or become humbled";
cana’, ‘‘to belowly,”’ occurs in Mic 6 8. For ‘‘humble”’


& 912; 10 12) RV bas ‘‘poor’; Ps 10 17; 34 2;
32, ‘‘meek"’; for ‘‘humbled" (Ps 35 13), ‘“aficted"!
Usa 2 11; 10 33), “brought low''; for ‘‘He humbleth


himself” ce 29) “is brought low,’’ m “bumbleth
himself’; Ps 10 10, “‘boweth down"; tapeinophrosune
is trd “humility ’’ (Col 2 18.23; 1 Pet § 5); in several
other places it is tr4‘‘lowlIness"’ and ‘‘lowliness of mind'';
tapeinés is trd ‘‘bumble” (Jas 4 6; 1 Pet 6 5; else-
where “lowly,’’ otc; 1 Pet 3 8, tapeinédphrén), RV
“bumble-minded""; tapeindé, ‘to humble,"’ occurs fre-
quently (Mt 18 4; 23 12, etc); tapetnésis is ‘‘ bumil-
iation™ (Acts 8 33); for ‘‘vile body” (Phil 3 21) RV
gives ‘‘body of our humiliation.”

_ (2) @) Inthe OT as well as in the NT; humility
is an essential characteristic of true piety, or of the
man who is right with God. God humbles men in
order to bring them to Himself (Dt 8 2.3, etc), and
it is when men humble themselves before Him that
they are accepted (1 K 21 29, 2 Ch 7 14, etc);
to “walk humbly with thy God” completes the Di-
vine requirements (Mic 6 8). In Ps 18 35 (28
22 36) the quality is ascribed to God Himself,
“Thy gentleness [or condescension] hath made me
great.’ Of “him that hath his seat on high” it is
gaid, ‘“‘[He] humbleth [shaphél] himself to behold the
things that are in heaven and in the earth” (Ps 113
6). It is in the humble heart that “the high and
lofty One, .. . . whose name is Holy” dwells (Isa
67 15; cf 66 2).

(b) The word tapeinophrosuné_is not found in
classical Gr (Lightfoot); in the NT (with the ex-
ception of 1 Pet 5 5) it is Pauline. In Gr pre-
Christian writers tapeines is, with a few exceptions
in Plato and Platonic writers, used in a bad or
inferior sense—as denoting something evil or un-
worthy. The prominence it gained in Christian
thought indicates the new conception of man in
relation to God, to himself, and to his fellows, which
is due to Christianity. It by no means implies
slavishness or servility; nor is it inconsistent with
a right estimate of oneself, one’s gifts and calling of
God, or with proper self-assertion when called for.
But the habitual frame of mind of a child of God
is that of one who feels not only that he owes all
his natural gifts, etc, to God, but that he has been
the object of undeserved redeeming love, and who
regards himself as being not his own, but God’s in
Christ. He cannoé exalt himself, for he knows that
he has nothing of himself. The humble mind is
thus at the root of all other graces and virtues.
Self-exaltation spoils everything. There can be no
real love without humility. ‘Love,’ said Paul,
“Vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up” (1 Cor 13
4). As Augustine said, humility is first, second and
third in Christianity. :

(c) Jesus not only strongly impressed His disci-
ples with the need of humility, but was in Himself
its: supreme example. He described Himself as
‘meek and lowly [tapeines] in heart” (Mt 11 29).
The first of the Beatitudes was to “the poor in
spirit”? (Mt 5 3), and it was “the meek’? who
should “inherit the earth.’ Humility is the way
to true greatness: he who should “humble himself
as this little child” should be “the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven”; “Whosoever shall exalt him-
self shall be humbled; and whosoever shall humble
himself shall be exalted” (Mt 18 4; 23 12; Lk


Humps
Hur


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1440


14 11; 18 14). To the humble mind truth is re-
vealed (Mt II 25; Lk 10 21). Jesus set a touch-
ing example of humility in His washing His disci-
ples’ feet (Jn 13 1-17).

(d) St. Paul, therefore, makes an earnest appeal
to Christians (Phil 2 1-11) that they should cherish
and manifest the Spirit of their Lord’s humility—
‘én lowliness of mind each counting other better
than himself,” and adduces the supreme example of
the self-emptying (kéndsis) of Christ: “Have this
mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus,’’ ete.
The rendering of heautén ekéndsen (Phil 2 7 AV) by
“he humbled himself’? has given rise to the desig-
nation of the Incarnation as ‘‘the Humiliation of
Christ.”

(e) There is a false humility which Paul warns
against, a self-sought, “voluntary humility” (Col
2 18.23). This still exists in many forms, and has
to be guarded against. It is not genuine humility
when we humble ourselves with the feeling that we
are greater than others, but only when we do not
think of self at all. It is not alone the sense of sin
that should create the humble spirit: Jesus had no
sin. It belongs not merely to the creature, but even
to a son in relation to God. There may be much
self-satisfaction where sinfulness is confessed. We
may be proud of our humility. It is necessary also
always to beware of ‘‘the pride that apes humility.”

W. L. WaLkER

HUMPS, humps: Appears in Isa 30 6.in ARV

for “bunches” in AV.


HUMTAH, hum’ta (TON, humtdh): An un-
identified place mentioned between Aphekah and
Hebron in the mountain of Judah (Josh 15 54).


HUNDRED, hun’dred (TN, mé’ah; tardy,
hekatén). See NumpBer.


HUNGER, hun’gér (A99, ra‘abh; Aupds, limds
(subs.), wewwdw, peindd (vb.): (1) The desire for
food, a physiological sensation associated with
emptiness of the stomach, and dependent on some
state of the mucous membrane; (2) starvation as
the effect of want of food, as Ex 16 3; Isa 49 10;
(3) to feel the craving for food as Dt 8 3; when
used to indicate the condition duc to general scarcity
of food as Jer 38 9; Ezk 34 29 it is replaced in RV
by “famine.” The word is used to express the
poverty which follows idleness and sloth (Prov 19
15). The absence of this condition is given as one
of the charactcristics of the future state of happi-
ness (Isa 49 10; Ezk 34 29; Rev 7 16). Meta-
phorically the passionate striving for moral and
spiritual rectitude is called hungering and thirsting
after righteousness (Mt 5 6); and the satisfaction
of the soul which receives Christ is described as a
state in which ‘he shall not hunger” (Jn 6 35).

On two occasions it is said of Our Lord that He
hungered (Mt 21 18; Lk 4 2); 9 t the old Eng.
expression ‘‘an hungred”’ is used, the ‘‘an’”’ being a
prefix which indicates that the condition is being
continued (Mt 12 1.3; 26 35.37.42.44; Mk 2 25;
Lk 6 3 AV). In Mt 42 AV, “an hungred’’ has
been changed to “hungered” in RV. “Hard be-
stead and hungry” in Isa 8 21 means bested
(that is, placed) in a condition of hardship, “sore
distressed,’”” ARV. The word occurs in Spenser,
“Thus ill bestedd and fearful more of shame’’ (I,
i, 24). The reference of the aggravation of the
sensation of hunger when one who is starving
awakes from a dream of food (Isa 29 8) is graphi-
cally illustrated by the expcrience of the antarctic
voyager (Shackleton, Heart of the Antarctic, II, 9).

ALEX. MAcauisTER

HUNTING, hunt’ing (YX, cayidh): The hunting

of wild animals for sport, or for the defence of men


and flocks, or for food, was common in Western
Asia and Egypt, esp. in early times. Some of the
Egyp and Assyr kings were great hunters in the
first sense, for example Amenhotep III (1411-1375
BC), “a lion-hunting and bull-baiting Pharaoh,”
who boasted of having slain 76 bulls in the course
of one expedition, and of having killed at one time
or other 102 lions; and the Assyrian conqueror,
Tiglath-pileser I (¢c 1100 BC), who claimed 4 wil
bulls, 14 elephants and 920 lions as the trophies of
his skill and courage.
The Bib. prototype of these heroes of war and
the chase is Nimrod, ‘a mighty hunter before Jeh”’
(Gen 10 9), that is perhaps “a hunter
1, Nimrod who had no equal,” a figure not yet
and His clearly identifiable with any historical
Like or mythical character in the Assyro-
Bab monuments, but possibly the
Gilgamesh of the great epic, who may be the hero
represented on seals and reliefs as victorious over
the lion (Skinner, “Gen,” JCC, 208). We are re-
minded also of Samson’s exploit at Timnah (Jgs
14 5 f), but this, like David’s encounter with the lion
and the bear (1 S 17 34f) and Benaiah’s struggle
with a lion in a pit on a snowy day (2 8 23 20),
was an occasional incident and scarcely comes
under the category of hunting. There is no evi-
dence that hunting for sport was ever practised by
the kings of Judah and Israel. Not until the time
of Herod the Great, who had a hunting establish-
ment and was a great hunter of boars, stags, and wild
asses (Jos, BJ, I, xxi, 13), mastering as many as 40
beasts in one day, do we find a ruler of Pal indulging
in this pastime.
Hunting, however, for the two other purposes
mentioned above was probably as frequent among
the Israelites, even after they had
2. Hunting ceased to be nomads, as among their
in the OT neighbors. We know indeed of only
two personal examples, both in the
patriarchal period and both outside the direct line
of Israelitish descent: Esau (Gen 25 27 ff) and
Ishmael (Gen 21 20); but there are several refer-
ences and many figurative allusions to the pursuit
and its methods and instruments. Hunting (inclu-
sive of fowling) is mentioned in the Pent in the regu-
lation about pouring out the blood and covering it
with dust (Lev 17 13); and there is a general
reference in the proverb (Prov 12 27): “The sloth-
ful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting.”
The hunting of the lion is assumed in Ezekiel’s
allegory of the lioness and her two whelps (Ezk 19
1-9; cf Job 10 16); of the antelope or oryx (Dt
14 5; Isa 51 20); of the roe (Prov 6 5); of the
pees in the mountains (1 8 26 20), and of
irds in general in many passages. Hunting is
probably implied in the statement about the pro-
vision of harts, gazelles and rocbucks for Solomon’s
kitchen (1 K 4 23), and to some extent in the refer-
ence to the den of lions in Babylon (Dnl 6 7 ff).
The weapons most frequently employed by hunt-
ers seem to have been bows and arrows. Isaac
(Gen 27 3) commands Esau to take
3. Methods his bow and quiver and procure him
of Hunters venison or game (ef also Isa 7 24; Job
41 28). This method is amply illus-
trated by the monuments. Ashur-nazir-pal ITI (885-
860 BC) and Darius (¢ 500 BC), for example, are
depicted shooting at lions from the chariot. Use
was also made of the sword, the spear, the dart or
javelin, the sling and the club (Job 41 26.28 , where
the application of these weapons to hunting is im-
plied). The larger animals were sometimes caught
in a pit. The classical reference is in Ezekiel’s
allegory, ‘He was taken in their pit’”’ (shahath, Ezk
19 4.8; cf also Isa 24 17f; Jer 48 43f; Ps 36 7,
etc). Thedetails of this mode of capture as practised


1441


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Humps
Hur


at the present day, and probably in ancient times,
are described by Tristram in his Natural History of
the Bible (118 f). A more elaborate method is de-
scribed by Maspero in Lectures historiques (285).


Assyrian Lion Hunt.


To make the pit-capture more effective, nets werc
also employed: “They spread their net over him”
(Ezk 19 8; cf Ps 35 7). When caught, the lion
was sometimes placed in a large wooden cage (Ezk
19 9, siighar, the Assyr shigdru; for the word and
the thing cf SBOT, “zk,” Eng., 132; Heb, 71).
The lion (or any other large animal) was led about
by a ring or hook (h4&h) inserted in the jaws or nose
(2 K 19 28=Isa 37 29; Ezk 19 4.9; 29 4; 38 4).
From wild animals the hrutal Assyrians transferred
the custom to their human captives, as the Israel-
ites were well aware (2 Ch 33 11 RVm, Heb ha;
for monumental illustrations ef SBOT, ‘“Ezk,”’
Eng., 132f). Nets were also used for other animals
such as the oryx or antelope (Isa 51 20). The
Egyp and Assyr monuments show that dogs were
employed in hunting in the ancient East, and it is
not improbable that they were put to this service
by the Hebrews also, but there is no clear Bib.
evidence, as “greyhound” in Prov 30 31 is a ques-
tionable rendering. Jos indeed (Ani, IV, viu, 9)
mentions the hunting dog in a law ascribed to
Moses, but the value of the allusion is uncertain.
The hunting of birds or fowling is so often referred or
alluded to that it must have been very widely practised
ef Ps 913; 1247; Prov 1 17; 5;
ceel 9 12; Am 8 5, etc). The only bird
specifically mentioned is the partridge,
said to be hunted on the mountains (1 S
26 20). The method of hunting is sup-
posed by Tristram (NHB, 225) to he that
still prevalent—continual pursuit until the
creature is struck down by sticks thrown along the
ground—but the interpretation is uncertain. Birds were
generally caught by snares or traps. Two passages are
peculiarly instructive on this point: Job 18 8-10, where
six words are used for such contrivances, represented
respectively by ‘‘net,” ‘‘toils,” ‘‘gin,”’ ‘‘snare,’’ ‘‘noose,’”


4. Fowlers
and Their
Snares


Hunting Deer in an Enclosed Field.


“trap’’; and Am 3 5, which is important enough to be
cited in full: ‘Can a bird fall in a snare upon the
earth, where no gin is set for him? shall a snare spring
up from the ground, and have taken nothing at all?

The word for ‘‘snare’’ in this passage (pak) probably
describes a net laid on the ground, perhaps a circular
net like the Egyp bird-trap. represented in the Cam-
bridge Bible, ‘‘ Amos,”’ 157. ‘he word for ‘gin,’ usually
trd in RV “snare” (makésh, lit. ‘‘fowling instrument’)
is supposed to refer either to the bait (ib, 158) or to the


catch connected with it which causes the net to collapse
(Slegfried). For a full account of Egyp modes of fowl-
ing which probably illustrate ancient Palestinian methods,
ef Wilkinson, Popular Account, TI, 178-83. The two
words (mékésh and pah) mentioned above are used fig-
uratively in many OT Passee es the former repeatedly of
the deadly influence of Canaanitish idolatry on Israel, as
in Ex 23 33, ‘‘For if thou serve their gods, it will surely
be a snare unto thee” (cf Ex 34 12; Dt 7 16; Josh
23 13). The use of the hawk in fowllng, which is at-
tested for Northern Syria hy a bas-relief found in 1908
at Sakje-Geuzi, is not mentioned in the OT, but there
may perhaps he an allusion in Apoc (Bar 3 17, ‘‘they
that had their pastime with the fowls of the air’). A
reference to the use of decoys has heen found in Jer §
27, ‘‘a cage... . full of birds,’ hut that is a doubtful
interpretation, and in the Gr of Sir 11 30, '‘As a decoy
partridge in a cage, so is the heart of a proud man,’’ but
the Heb text of the latter is less explicit. See Fow er.
The NT has a few figurative allusions to hunting.
The words for “catch” in Mk 12 13 and Lk 11 54
; (agreio and théreid) mean lit. “hunt.”
5. Allusions The vb. “ensnare’”’ (pagideiid) occurs
in the NT once in the Gospels (Mt 22 15), and
d the noun ‘‘snare”’ (pagis) is met with
in 5 passages (Lk 21 34; Rom 11 9; 1 Tim 3 73
69; 2 Tim 2 26). Another word_for “snare’
(bréchos), which means lit. “noose’’ (RVm), is used
in 1 Cor 7 35. The words for “things that cause
stumbling” and “stumble” (skdndalon and skanda-
liz6) may possibly conceal in some passages an allu-
sion to a hunter's trap or snare, Skandalon is
closely allied to skanddléthron, “the stick in_a trap
on which the bait is placed,” and is used in LXX for
mokésh. The abundant use of imagery taken from
hunting in the Bible is remarkable, in view of the
comparative rarity of literal references.
Lrrerature.—tIn addition to the works cited in the
course of the art., the art. “‘Hunting’’ in DB?, HDB
large and small, EB, Jew Enc; and ‘‘Jagd"’ in German
Bible Dicts. of Guthe, Riehm?, and Wiener, and in RE.
Winuam Tayitor Smita
HUPHAM, hi’fam (ODN, huphdm, ‘‘coast-
inhabitant’): One of Benjamin’s sons and head of
the Huphamite family (Nu 26 39). See Huprim.


HUPPAH, hup’a ("2M , huppah, “protection”):


- The priest in charge of the 13th course as prescribed


under David (1 Ch 24 138).


HUPPIM, hup’im (O"50, huppim, “coast-
people’): Probably a variant form of HupHam
(q.v.). From the only mention made of him (Gen
46 21; 1 Ch 7 12.15), his direct descent is difficult
to establish.


HOUR, hir (0, har):

(1) A prominent official in Israel. With Aaron
he held up Moses’ hands during the battle against
the Amalekites (Ex 17 10.12) and assisted him as
judicial head of the people during Moses’ stay in
the mount (Ex 24 14). :

(2) Grandfather of Bezalel, the head_artificer
in the construction of the Tabernacle (Ex 31 2;
35 30; 38 22; 2 Ch15). He is here assigned
to the tribe of Judah, and in I Ch is connected with
the same by descent through Caleb (2 19.20.50;
4 1.4). - Jos (Ané, III, ii, 4; vi, 1) makes him identi-
cal with (1) and the hushand of Miriam.

(3) One of the five kings of Midian slain along
with Balaam when Israel avenged the “matter of
Peor” upon this people (Nu 31 8; cf vs 1.2.16).
In Josh 13 21 these kings are spoken of as ‘chiefs
[nesv’tm] of Midian” and “princes [n*sikhim] of
Sihon,” king of the Amorites.

(4) According to I K 4 8 AV, the father of one
of Solomon’s twelve officers who provided food for
the king’s household, and_ whose district, was the
hill country of Ephraim. Here RV has “Ben-hur,”
taking the Heh ben, “son of,’’ as part of the proper
name; and the same is true in reference to the


Hyena THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 1442
names of four others of these officers (ef vs 9.10. | own domain his rule was well-nigh absolute. The


11.13).

(5) Father of Rephaiah, who was one of the build-
ers of the wall under Nehemiah, and ruler of half
the district of Jerus (Neh 3 9).

Benyamin RENo DowNER

HURAI, hori, ho'rai, harat (HN, haray,
“Jinen-weaver’): One of David’s “mighty men”
mentioned in 1 Ch 11 82 as of the brooks of Gaash,
i.e. from Mt. Gaash. In the || 2 S 23 30, the
orthography is Hiddai.


HURAM, hi’ram (OV, haram, “noble-born”):

(1) Grandson of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 5).

(2) King of Tyre in alliance with David and Solo-
mon. So named in 2 Ch 2 3.11.12; 8 2; 9 10.21,
but elsewhere written Hiram (q.v.).

(3) The Tyrian artisan who is so named in 2 Ch
2 13; 4 11.16, but elsewhere called “Hiram.”


HORI, hi’ri (OM, hart, “linen weaver’): One |


of the immediate descendants of Gad, and father of
Abihail, a chief man of his family (1 Ch 6 14).


HURT, hart: The term (noun and vb.) represents
a large number of Heb words, of which the chief are
I, ra‘ (vb. IPD, ra‘a‘), “evil” (Gen 26 29; 1S
24.9; Ps 36 4, etc), and TQ or W2W, shébher or
shebher (from 20 , shabhar), ‘‘a fracture’ or “‘break~-
ing” (Jer 6 14; 8 11.21; 10 19; cf Ex 22 10.14).
In Gr a principal vb. is dduéw, adikéd, “to do in-
justice’ (Lk 10 19; Rev 2 11; 6 6, etc); once
the word “hurt” is used in AV (Acts 27 10, story
of Paul’s shipwreck) for #@p:s, hubris, “injury”
(thus RV). In RV “hurt” sometimes takes the
place of other words in AV, as “sick” (Prov 28 35),
“breach” (Isa 30 26), “brnise’ (Jer 80 12; Nah
3 19); sometimes, on the other hand, the word in
AV is exchanged in RV for “evil’’ (Josh 24 20),
“harm’’ (Acts 18 10), or, as above, “injury” (Acts
27 10). These references sufficiently show the
meaning of the word—harm, bruise, breaking, etc.
In Jer (ut supra) the word is used figuratively for
moral disease or corruption. James ORR


HUSBAND, huz’band (W°S, ish; dv4p, anér):
In the Heb household the husband and father was
the chief personage of an institution which was re-
garded as more than a social organism, inasmuch
as the family in primitive Sem society had a
distinctively religious character and_ significance.
It was through it that the cult of the household
and tribal deities was practised and perpetuated.
The house-father, by virtue of being the family
head, was priest of the household, and as such,
responsible for the religious life of the family and
the maintenance of the family altar. As priest he
offered sacrifices to the family gods, as at first,
before the centralization of worship, he did to Jeh
as the tribal or national Deity. We see this re-
flected in the stories of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and in the Book of Job. This goes far to explain
such records as we have in Gen $1 53; 82 9, and
the exceptional reverence that was paid the paternal
sepulchers (1 § 20 6). Abraham was regarded
as being the father of a nation. It was customary,
it would seem, to assign a “father” to every known
tribe and nation (Gen 10). So the family came to
play an important and constructive part in Heb
thought and life, forming the base upon which the
social structure was built, merging gradually into
the wider organism of the clan or tribe, and vitally
affecting at last the political and religious life of the
nation itself.

The husband from the first had supreme author-
ity over his wife, or wives, and children. In his


wife, or wives, looked up to him as their lord (Gen
18 12). He was chief (cf Arab. shétk), and to dis-
honor him was a crime to be punished by death
(Ex 21 15.17). He was permitted to divorce his
wife with little reason, and divorces were all too
common (Dt 22 13.19.28.29; Isa 50 1; Jer 3 8;
5 8; Mal 2 16, etc). The wife seems to have had
no redress if wronged by him. Absolute faithful-
ness, though required of the wife, was apparently
not expected or exacted of the husband, so long as
he did not violate the rights of. another husband.
In general among Eastern people women were
lightly esteemed, as in the Japhetic nations they
came to be. Plato counted a state “disorganized”
“where slaves are disobedient to their masters, and
wives are on equality with their husbands.” “Is
there a human being,” asks Socrates, “with whom
you talk less than with your wife?” But from the
first, among the Hebrews the ideal husband trained
his household in the way they should go religiously,
as well as instructed them in the traditions of the
family, the tribe, and the nation (Gen 18 19; Ex
12 26; 13 8; Dt 6 7, etc). It was due to this, in
part at least, that, in spite of the discords and evils
incident to polygamy, the Heb household was a
nursery of virtue and piety to an unusual degree,
and became a genuine anticipation of the ideal real-
ized later in the Christian home (1 Cor 7 2 ff;
Eph 5 25; 1 Pet 3 7).

Used figuratively of the relation (1) between Jeh
and His people (Isa 54 5; Jer 3 14; Hos 2 19f);
(2) between Christ and His church (Mt 9 15; 2 Cor
11 2; Eph 6 25; Rev 19 7; 21 2).

Gro. B. Eacer

HUSBANDMAN, huz’band-man, HUSBANDRY,
huz’band-ri: Husbandman, originally a “house-
holder” or ‘‘master of the house,” is now limited
in its meaning to “farmer” or “tiller of the soil.”
In this sense it is the correct tr of the various Bib.
words: MDTN WN, 'tsh ’ddhamah, lit. “man of the
soil” (Gen 9 20); "2N, ‘ikkar, lit. “digger,” “a
farmer” (2 Ch 26 10; Jer 31 24; 51 23; Am
6 16; Joel 111); D4, gabh, “to dig” (2 K 26
12); 332, ydghabh, “to dig’ (Jer 52 16); yewpyés,
georgés, “cultivator” (Mt 21 33 ff; Jn 15 1; Jas
5 7). See AcricuLTuRE.

It is a common practice in Pal and Syria today
for a rich man to own lands in many different parts
of the country. He sets farmers over these differ-
ent tracts who, with the helpers, do the plowing,
planting, reaping, etc; or he lets out his lands to
farmers who pay him an annual rental or return to
him a certain percentage of the crop. Much of the
plain of Esdraelon, for example, was until recently
owned by Beirut proprietors and farmed in this
way. The writer while riding on the plain near
ancient Dan, was surprised to overtake an acquaint-
ance from Beirut (3 days’ journey away), who had
just dismounted at one of his farms to inspect it
and to receive the annual account of his farmer.
The pride with which the husbandman pointed out
the abundant harvest will not be forgotten. All
the difficulties of the owner with his husbandmen
described by Jesus are often repeated today.

Figurative: Jesus said “I am the true vine, and
my father is the husbandman” (Jn 15 1). Hesows,
cultivates, prunes and expects fruits from His church.
In the parable of the Householder (Mt 21 33 ff),
the wicked husbandmen were the Jews. The church
is referred to as “God’s husbandry” in 1 Cor 3 9
(m ‘tilled land’). James A. Patou


HUSBAND’S BROTHER (02°, yabham,
“brother-in-law”; érvyapBpedw, epigambretis; Late
Lat levir): He was required (Dt 25 5-10; Mt 22


1443


24) ‘to perform the duty of a husband’s brother”
(yubb°mah); that is, if his brother, living with him
on the paternal estate, died without male issue, he
should take the widow to wife, and “Taise up seed
unto his brother,’’ the firstborn of the new marriage
inheriting the deceased brother’s estate. Refusal
of the duty was possible, but entailed public ceremo-
nial disgrace and lasting reproach. This provision
for a specific case modified the general law which
forbade the marriage of a sister-in-law (Lev 18 16.
18). It was a patriarchal custom (Gen 38; Judah
and Tamar), and 1s alluded to in Ruth 1 11-13. A
related custom is found in Ruth 4 1, Boaz playing,
however, the part, not of levir (‘‘brother-in-law’’),
but of ga‘él (“redeemer’’). It was at least theoreti-
cally in force in Our Lord’s time (Mt 22 23-28; the
question of the Sadducees concerning the resurrec-
tion). For the origin and object of this custom see
FaMILy; MarriaGE.
Pure, WENDELL CRANNELL

HUSHAH, hi’sha (WIN, hishadh, “haste”’):
Mentioned in 1 Ch 4 4 as probably an individual,
a Judahite, or afamily name; but may possibly be
a place. :


HUSHAI, hi’shi, hi’shéi CUNT, hushay,
Xovoel, Chousei; Jos, Chousi): An  Archite,
native of Archi or Erech(?), W. of Bethel on the
northern border of Benjamin and southern border
of Joseph (Josh 16 2). Hushai was one of David’s
most faithful and wise counsellors. When David
was fleeing from Jerus and Absalom, Hushai met
him, having his coat rent and earth on his head.
The king persuaded him to return to Jerus, feign
submission to Absalom, and try to defeat the counsel
of Ahithophel (2 8 15 32f). Whatever Absalom
decided on, Hushai was to send word to David
through two young men, sons of the priests Zadok
and Abiathar (15 34-36). Hushai obeyed, and suc-
ceeded in persuading Absalom to adopt his counsel
rather than that of Ahithophel (2 8 16 16—17 14).
He sent word to David of the nature of Ahithophel’s
counsel, and the king made good his escape that
night across the Jordan. The result was the suicide
of Ahithophel and the ultimate defeat and death
of Absalom. J. J. REEVE


HUSHAM, hi’sham (DWM, husham, Gen 36 34;
DWM, hdusham, 1 Ch 1 45-46, “alert’’): Accord-
ing to the former reference, Husham was one of the
kings of Edom, and according to the latter he was
“of the land of the Temanites” and (1 Ch 1 35 f)
descended from Esau.


HUSHATHITE, hi'shath-it OMWIN, hishathi,
“a dweller in Hushah’’?): The patronymic given
in two forms, but probably of the same man, Sib-
beccai, one of David’s thirty heroes (2 8 21 18;
1 Ch 11 29; 20 4; 27 11), or Mebunnai as named
in the || passage (2 S 23 2’).


HUSHIM, hi’shim (OU, DUST, OMAN, hasham,
“hasters’’): ;

(1) Family name of the children of Dan (Gen 46
23), but of form ‘“Shuham” in Nu 26 42. a

(2) The sons of Aher, of the lineage of Benjamin
(1 Ch 7 12). ; : :

(3) One of the wives of Shaharaim, of the family
of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 8.11).


HUSHSHATHITE, hush’shath-it (NWN, hush-
shatht). Same as Huswarmre (q.v.), except in


reduplicated form (1 Ch 27 11; cf 11 29, Heb
pronunciation).


HUSKS, husks (kepérva, kerdtia, ie. “little
homs,” Lk 15 16): These are the pods of the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Hurai
Hyena


carob tree (RVm), also called the locust tree (Cera-
tonia siliqua). This tree flourishes all over Pal,


esp. on the western mountain slopes toward the sea;
It is dioecious,


by the Arabs it is called kharrab.
has dense, dark, evergreen
foliage, glossy leaves and
long, curved pods, like
small horns (hence the
name). These pods which
are from 4 to 9 in. in
length, have a leathery
case containing a pulpy
substance in which the
beans are imbedded; this
pulp is of a pleasant,
sweetish flavor and has a
characteristic odor, and is
much loved by children.
The pods are sold in the
markets, both as cattle
food and for the poor,
who extract by boiling
them a sweetish substance like molasses. The tra-
dition that the “locusts” of Mt 3 4; Mk 1 6 were
carob pods is preserved in the name given to them,
“St. John’s bread,” but it has little to be said for it.
: E. W. G. MasterMan
HUZ, huz (Gen 22 21 AV). See Uz.


HUZZAB, huz’ab (AE, huggabh, only in Nah 2
7 AV and RVm): Its meaning isdoubtful. Accord-
ing to Gesenius, it is a vb., Hoph. of 332, cabhabh,
“flow,” hence to be rendered with preceding ver,
“The palace is dissolved and made to flow down.”
Wordsworth made it Pual of 222, ndgabh, ‘“fix’’:
“The palace is dissolved, though established.”
LXX renders with the next word, hé hupdstasis
apokaliphth2, ‘‘The foundation [or treasure] is un-
covered.” AV, RVm and ARV text make it Hoph.
of ndgabh, “fix,” hence ‘It is decreed.”’ Perhaps
more probably, with AV and RV text and ARVm,
it is a name, or noun with the article (or the cor-
ruption of such a word), referring either to the
Assyr queen, or personifying Nineveh. No such
queen is now known, but Assyriology may throw
light. The ‘name’ interpretation accords best
with the general trend of the passage, which de-
scribes the discomfiture of a royal personage.
BDB calls it “perhaps textual error.” The
Massoretic vocalization may be at fault.

Puitie WENDELL CRANNELL

HYACINTH, hi’a-sinth (tékiw80s, hudkinthos):
RV uses this word in Rev 9 17 for AV “‘jacinth,”
with reference, not to stone, but to dark-purple
color. In Rev 21 20, where stone is meant,
RV tr# “sapphire.”


HYADES, hi’a-déz.


HYDASPES, hi-das’péz (Y8dorns, Huddéspés):
A river mentioned in Jth 1 6 in connection with
the Euphrates and Tigris, but otherwise unknown.
It is possible there may be a confusion with the
Hydaspes of India. Some have conjectured an
identity with the Choaspes.


HYENA, hi-é’na (VISR, cabhat* [Jer 12 9};
LXX talvyn, huainé [Jer 129; Ecclus 13 18};


ef Arab. we or A 4, dab‘ or dabu', “hyaena”; ef


myx, ¢bho'tm, Zeboim [1 S 13 18; Neh 11 34];
also cf JIWA, gibh‘on, Zibeon [Gen 36 2.14.20;
1 Ch 1 38]; but not OMAR, gebhdyim, Zeboiim
[Gen 10 19; 14 2, ete]): EV does not contain the
word “hyena,” except in Ecclus 13 18, “What
peace is there between the hyena and the dog? and


Carob Tree (Ceratonia
siliqua).


See Astroxoey, II, 4.


Hymenaeus
Hyssop


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1444


what peace between the rich man and the poor?”
In Jer 12 9, where the Heb has ha-‘ayit cabhu'
(RV “a speckled bird of prey”), LXX has om#hacov
valyys, spélaion huainégs, ‘‘a byena’s den,” as if
from a Heb original having m*‘drah, “cave,” instead
of ha-‘ayit, “bird.” The root cabha‘ may mean “to
selze as prey” (cf Arab. seb‘, “lion” or “rapacious
animal’’), or ‘to dip” or “to dye” (cf Arab. sabagh,
“to dye’), hence the two tr® of cabhu** as “hyena”
and as “‘speckled” (Vulg versicolor).

The hyena of Pal is the striped hyena (Hyaena
striata) which ranges from India +o North Africa.
The striped, the spotted, and the brown hyenas
constitute a distinct family of the order of Car-
nivora, having certain peculiarities of dentition
and having four toes on each foot, instead of four
behind and five in front, as in most of the order.
The hyena is a nocturnal animal, rarely seen though
fairly abundant, powerful but cowardly, a feeder
on earrion and addicted to grave-robbing. The
last habit in particular has won it the abhorrence
of the natives of the countries which it inhabits.
In the passage cited in Ecclus, it is to be noted that
itis to the hyena that the rich man is compared.
The jaws and teeth of the hyena are exceedingly
strong and fitted for crushing bones which have
resisted the efforts of dogs and jackals. Its dens
are in desolate places and are littered with frag-
ments of skeletons. “Is my heritage unto me as a
speckled bird of prey?” (Jer 12 9) becomes a more
striking passage if the LXX is followed, “Is my
heritage unto me as a hyena’s den?”

Shakk-ud-Dibé‘, “Cleft of the byenas,’”’ is the
name of a valley north of Wédi-ul-Keli, and Wédi-
Abu-Dibé‘ (of similar meaning) is the name of an
affluent of Wédi-ul-Kelt. Either of these, or possi-
bly Wédi-ul-K elt itself, may be the valley of Zeboim
(valley of hyenas) of 1 S 13 18.

The name of Zibeon the Horite (Gen 36 2, etc)
is more doubtiully connected with “hyena.”

ALFRED Ey Day

HYMENAEUS, hi-men-d’us (Ypévacos, Humén-
aios, so named from Hymen, the god of marriage,
1 Tim 1 20; 2 Tim 2 17): A heretical teacher
in Ephesus, an opponent of the apostle Paul, who
in the former reference associates him with Alex-
ander (see ALEXANDER), and in the latter, with
Philetus (see PHILETUS).

It is worthy of notice that in both passages where
these persons are mentioned, the name of Hymen-

aeus occurs first, showing, perhaps, that
1. His he was the leader. In the passage in
Career 1 Tim Hymenaeus is mcluded in
the “some’’ who had put away faith
and a good conscience and who had made shipwreck
concerning faith. The apostle adds that he had
delivered Hymenaeus and Alexander unto Satan,
that they might learn not to blaspheme.

In the passage in 2 Tim, Hymenaeus and Philetus
are included among persons whose profane and vain

babblings will increase unto more un-


2. His godliness, and whose word “‘will eat
Denial of as doth a gangrene.” The apostle
the Resur- declares that Hymenaeus and Philetus
rection are of the number of such people as


those just described, and he adds that
those two persons “concerning the truth have erred,
saying that the resurrection is past already, and
overthrow the faith of some.” Then, for the
guidance of Timothy, he goes on to say the seal
upon the foundation of God is, “The Lord knoweth
them that are his: and, Let every one that nameth
the name of the Lord depart from unrighteousness.”
The inference intended is, that though Hymenaeus
and Philetus had named the name of Christ, they
did not depart from iniquity. There is no doubt in
regard to the identity of this Hymenaeus with the


person of the same name in 1 Tim. Accordingly,
the facts mentioned in the two epistles must be
placed together, viz. that though he had made a
Christian profession by naming the name of Christ,
yet he had not departed from iniquity, but by his
profane teaching he proceeded unto more ungodli-
ness, and that he had put away faith and a good
conscience and had made shipwreck of faith.

The error, therefore, of Hymenaeus and his two
companions would amount to this: They taught
that “the resurrection is past already,” that there
shall be no bodily resurrection at all, but that all
that resurrection means is that the soul awakes from
sin. This awakening from sin had already taken
place with themselves, so they held, and therefore
there could be no day in the future when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God and shall
come forth from the grave (Jn 6 28).


This teaching of Hymenaeus had been so far success-
ful: it had ‘‘overthrown the faith of some’’ (2 Tim 2
18). It is impossible to define exactly
3. Incipient the full nature of this heresy, but’ what
. ve Paul says regarding it makes it evident
Gnosticism that it was a form of incipient Gnosticism.
This spiritualizing of the resurrection
sprang from the idea of the necessarily evil nature of all
material substance. This idea immediately led to the
conclusion of the essentially evil nature of the human
body, and that if man is to rise to his true nature, he
must rid himself of the thraldom, not of sin, but of the
body. This contempt for the body led to the denial of
the resurrection in its literal sense; and all that Christ
had taught on the subject was explained only, in an al-
legorical sense, of the resurrection of the soul from sin.
Teaching of this kind is described by Paul as having
effects similar to the ‘‘eating’’ caused by a gangrene.
It is deadly; it overthrows Christian faith.


4. Over- It not destroyed, it would corrupt the
throws community, for if there is no literal resur-

_ rection of the dead, then, as Paul shows
Faith in 1 Cor 15, Christ is not_raised; and if


4 the literal resurrection of Christ is denied,
Christian believers are yet in their sins, and the Christian
religion is false.


The way in which the apostle dealt with these
teachers, Hymenaeus and his companions, was not
merely in the renewed assertion of


5. Deliv- the truth which they denied, but also
ered unto by passing sentence upon these teach-
Satan ers—“whom I delivered unto Satan,


that they might be taught not to
blaspheme.’”’ In regard to the meaning of this
sentence much difficulty of interpretation exists.
Some understand it to mean simple excommunica-
tion from the church. But this seems quite inade-
quate to exhaust the meaning of the words employed
by Paul. Others take it to signify the infliction of
some bodily suffering or disease. This also is
quite insufficient as an explanation. It seems
that a person who was delivered unto Satan was
cut off from all Christian privileges, he was “put
away’’ from the body of Christian believers, and
handed over to “the Satan,” the Evil One in his
most distinct personality (1 Cor 6 2.5.13). Cf the
cases of Ananias and Sapphira (Acts 5), and of
Elymas (Acts 13 11).

It is important that the purpose of this terrible
sentence should not be overlooked. The intention
of the punishment was distinctly remedial. Both
in the case of Hymenaeus and Alexander, and in
that of the person dealt with in 1 Cor 5, the
intention was the attaining of an ultimate good.
In 1 Cor it is “for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus.” Similarly, Hymenaeus and Alexander are
delivered unto Satan, not for their final perdition,
but that they may be taught, through this terrible
discipline—for such is the signification of the word
which is tr’ “taught’”’—not to blaspheme. The
purpose of this discipline, that they might learn
not to blaspheme, shows the dreadful length of


1445


Hymenaeus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


impiety and of railing at Christian truth to which
Hymenaeus had gone.
In the history of Hymenaeus and his companions, and


in their bold and anti-Christian teaching which had over-
thrown the faith of some, we cannot fail


6. Th to see the fulfilment of what Paul had said
“ € - many years previously, in his farewell ad-
Perverse dress to the elders of the church in Ephe-
Things” at sus: “T know that after my departing
Ephesus grievous wolves shall enter in among you,
p not sparing the flock; and from among


your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them”
(Acts 20 29f). It was in the Ephesian church that
Hymenaeus and Alexander and Philetus had arisen.
The gangrene-like nature of their teaching has already
been. described.


JoHN RUTHERFURD

HYMN, him (ipvos, hiimnos): In Col 3 16; Eph
5 19 St. Paul bids his readers sing ‘psalms and
hymns and spiritual songs.’ Gregory of Nyssa
(4th cent.) distinguishes these as follows: the Pss
were accompanied by instruments, the hymns
were mainly vocal, and the song, ode, was a general
term comprehending both. This distinction might
suggest that the psalm belonged especially to the
public worship of the church, while the hymn was
the production, more or less spontaneous, of the
individual member. The inference is, however,
inconsistent with 1 Cor 14 26, and it is probable
that in the apostolic age, at least, the terms were
used indiscriminately. Of Christian psalms or
hymns we have examples in the NT. Lk 1 and
2 contain such hymns in the songs of Mary, Zacha-
rias and Simeon. The Apocalypse is studded
with hymns or odes, many of them quite general in
character, and probably borrowed or adapted from
Jewish books ok: praise. In the Epp. of Paul, esp.
the later ones, fragments of hymns seem to be
quoted. Lightfoot detects one in Eph 6 14, and
others readily suggest themselves.

It is probable that the hymn mentioned as having
heen sung by Jesus and the disciples after the
Passover (Mt 26 30; Mk 14 26) was the second
part of the Hallel, i.e. Pss 115-18, and the hymns
of Paul and Silas were most likely also taken from
the Psalter. But the practice of interpolating and
altering Jewish non-canonical books, like the
Psalter of Solomon and the recently discovered
Odes of Solomon, shows that the early Christians
adopted for devotional purposes the rich store of
sacred poetry possessed by their nation. For the
music to which these psalms, etc, were sung, see
Music; Sona. James MILLAR


HYPOCRISY, hi-pok’ri-si, HYPOCRITE, hip’é-
krit (3M, héneph, 239, hanéph; vwénpiots, hupd-
krisis, broxpirfs, hupokrités) : ;

(1) “Hypocrisy” occurs only once in the OT as
the tr of héneph (Isa 32 6, RV “‘profaneness’’);
hanéph, from which it is derived, means properly
“to cover,” ‘to hide,” or “becloud,”’ hence to pol-
lute, to be polluted or defiled, to make profane,
to seduce; as a subst. it is trd “hypocrite” (Job
813; 18 16; 16 34; 17 8; 20 5; 27 8; 34 30;
36 13, in all which’ instances RV has “godless
man,” “godless men,” “godless”; Prov 11 9, RV
“the godless man”; Isa 917, RV “profane”;
Isa 83 14, RV “the godless ones’’); it is rendered
“hypocritical,” in’ Ps 35 16; Isa 10 6, RV “pro-
fane.” ; :
(2) “Hypocrisy,” “hypocrite” are frequent in
the NT; chiefly in Christ’s discourses in the Gos-
pels. The word hupokrisis (primarily, “an answer,”

‘response’’) meant generally, in classical Gr, stage-
playing, acting, the histrionic art; hence it came to
mean acting a part in life, ete. We find hupokrisis
in this sense in 2 Mace 6 25, RV “dissimulation,”’
and hupokrinomai, ‘‘to pretend,” “to feign,” etc.
Ecclus 1 29; 32 15; 38 2, tr4 “hypocrite”; 2 Mace


Hyssop


5 25, “pretending peace,” RV “playing the man of
peace’; 6 21, RV “to make as if.” Hupokrités
(lit. “an actor”) is the LXX for hanéph (Job
34 30; 36 13), equivalent to bad, wicked, godless,
which is perhaps included in some of Our Lord’s
uses of the words, e.g. Mt 23 27f, “full of hypoc-
risy and iniquity” (cf vs 29f; 24 51); but, in
general, the meaning is acting a part, false, de-
ceptive and deceived, formally and outwardly
religious and good, but inwardly insincere and
unrighteous; the hypocrite may come to deceive
himself as well as others, but ‘‘the hypocrite’s
hope shall perish” (Job 8 13 AV). On no class
did Our Lord pronounce such severe condemnation
as on the hypocrites of His day.

“Fypocrisy’’ (hupokrisis) occurs in Mt 23 28; Mk
12 15; Lk 12 1; 1 Tim 4 2; 1 Pet 2 1 (in Gal 2 13
it is rendered ‘'dissimulation"’);
krités), Mt 6 2.5.16; 75; 15 7; 22
2511.29; 24 51, Mk 7.6; Lk 12 56;
3.17, anupékritos is ‘‘ without hypocrisy,’’ so RV, Rom
129 (‘unfeigned,” 2 Cor 6 6; 1 Tim 15; 2 Tim 1


5; 1 Pet 1 22).
W. L. Waker

HYRCANUS, hér-ka’nus (Ypkavés, Hurkanés):
‘Son of Tobias, a man of great dignity,’’ who had a
large sum of money deposited in the Temple of
Jerus when Heliodorus was sent to confiscate it in
187 BC (2 Mace 3 11 ff). Opinions differ as to
the identity of this H. with the grandson of Tobias
whose birth and history are related at considerable
length by Jos (Ant, XII, iv, 6 ff), or with another of
the same name mentioned in Ant, XIII, viii, 4. See
AsMONEANS; MaccaBagts.


HYSSOP, his’up (AMIR, ’@0bh; tooomos, his-
sGpos, Ex 12 22; Lev 14 4.6.49ff; Nu 19 6.18;
1K 4 33; Ps 517; Jn 1929; He 919): A
plant used fom,ritual cleansing purposes; a humble
plant springia® out of the wall (1 K 4 38), the
extreme conmt#st to the cedar.


‘hypocrite’


Caper (Capparis spinosa).


The common hyssop (Hyssopus officinalis) of the
N.O. Labiatae, an aromatic plant with stomatic
properties, cannot be the hyssop of the Bible as it
is unknown in Pal, but allied aromatic plants of the
same N.O. have by Maimonides (Neg. xiv.6) and
other Jewish writers been identified with it. Prob-
ably hyssop is identical with the Arab. zat‘ar, a
name applied to a group of aromatic plants of the
genus marjoram and thyme. They would any of
them furnish a bunch suitable for sprinkling, and
they have the important recommendation that they


I,I Am
Idolatry


1446


grow everywhere, being found even in the desert.
Post thinks of all varieties the Origanum maru, a
special variety of marjoram which favors terrace
walls and rocks, is the most probable.

The proposal (Royle, Jour. Royal Asiatic Soc.,
VII, 193-213) to identify the caper (Capparis
spinosa) with hyssop, which has been popularized
by the works of Tristram, has not much to recom-
mend it. It is true that the caper is very com-
monly seen growing out of walls all over Pal (1 K
4 33), but in no other respect is it suitable to the
requirements of the Bib. references. The supposed
similarity between the Arab. ’asaf (‘‘caper’’) and the
Heb ’éz0bh is fanciful; the caper with its stiff,
prickly stems and smooth, flat leaves would not
furnish a bunch for sprinkling as serviceable as


I, 1 AM, 1 AM THAT IAM. See Gon, Names
OF.


I WILL BE. Sce Gop, NaMEs oF.
IACIMUS, i-as’i-mus.


IACUBUS, i-ak’fi-bus (IaxotBos, Jakotibos; 1 Esd
' 9 48): “Akkub” in Neh 8 7.


IADINUS, i-ad’i-nus (Ié8evos, Iddeinos; 1 Esd
9 48, AV Adinus): Same as Jamin of Neh 8 7.


IBHAR, ib’har (2°, yibhhar, “He [God]
chooses’; in S, B, "EBedp, Ebedr, in Ch, B, Badp,
Badr, A, "IeBaép, Jebadr): Oue of David’s sons,
born at Jerus; son of a wife and not of a concubine
(4 Ch 8 6; 28S 5 15); otherwise unknown. His
name in all three lists follows Solomon’s. In
Peshitta’, ‘“Juchabar.”


IBIS, i’bis. In Isa 34 11, yanshdph, which is
rendered “‘owl,’? apparently indicates the sacred
ibis (bis religiosa). The LXX gives efbis and
Vulg ibis; RVm “bittern.”? See Ow1.


IBLEAM, ib’lé-am (D993, yibhi‘am); A town
in the territory of Issachar which was assigned
to Manasseh (Josh 17 11). This tribe, however,
failed to expel the inhabitants, so the Canaanites
continued to dwell in that land (Jgs 1 27). It was
on the route by which Ahaziah fled from Jehu.
He was overtaken and mortally wounded ‘“‘at the
ascent of Gur, which is by Ibleam’”’ (2 K 9 27).
The name appears as Bileam in 1 Ch 6 70; and
it probably corresponds to Belmen of Jth.. It is
now represented by the ruin of Bel‘ameh on the
W. of the valley through which the road to the south
runs, about half a mile from Jenin. In 2 K 15
10, where it is said that Zechariah the son of Jero-
boam was slain by Shallum “before the people,”
this last phrase, which is awkward in the Heb,
should be amended to read “in Bileam.” Possibly
“Gath-rimmon” in Josh 21 25 is a clerical error
for ‘Tbleam.”’ W. Ewine


IBNEIAH, ib-né'ya (T2227, yibhneyah, “Jeh
buildeth up”): A Benjamite, son of Jeroham (1
Ch 9 8).


IBNIJAG, ib-ni'ja (ID, yibhniyah, or 124,
yibhntyah, ‘“Jeh buildeth up’): A Benjamite,
father of Reuel (1 Ch 9 8).

IBRI, ib’ri (IAD, ‘ibhri, ‘a Hebrew’): A
Merarite Levite, son of Jaaziah (1 Ch 24 27).


See ALCIMUS.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


many species of zat‘dr. It has been specially urged
that the byssop suits the conditions of Jn 19 29,
it being maintained that a stem of caper would
make a good object on which to raise the “sponge
full of vinegar” to the Saviour’s face, the equivalent
of the “reed” of Mt 27 48; Mk 16 36. For such
a purpose the flexible, prickly stems of the hyssop
would be most unsuitable; indeed, it would be no
easy matter to find one of sufficient length. It is
necessary to suppose either that a bunch of hyssop
accompanied the sponge with the vinegar upon the
reed, or, as has been proposed by several writers (for
references see art. “Hyssop,” HB), that hussépé is a
corruption of hussé, “javelin,” and that the passage
should read “They put a sponge full of vinegar upon
a javelin.” E. W. G. MasTeRMAN


IBSAM, ib’sam (Pa, yibhsam, “fragrant,”
AV Jibsam): Descendant of Issachar, family of
Tolah (1 Ch 7 2).


IBZAN, ib’zau (j¥3N, ’ibhcdn): The 10th judge
of Israel. His city is given as Bethlehem (whether
of Judah or Zebulun is not stated). He judged
Israel 7 years, and when he died he was buried in
his native place. The only personal details given
about him in the Bib. narrative are that he had 30
sons and a like number of daughters. He sent all
of his sons ‘“‘abroad’’ for wives and brought hus-
bands from “abroad” for all his daughters. The
exact meaning of ha-hig¢, “abroad,” is mere matter
of speculation, but the great social importance of
the man and, possibly, alliances among tribes, are
suggested in the brief uarrative (Jgs 12 8-10).
Jewish tradition identifies Ibzan with Boaz of
Bethlehem-Judah (Talm, Babha’, Bathra’, 91a).

Exza Davis Isaacs

ICE, is (22, kerah): Ice is almost unknown in
Pal and Syria except on the highest mountains. At
moderate heights of less than 4,000 ft. a little ice
may form during the night in winter, but the warm
rays of the sun melt it the next day. A great quan-
tity of snow is packed away iu caves in the moun-
tains during the winter, and is thus preserved for
use in the summer months. The word is fouud in
the Bible in three places where it describes God’s
power. ‘Out of whose womb came the ice? Aud
the... . frost” (Job 38 29); ‘By the breath of
God ice is given” (37 10); ‘He casteth forth his ice
like morsels” (Ps 147 17).

Figurative: Untrue friends are compared to
streams ‘‘which are black by reason of the ice” (Job
6 16). ALFRED H. Joy


ICHABOD, ik’a-bod, i’ka-bod (TI3D7°N, '7-kha-
bhédh, “inglorious”; B, otal BapyaBde, ouai bar-
chabéth, A, otal xaBs0, ouat chabsth, “Aripos,
Atimos): Son of Phinehas, Eli’s son, slain at the
battle of Aphek when the ark was takeu. Ichabod
was born after his father’s death. His mother
gave him this name on her death-bed to iudicate
that the ‘glory [had] departed from Israel’ (1 8
4 19 ff). He was thus important as a symbol,
though little is recorded of him as an individual.
His nephew Ahijah was one of those who tarried
with Saul and the six hundred at Gibeah just before
Jonathan’s brave attack upon the Philis (1 S 14
2f). Henry WaLLAcE


ICONIUM, i-k6’ni-um (‘Ikévev, Ikénion, also
El«éviov, Eikénion, on inscriptions): Iconium was
visited by St. Paul on his first and on his second
missionary Journey (Acts 13 51 ff; 16 2ff), and


1447


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


I,T Am
Idolatry


if the “South Galatian theory” be correct, probably
also on his third journey. His sufferings there are

referred to in 2 Tim 3 11.
The topographical position of Iconium is elearly
‘indicated in Acts, and the evidence of Acts has been
confirmed by reeent research. Was


1. Topo- Iconium in Phrygia or in Lycaonia,
graphical and in what sense can it be said to have
Position belonged to one ethnical division or the


other? The majority of our ancient
authorities (e.g. Cicero, Strabo, Pliny), writing
from the point of view of Rom provincial adminis-
tration, give lconium to Lycaonia, of which geog-
raphy makes it the natural capital. But Xenophon,
who marehed with Cyrus’ expedition through Phry-
gia into Lycaonia, calls Iconium the last city of
Phrygia. The writer of Acts 14 6 makes the same
statement when he represents St. Paul and St.
Barnabas as fleeing from Iconium to the eities of
Lycaonia—implying that the border of Phrygia
and Lycaonia passed between Iconium and Lystra,
18 miles to the 8. Other ancient authorities who
knew the loeal eonditions well speak of Iconium as
Phrygian until far into the Rom imperial period.
At the neighboring city of Lystra (Acts 14 11), the
natives used:the “speech of Lyeaonia.’”’ Two in-
seriptions in the Phrygian language found at Ieonium
in 1910 prove that the Phrygian language was in
use there for 2 centuries after St. Paul’s visits, and
afford confirmation of the interesting topographical
detail in Aets (see Jour. Hell. Stud., 1911, 189).

In the apostolic period, Iconium was one of the

chief cities in the southern part of the Rom province

Galatia, and it probably belonged to
2. In Apos- the “Phrygian region’? mentioned in
tolic Acts 16 6. The emperor Claudius
Period conferred on it the title Claudiconium,

which appears on coins of the city and
on inseriptions, and was formerly taken as a proof
that Claudius raised the city to the rank of a Rom
colonia. It was Hadrian who raised the city to
eolonial rank; this is proved by its new title, Co-
lonia Aelia Hadriana Iconiensitum, and by a re-
eently discovered inscription, whieh belongs to the
reign of Hadrian, and which mentions the first
duumvir who was appointed in the new colonia.
Ieonium was still a Hellenic city, but with a stron
pro-Rom bias (as proved by its title ‘“Claudian”
when St. Paul visited it.

About 295 AD, an enlarged province, Pisidia,
was formed, with Antioch as capital, and Ieonium
as a “sort of secondary metropolis.”
The Byzantine arrangement, familiar
to us in the Notitiae Episcopatuum,
under which Iconium was the capital
of a province Lycaonia, dates from about 372 AD.
Iconium, the modern Konia, has always been the
main trading center of the Lycaonian Plain. Trade
attracted Jews to the ancient Phrygio-Hellenie city
(Acts 14 1), as it attracts Greeks and Armenians
to the modern Turkish town.

St. Paul’s experiences at Iconium
4. St. form part of the theme of the semi-
Thekla historical legend of St. Thekla, on
which see Professor Ramsay’s Church
in the Roman Empire, 380 ff.

LiteratuRe.—Ramsay, Hist. Comm. on Paul's Ep, to
the Gal, 214 ff; Cities of St. Paul, 317 ff. To the lit.
referred to in the notes to the iatter book (pp. 448 ff)
add Ath, Mitth., 1905, 324 ff; Revue de Philologie, 1912,
48 ff; Jour. Hellenic Studies, 1911, 188 ff.

W. M. Caper

IDALAH, id’a-la, i-da‘la ENT, yidh'dlah): A
town in the territory of Zebulun, named with
Shimron and Beth-lehem (Josh 19 15). The Talm
identifies it with Huryzh (Talm Jerus on M¢gh., I, 1).
This, Conder thinks, may be represented by the
modern Khirbet el-Huwara to the S.of Beit Lahm.


3. Later
History


IDBASH, id’bash (W2", yidhbash, “honey-
sweet”’[?]): A man of Judah, one of the sons of the
father of Etam (1 Ch 4 3; LXX “sons of Etam”).


IDDO, id’é:

(1) (VAR, “ddd [? TTS , ’adhadh, “to be strong”),
“hap,” “happy” [?], Ezr 817): The ‘chief at
the place Casiphia,” who provided Ezra with
Levites and Nethinim, the head of the Levitical
body or school, said to be one of the Nethinim or
temple slaves, but perhaps an “and’”’ has slipped
out, and it should read: “his brethren and the
Nethinim.” 1 Esd 8 4546 has ‘Loddeus [AV
“Saddeus”], the captain who was in the place of
the treasury,’’ kegeph meaning silver. LXX has
‘fn the place of the silver [év dpyuply rob rérov, en
argurt6 tot, tépou] . . . . to his brethren and to the
treasurers.”

(2) (1, yiddd, “beloved,” or “loving,” 1 Ch
27 21): Son of Zechariah, and captain of the half-
tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, under David.

(3) (1, yiddo, “beloved,” or “loving,” Ezr
10 43): One of those who had taken foreign wives.
Another reading is Jaddai, AV “Jadan.”’ In 1 Esd
9 35 ‘“Edos” (AV “Tdes”’).

(4) (NY, ‘idda’, ‘timely,’ 1 K 4 14): Father of
Abinadab, Solomon’s commissary in Mahanaim
in Gilead.

(5) (1, yidds, “beloved,” or “loving,” 1 Ch
6 21): A Gershomite Levite, son of Joah, ealled
Adaiah in ver 41; aneestor of Asaph. .

(6) (VIZ), ye'dd [Kethibh 197, ye'di], or 9,
‘iddd, “deeked,”’ ‘“adorned’’): Seer (hdzeh) and
prophet (ndbht), the Chronicler’s ‘“‘source” for the
reign of Solomon (2 Ch 9 29): ‘The visions of
Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam the son of Ne-
bat’’; and for the reign of Rehoboam (2 Ch 12 15);
“The histories of Iddo [T59 , ‘tdd6] the seer, after the
manner of for, ‘in reckoning’’] genealogies”; and
for the reign of Abijah (2 Ch 13 22): ‘The commen-
tary [midhrash] of the prophet Iddo” (179, ‘iddé).
He may have been the prophet who denounced
Jeroboam (1 K 13), who is called by Jos and
Jerome Jadon, or Jaddo. Jerome makes Iddo and
Oded the same.

(7) (VIF, ‘iddd, “timely,” Zee 11): Grand-
father (father, aceording to Ezra) of the prophet.
Zechariah. See also Zec 1 7; Ezr 61; 6 14
(NVIY, dda’). In 1 Esd 6 1, “Addo.”

(8) (RITY, ‘idds', “decked,” “adorned,” Neh 12
4.16): A priest who went up with Zerubbabel (ver 4);
one of the priestly clans which went up (ver 16);
perhaps same as (7)

Partie WENDELL CRANNELL

IDLE, i’d’l, IDLENESS, i’d’l-nes: Both words,
adj. and noun, render different Heb words (from
SBD, ‘acél, “to be lazy,” M27, raphah, “to relax,”
and UpwW, shakat, “to be quiet’). According to the
Yahwistic narrative Pharaoh’s retort to the com-
plaints of the Israelites was a charge of indolence
(Ex 6 8.17). It was a favorite thought of Heb
wisdom—practical philosophy of life—that indo-
lence inevitably led to poverty and want (Prov
19 15; Eccl 10 18). The “virtuous woman” was
one who would not eat the “bread of idleness’
(Prov $1 27). In Ezk 16 49 for AV “abundance
of idleness’? RV has “prosperous ease.” In the
NT “idle” generally renders the Gr word dpyés,
argés, \it. “inactive,” “useless” (Mt 20 3.6). In Lk
24 11 “idle talk” corresponds to one Gr word which
means “empty gossip” or “‘nonsensical talk.”

eae T. Lewis

IDOLATRY, i-dol’a-tri (D2, teraphim, “house-

hold idols,” ‘idolatry’; ¢l8wAcdarpela, eiddlola-


Idolatry
Tiyricum


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1448


treia): There is ever in the human mind a craving
for visible forms to express religious conceptions,
and this tendency does not disappear with the
acceptance, or even with the constant recognition,
of pure spiritual truths (see Imaczs). Idolatry
originally meant the worship of idols, or the wor-
ship of false gods by means of idols, but came to
mean among the OT Hebrews any worship of false
gods, whether by images or otherwise, and finally
the worship of Jeh through visible symbols (Hos
8 5.6; 10 5); and ultimately in the NT idolatry
came to mean, not only the giving to any creature
or human creation the honor or devotion which be-
longed to God alone, but the giving to any human
desire a precedence over God’s will (1 Cor 10 14;
Gal 5 20; Col 3 5; 1 Pet 4 3). The neighboring
gods of Phoenicia, Canaan, Moab—Baal, Melkart,
Astarte, Chemosh, Moloch, etc—were particularly
attractive to Jerus, while the old Sem calf-worship
seriously affected the state religion of the Northern
Kingdom (see GoLDEN CaF). Asearly asthe Assyr
and Bab periods (8th and 7th cents. BC), various
deities from the Tigris and Euphrates had intruded
themselves—the worship of Tammuz becoming a
little later the most popular and seductive of all
(Ezk 8 14)—while the worship of the sun, moon,
stars and signs of the Zodiac became so intensely
fascinating that these were introduced even into
the temple itself (2K 1716; 21 3-7; 28 4.12;
Jer 19 18; Ezk 8 16; Am 5 26).

The special enticements to idolatry as offered by
these various cults were found in their deification of
natural forces and their appeal to primitive human
desires, esp. the sexual; also through associations
produced by intermarriage and through the appeal
to patriotism, when the help of some cruel deity
was sought in time of war. Baal and Astarte wor-
ship, which was esp. attractive, was closely asso-
ciated with fornication and drunkenness (Am 2 7.8;
cf 1 K 14 23 f), and also appealed greatly to magic
and soothsaying (e.g. Isa 2 6; 3 2; 8 19).

Sacrifices to the idols were offered by fire (Hos 4
13); libations were poured out (Isa 57 6; Jer 7
18); the first-fruits of the earth and tithes were pre-
sented (Hos 2 8); tables of food were set before
them (Isa 65 11); the worshippers kissed the idols
or threw them kisses (1 K 19 18; Hos 13 2; Job
31 27); stretched out their hands in_ adoration
(Isa 44 20); knelt or prostrated themselves before
them and sometimes danced about the altar, gash-
ing themselves with knives (1 K 18 26.28; for a
fuller summary see HB).

Even earlier than the Bab exile the Heb prophets
taught that Jeh was not only superior to all other
gods, but reigned alone as God, other deities being
nonentities (Lev 19 4; Isa 2 8.18.20; 19 1.3; 31 7;
44 9-20). The severe satire of this period proves
that the former fear of living demons supposed to
inhabit the idols had disappeared. These prophets
also taught that the temple, ark and sacrifices were
not essential to true spiritual worship (e.g. Jer 3 16;
Am § 21-25). These prophecies produced a strong
reaction against the previously popular idol-
worship, though later indications of this worship
are not infrequent (Ezk 14 1-8; Isa 42 17). The
Maccabean epoch placed national heroism plainly
on the side of the one God, Jeh; and_although Gr
and Egyp idols were worshipped in Gaza and As-
calon and other half-heathen communities clear
down to the 5th or 6th cent. of the Christian era,
yet in orthodox centers like Jerus these were despised
and repudiated utterly from the 2d cent. BC on-
ward. See also Gorpen Car; Gops; ImacEs;
‘TERAPHIM.

Lirerature.—Wm. Wake, A_ Discourse concerning the


Nature of Idolatry, 1688; W. R. Smith, Lectures on the
Religion of the Semites; EB. B. Tylor, Prim. Culture; J. G.


Frazer, Golden Bough (3 vols); L. R. Farnell, Evolution of
Religion, 1905; Baudissin, Studien zur semitischen Reh-
gionsgeschichte; Baethgen, Der Gott Israels u. die Gdtter


der Heiden, 1888.
CampEen M. Cosern
IDUEL, id’ii-el (I8ovqAos, Idouélos): 1 Esd 8
43, EVm “Arrey” (q.v.).


IDUMAEA, id-t-mé’a, IDUMAEANS, id-t-mé’-
anz. See Epo.


IEDDIAS, yed-i/as, i-ed-i’as, AV Eddias (*1c58las,
Ieddias): One who agreed to put away his foreign
wife (1 Esd 9 26); called also ‘Jezeias.”


IEZER, i-é’zér, IEZERITES, 1-2’zér-its CIS",
‘Tezer, Nu 26 30): Contracted from ABIE2zER (Josh
17 2, etc) (q.v.).


IGAL, i’gal GR, yigh’al, “he [God] redeems”;
LXX variously "Iya, Igdl, Tadd, Gadl, Iwhd, Lael):

(1) One of the twelve spies sent by Moses from
the wilderness of Paran; son of Joseph, tribe of Issa-
char (Nu 18 7).

(2) One of David’s heroes, son of Nathan of
Zohah (2 § 23 36). In 1 Ch 11 38 he is “Joel
[AN1T, yo°al], the brother of Nathan.”

(3) Son of Shemaiah of the royal house of David,
descendant of Zerubbabel (1 Ch 3 22, AV “‘Igeal’”).


IGDALIAH, ig-da-li’a (WDIDM, yighdalyaha,
“Jeh is great’’): Ancestor of certain persons who had
a “chamber” in the temple in Jeremiah’s time (Jer
35 4).


IGEAL, i’gé-al, 1'jé-al GOR, yigh’al, “he [i.e.
God] redeems’’): A remote descendant of David
(1 Ch 3 22, RV “Igal’’).


IGNORANCE, ig’né-rans (M330, sheghdghah;
&yvoa, dgnota): “Ignorance” is the tr of sh*gha-
ghah, “wandering,” ‘going astray’ (Lev 4 2, etc
“Sf a soul sin through ignorance,” RV“unwittingly,’
m ‘through error’; 5 15; Nu 15 24 ff; cf 35 11;
Josh 20 3 ff; Eccl 5 6; 10 5, “an error”). In the
Law sh*ghaghadh means “innocent error,’’ such as had
to be taken with consideration in judgment (see
passages referred to). “Ignorance’’ is also expressed
hy the negative lo’ with yadha‘, “‘to know’ (Isa 56
10; 63 16; Ps 73 22); also by bi-bhelt da‘ath, lit.
“in want of knowledge” (Dt 19 4; cf 4 12; Josh 20
5, tr “unawares,” “unwittingly’’).

In the NT the words are agnoia, “absence of
knowledge” (Acts 3 17; 17 30; Eph 4 18; 1 Pet
1 14); agnééma, “error” (He 9 7, RVm “Gr igno-
rances’”’); agnésia, “ignorance” (1 Pet 2 15), “no
knowledge” (1 Cor 15 34 RV); agnoéé, “to be with-
out knowledge,” “ignorant’? (Rom 1 13; 10 3; 11
25, etc), “not knowing” (Rom 2 4, etc), “understood
not” (Mk 9 32, ete), “ignorantly” (Acts 17 23, RV
“in ignorance’; 1 Tim 1 13); ididtés, tr4 “igno-
rant” (Acts 4 13), “unlearned” (1 Cor 14 16, RVm
“him that is without gifts,” and so in vs 23.24),
“rude” (2 Cor 11 6); agrdémmatos, once only in
connection with ididtés (Acts 4 13, “unlearned and
ignorant men’’); agrammatos corresponds to mod-
ern ‘illiterate’ (cf Jn 7 15; Acts 26 24); ididtés
originally denoted “the private man” as distin-
guished from those with a knowledge of affairs,
and took on the idea of contempt and scorn. In
Philo it denoted the whole congregation of Israel
as distinguished from the priests (De Vita Mosis,
III. 29). With Paul (L Cor 14 16.23.24) it seems to
denote “plain believers as distinguished from those
with special spiritual gifts.’ In Acts 413 it
may refer to the want of Jewish learning; certainly
it does not mean ignorant in the modern sense.

Paulin Rom 1 18.32 attributes the pre-Christian


1449


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Idolatry
Tilyricum


ignorance of God to “the ungodliness and un-
righteousness of men, who hinder the truth in
unrighteousness’ (but m has, with AV, “hold the
truth, ef 1 Cor 7 30, Gr”); many, however (Alford,
De Wette, Meyer and others), tr “hold back the
truth.” A wilful ignorance is also referred to in
Eph 4 17f; 2 Pet 3 5. But there is also a less
blameworthy ignorance. Paul at Athens spoke of
‘times of ignorance’ which God had “overlooked”
(Acts 17 30); Paul says of himself that he ‘obtained
mercy, because [he] did it [against Christ] ignorantly
in unbelief”? (1 Tim 1 13); Peter said to the Jews
(Acts 3 17) that they and their rulers rejected
Christ ‘in ignorance” (cf 1 Cor 2 8); and Jesus
Himsclf prayed for those who crucified Him: ‘‘Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do’;
(Lk 23 34); in He 5 2 the necessary qualification


of a high priest is that he “can bear gently with ,


the ignorant and erring’—those who sin in igno-
rance or go astray (cf 9 7, “blood, which he offereth
for himself, and for the errors of the people,” m “Gr
ignorances
it increasing responsibility, and the “ignorance”
that may be “overlooked”’ at one stage of the his-
tory of men and nations may be blameworthy and
even criminal at another. W. L. WaLKER


IM, iim (09 , ‘tyim): Same as Iyim (q.v.).
IJE-ABARIM, i-jé-ab’a-rim. See IyE-aBarim.


IJON, jon (jPY, ‘yon; LXX in K has
‘Aly, Ain, or Nalv, Nain; in Ch 'Id, [6; Aldv,
Aién): A town in the territory of Naphtali,
first mentioned in connection with the invasion of
Ben-hadad, in the reign of Baasha. It was cap-
tured along with Dan and Abel-beth-maacah (1 K
15 20; 2 Ch 16 4). It shared with these cities a
similar fate at the hands of Tiglath-pileser in the
reign of Pekah (2 K 15 29). The name survives
in that of Merj A‘yiwn, “meadow of springs,” a
rich, oval-shaped plain to the N.W. of Tell el Kady,
where the [atany turns sharply westward to the sea.
The ancient city may be represented by Tell
Dibbin, an important site to the N. of the plain.

5 W. Ewine

IKKESH, ik’esh (UP, ‘“ikkésh, “crooked’’):
A Tekoite, father of Ira, one of David’s “thirty”
(2 S 23 26; 1 Ch 11 28; 27 9).


ILAI, 14-4, 7H 99, Way): A mighty man of
David (1 Ch 11 29); called Zalmon in 2 § 23 28.


ILIADDN, i-li’a-dun, il’i-ad-un ?EAuaSotv, Elia-
doin, 1 Esd 5 58; AV Eleadun): Possibly corres-
ponding to Henadad in Ezr 3 9.


ILL, il, ILL-FAVORED, il-fa’vérd.
FAVOREDNESS.


ILLUMINATION, i-l0-mi-na’shun: He 10 32 AV,
only, “the former days, in which, after ye were
illuminated [RV “enlightened”’], ye endured a great
fight of afflictions.’ The vb. is g¢wrl{w, photizo,
rendered in 6 4 by ‘‘enlightened” and in both pas-
sages (and not elsewhere in the NT) being used to
describe complete conversion. The vb., indeed, is
used in such a technical way that Syr VSS render
by “baptized,” and it is not perhaps impossible
that the author of He had baptism definitely in
mind. (In the early church baptism is frequently
described as “illumination,” e.g. Justin, A pol., 1.61.)
But this probably would go too far; the most that
can be said is that he means the state of mind of a
full Christian and not that of a catechumen (cf also
Bar 4 2 AV; Sir 25 11).

Burton Scotr Easton


See Evit-


’). Growing light, however, brings with’


ILLUSTRIOUS, i-lus’tri-us, THE (Savpacrés,
thaumastés): A title of rank and merit attached to
the name of Bartacus, the father of Apame (1 Esd 4
29, AV “the admirable). Instead of “the illus-
trious”’ we should possibly read ‘‘colonel”’ (Ant, XI,
iii, 5; HB,s.v.). See Bartacus; APAME.


ILLYRICUM, i-lir’i-kum = (’TAAvpixdv, — TTluri-
kén): A province of the Rom Empire, lying E.
and N.E. of the Adriatic Sea. In his Ep. to the
Rom Paul emphasizes the extent of his missionary
activities in the assertion that “from Jerus, and
round about even unto Illyricum, 1 have fully
preached the gospel of Christ’? (16 19). An
examination of this statement involves three ques-
tions: What is the force of the preposition ‘‘even
unto” (uéxpt, méchri)? What meaning is borne
by the word Illyricum? and, At what period of his
missionary career did Paul reach the limit here
spoken of?

In Gr, as in Eng., the preposition “unto” may
either be exclusive or inclusive. In other words,

Paul may mean that he has preached
1. Force of throughout Macedonia as far as the
“even unto” Illyrian frontier, or his words may

involve a journey within Illyricum
itself, extending perhaps to Dyrrhachium (mod.
Durazzo) on the Adriatic seaboard, which, though
belonging politically to Macedonia, lay in “Gr
Illyria.” But since no word is said in the Acts of
any extension of Paul’s travels beyond the confines
of Macedonia, and since the phrase, “I have fully
preached,” precludes a reference to a hurried or
cursory tour in Illyricum, we should probably take
the word “unto” in its exclusive sense, and under-
stand that Paul claims to have evangelized Mace-
donia as far as the frontier of Illyricum.

What, then, does the word “Tllyricum” denote?
It is sometimes used, like the Gr terms Illyris

and Illyria, to signify a vast area lying
2. Meaning between the Danube on the N. and
of “Illyri- Macedonia and Thrace on the S., ex-
cum’”’ tending from the Adriatic and the Alps

to the Black Sea, and inhabited by a
number of warlike and semi-civilized tribes known
to the Greeks under the general title of Illyrians
(Appian, JUyr. 1; Suetonius, Tiberius, 16); it thus
comprised the provinces of Jllyricum (in the nar-
rower sense), Pannonia and Moesia, which for cer-
tain financial and military purposes formed a single
administrative area, together with a strip of coast
land between Dalmatia and Epirus and, at a later
date, Dacia. Appian (Illyr. 6) even extends the
term to include Raetia and Noricum, but in this
he appears to be in error. But Illyricum has also
a narrower and more precise meaning, denoting a
single Roman province, which varied in extent. with
the advance of the Roman conquest but was finally
organized in 10 AD by the emperor Augustus. At
first it bore the name superior provincia Illyricum or
simply Illyricwm; later it came to be known as Dal-
matia (Tac. Annals, iv.5; Jos, BJ, II, xvi; Dio
Cassius, xlix.36, etc). In accordance with Paul’s
habitual usage of such terms, together with the fact
that he employs a Gr form which is a transliteration
of the Lat Illyricum but does not occur in any
other extant Gr writer, and the fact that he is here
writing to the church at Rome, we may conclude
that in Rom 16 19 IIlyricum bears its more re-
stricted meaning.

The Romans waged two Illyrian wars: in 229-228


BC and in 219 BC, but no province was formed until 167,
when, after the fall of the Macedonian


s = power, Illyria received its provincial con-
: Hele stitution (Livy, xlv.26). At this time
ion to it extended from the Drilo (mod. Drin)
Rome to Dalmatia, which was gradually subju-


gated by Rom arms. In 59 BO Julus
Caesar received as his province Illyricum and Gaul, and


Image


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1450


later Octavian and his generals, Asinius Pollio and Stati-
llus Taurus, waged war there with such success that in
27 BC, at the partition of the provinces between Augustus
and the Senate, INyricum was regarded as wholly pacified
and was assigned to the latter. Renewed disturbances
led, however, toits transference to the emperorin11 BC.
Two years later the province was extended to the Danube,
but in 9 AD, at the close of the 2d Pannonian War, it
was divided into two separate provinces, Pannonia and
Illyricum (Dalmatia). The latter remained an imperial
province, administered by a consular legatus Augusti
pro practore residing at Salonae (mod. Spalato), and two
legions were stationed there, at Delminium and at Bur-
num. One of these was removed by Nero, the other by
Vespasian, and thenceforward the province was garri-
soned only by auxiliary troops. It fell into three judicial
circuits (convenius), that of Scardona comprising Li-
burnia, the northern portion of the province, while those
of Salonae and Narona made up the district of Dalmatia
in the narrower sense. The land was rugged and moun-
tainous, and civilization progressed but slowly; the Ro-
mans, however, organized 5 Rom colonies within the
province and a considerable number of municipia.


The extension of Paul’s preaching to the Illyrian
frontier must be assigned to his 3d missionary
? journey, i.e. to his 2d visit to Mace-
4. Paul’s  donia. His movements during the lst
Relation to visit (Acts 16 12—17 15) are too fully
Illyricum _recorded to admit of our attributing it
to that period, but the account in Acts
20 2 of his second tour is not only very brief, but
the words, ‘‘when he had gone through those parts,”
suggest an extensive tour through the province,
occupying, according to Ramsay, the summer and
autumn of 56 AD. See also DatMatta.

Lireraturse.—A. M. Poinsignon, Quid praecipue apud
Romanos adusque Diocletiani tempora Illyricum fuerit
(Paris, 1846); Zippe, Die rémische Herrschaft in Illyrien
bis auf Augustus PPeipzig, 1877); H. Cons, La province
romaine de Dalmatie (Paris, 1882); T. Mommsen, CIL,
III, pp. 279 ff; T. Mommsen et J. Marquardt, Manuel
des antiguités romaines (Fr. T), 1X, 171 ff.

M. N. Topo

IMAGE, im’ay (poy, celem; elxdv, eikén): Its
usage falls under 3 main heads. (1) ‘Image’ as
object of idolatrous worship (tr® about a dozen
words, including M202, masgékhah, “molten image’
(Dt 9 12, ete]; M282, maceébhah, in AV tr? “image”
or “pillar,” in RV always “‘pillar’’ [Ex 23 24, ete];
3B , pesel, “graven image’ [Ex 20 4, etc]; ¢elem,
“image” [2 K 11 18, etc]; etkin, “image’’ [e.g.
Rev 14 9]); (2) of man as made in the image of
God; (3) of Christ as the image of God. Here
we are concerned with the last two usages. For
“Gmage’”’ in connection with idolatrous practices,
see Ipotatry; Imaces; Pruuar; Trraruim,
etc.

-L. Man as Made in the Divine Image.—To define
man’s fundamental relation to God, the priestly

writer in Gen uses two words: “image”
1. In (celem) and “‘likeness’’ (d*mith); once
the OT employing both together (Gen 1 26;

cf 5 3), but elsewhere one without the
other, “image” only in 1 27; 9 6, and “likeness”
only in 5 1. The priestly writer alone in the OT
uses this expression to describe the nature of man,
though the general meaning of the passage Gen 1
26 f is echoed in Ps 8 5-8, and the term itself re-
appears in Apoc (Sir 17 3; Wisd 2 23) and in the
NT (see below). : . '

The idea is important in relation to the Bib.
doctrine of man, and has figured prominently in
theological discussion. The following are some of
the questions that arise:

(1) Is there any distinction to be understood between
“image” and ‘‘likeness’’? Most of the Fathers, and some
jater theologians, attempt to distinguish between them.
(a2) Some have referred “‘image" to man's bodliy form,
and ‘‘likeness"’ to his spiritual nature (Justin Martyr,
Trenaeus). (b) Others, esp. the Alexandrian Fathers,
understood by the ‘‘Image”’ the mental and moral endow-
ments native to man, and by the “‘iikeness'’ the Divine
perfections which man can only gradually acquire by


free development and moral conflict (Clement of Alex-
andria and Origen), or which Is conferred on man as a


gift of grace. (c) This became the basis of the later
Roman Catholic distinction between the natural gifts
of rationality and freedom (=the image), and the super-
natural endowments of grace which God bestowed on
man after He had created him (the likeness=donum
superadditum). The former remained after the Fall,
though in an enfeebled state; the latter was lost through
sin, but restored by Christ. The early Protestants re-
jected this distinction, maintaining that supernatural
righteousness was part of the true nature and idea of
man, i.e. was included in the ‘‘image,’’ and not merely
externally superadded. Whatever truth these distinc-
tions may or may not contain theologically, they cannot
be exegetically inferred from Gen 1 26, where {as is
now generally admitted) no real difference is intended,
We have here simply a ‘‘duplication of synonyms
(Driver) for the sake of emphasis, The two terms are
elsewhere used interchangeably.


(2) What, then, is to be understood by the Di-
vine image? Various answers have been given.
(a) Some of the Fathers (influenced by Philo) sup-
posed that the “image” here = the Logos (called
“the image of the invisible God” in Col 1 15), on
the pattern of whom man was created. But to
read the Logos doctrine into the creation narrative
is to ignore the historic order of doctrinal develop-
ment. (6) That it connotes physical resemblance
to God (see (1), (a) above; so in the main Skinner,
ICC, in loc.). It may be admitted that there is a
secondary reference to the Divine dignity of the
human body; but this does not touch the essence
of the matter, inasmuch as God is not represented
as having physical form. (c) That it consists of
dominion over the creatures (Socinian view; so
also Gregory of Nyssa, Chrysostom, etc). This
would involve an unwarranted narrowing of the
idea. It is true that such “dominion” is closely
associated with the image in Gen 1 26 (cf Ps 8
6-8). But the “image of God” must denote pri-
marilf man’s relation to his Creator, rather than
his relation to the creation. Man’s lordship over
Nature is not identical with the image, but is au
effect of it. (d) It is best to take the term as refer-
ring to the whole dignity of man, in virtue of his
fundamental affinity to God. It implies the pos-
session by man of a free, self-conscious, rational
and moral personality, like unto that of God—a
nature capable of distinguishing right and wrong,
of choosing the right and rejecting the wrong, and
of ascending to the heights of spiritual attainment
and communion with God. This involves a separa-
tion of man from the beast, and his supremacy as
the culmination of the creative process.

(8) Does the term imply man’s original perfec-
tion, lost through sin? The old Protestant divines
maintained that the first man, before the Fall,
possessed original righteousness, not only in germ
but in developed form, and that this Divine image
was destroyed by the Fall. Exegetically considered,
this is certainly not taught by the priestly writer,
who makes no mention of the Fall, assumes that the
image was transmitted from father to son (cf Gen
5 1 with 6 3), and naively speaks of post-diluvian
men as created in the image of God (Gen 9 6; ef
1 Cor 11 7; Jas 3 9). Theologically considered,
the idea of the perfect holiness of primitive man is
based on an abstract conception of God’s work in
creation, which precludes the idea of development,
ignores the progressive method of the Divine govern-
ment and the essential place of effort and growth in
human character. It is more in harmony with
modern conceptions (a) to regard man as originally
endowed with the power of right choice, rather than
with a complete character given from the first; and
(b) to think of the Divine image (though seriously
defaced) as continuing even in the sinful state, as
man’s inalienable capacity for goodness and his true
destination. Ifthe Divine image in man is a self-
conscious, rationa] and ethical personality, it can-
not be a merely accidental or transitory attribute,
but is an essential constituent of his being.


1451


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Image


Two features may be distinguished in the NT
doctrine of the Divine image in man: (1) man’s
first creation in Adam, (2) his second
2. In or new creation in Christ. As to (1),
the NT the doctrine of the OT is assumed in
the NT. Paul makes a special appli-
cation of it to the question of the relation of husband
and wife, which is a relation of subordination on the
part of the wife, based on the fact that man alone
was created immediately after the Divine image
(1 Cor 11 7). Thus Paul, for the special purpose
of his argument, confines the meaning of the image
to man’s lordly authority, though to infer that he
regards this as exhausting its significance would be
quite unwarranted. Man’s affinity to God is im-
plied, though the term “image’’ is not used, in Paul’s
sermon to the Athenians (Acts 17 28f, man the
“offspring”? of God). See also Jas 3 9 (it is wrong
to curse men, for they are “‘made after the likeness
of God’’).

(2) More characteristic of the NT is the doctrine
of the new creation. (a) The redeemed man is
said to be in the image of God (the Father). He is
“renewed unto knowledge after the image of him
that created him” (Col 3 10), i.e. of God the Crea-
tor, not here of Christ or the Logos (as some) (cf
Eph 4 24, “after God”). Though there is here
an evident reference to Gen 1 26f, this does not
imply that the new creation in Christ is identical
with the original creation, but only that the two
are analogous. To Paul, the spiritual man in Christ
is on a higher level than the natural (‘psychical’)
man as found in Adam (cf esp. 1 Cor 15 44-49),
in whom the Divine image consisted (as we have
seen) in potential goodness, rather than in full
perfection. Redemption is infinitely more than
the restoration of man’s primitive state. (b) The
Christian is further said to be gradually transformed
into the image of the Son of God. This progressive
metamorphosis involves not only moral and spiritual
likeness to Christ, but also ultimately the Chris-
tian’s future glory, including the glorified body, the
“passing through a gradual assimilation of mind and
character to an ultimate assimilation of His dééa,
déxa, the absorption of the splendor of His presence”
(Sanday and Headlam, Rom, 218; see Rom 8 29;
1 Cor 15 49; 2 Cor 3 18; and ef Phil 3 21; 1 Jn
3 2).

Hl. Christ the Image of God.—In 3 important pas-
sages in EV, the term “image’’ defines the relation
of Christ to God the Father; twice in Paul: ‘the
light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the
image of God” (2 Cor 4 4); ‘who is the image of
the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation”
(Col 1 15); and once in He: “who being the efful-
gence of his glory, and the very image of his sub-
stance’ (1 3). These statements, taken in their
contexts, register the highest reach of the Christol-
ogy of the Epp. ,

In the two Pauline passages, the word used is
eikén, which was generally the LXX rendering of
celem (Vulg imago); it is derived from
efxw, eik0, touxa, éotka, “to be like,”
“regemble,” and means that which
resembles an object and reprosents it,
as a copy represents the original. In He 1 3 the
word used is xapaxrhp (charaktér), which is found
here only in the NT, and is tr4 in Vulg figura, AV
“express image,’ RV “very image,” RVm “im-
press.” It is derived from xapdeow (chardssé), ‘‘to
engrave,’ and has passed through the following
meanings: (1) an engraving instrument (active
sense); (2) the engraved stamp or mark on the
instrument (passive sense); (3) the impress made
by the instrument on wax or other object; (4) hence,
generally, the exact image or expression of any per-
gon or thing as corresponding to the original, the


1. The
Terms


distinguishing feature, or traits by which a person
or thing is known (hence Eng. words “character,”
“characteristic’’). The word conveys practically
the same meaning as eikon; but Westcott distin-
guishes them by saying that the latter “gives a
complete representation, under conditions of earth,
of that which it figures,” while charaktér ‘conveys
representative traits only’? (Westcott on He 1 3).
The idea here expressed is closely akin to that of
the Logos doctrine in Jn (1 1-18). Like the Logos,
the Image in Paul and in He is the
2. Meaning Son of God, and is the agent of creation
as Applied as well as the medium of revelation.
to Christ “What a word (logos) is to the ear,
namely a revelation of what is within,
an image is to the eye; and thus in the expression
there is only a translation, as it were, of the same
fact from one sense to auother”’ (Dorner, System of
Ch. D., ET, III, 178). AsImage, Christ is the visible
representation and manifestation of the invisible
God, the objective expression of the Divine nature,
the face of God turned as it were toward the world,
the exact likeness of the Father in all things except
being the Father. Thus we receive “the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
deus Christ” (2 Cor 4 6). He is the facsimile of
od.
Is Christ described as the Image of God in His
preincarnate, His incarnate, or else His exalted
state? It is best to say that different
3. To What passages refer to different states, but
State Does that if we take the whole trend of NT


It Refer? teaching, Christ is seen to be essen-
tially, and in every state, the Image of -
God. (a) In He 1 3 the reference seems to be to


the eternal, preincarnate Son, who is inherently and
essentially the expression of the Divine substance.
So Paul declares that He subsisted originally in the
form of God (év poppy Geot trdpxwv, en morphé
theo. hupdrchon, Phil 2 6). (6) In Jn 118; 12
45; 14 9, though the term image is not used, we
have the idea of the Avstorical Jesus as a perfect reve-
lation of the character and glory of God. (c) In
the two Pauline passages (2 Cor 4 4; Col 1 15),
the reference is probably to the glorified, exalted
Christ; not to His preéxistent Divine nature, nor
to His temporal manifestation, but to His ‘‘whole
Person, in the divine-human state of His present
heavenly existence’ (Meyer). These passages in
their cumulative impressions convey the idea that
the Image is an inalienable property of His person-
ality, not to be limited to any stage of His existence.
Does this involve identity of essence of Father
and Son, as in the Homoousion formula of the Ni-
cene Creed? Not necessarily, for man

4. Theo- also bears the image of God, even in
logical his sinful state (see I above), a fact
Implications which the Arians sought to turn to their
advantage. Yet in the light of the

context, we must affirm of Christ an absolutely
unique kinship with God. In the Col passage, not
only are vast cosmic and redemptive functions
assigned to Him, but there is said to dwell in Him
“all the fulness of the Godhead bodily” (1 19; 2 9).
In He not only is the Son the final revelation of God
to men, the upholder of the universe, and the very
image of the Divine nature, but also the effulgence
(dratyacua, apatiigasma) of God’s glory, and there-
fore of one nature with Him as the ray is of one
essence with the sun (1 1-3). The superiority of
the Son is thus not merely one of function but of
nature. On the other hand, the figure of the
“image” certainly guards against any Sabellian
identification of Father and Son, as if they were but
modes of the one Person; for we cannot identify
the pattern with its copy, nor speak of anyone as
an image of himself. And, finally, we must not


Image of God
Images


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1452


overlook the affinity of the Logos with man; both
are the image of God, though the former in a unique
sense. The Logos is at once the prototype of hu-
manity within the Godhead, and the immanent
Divine principle within humanity.

Both in Paul and in He we have an echo of the
Jewish doctrine of Wisdom, and of Philo’s doctrine


of the Logos. Inthe Alexandrine Book
5. Relation of Wisd, written probably under Stoic
to Pre- influence, Divine Wisdom is pictorially
Christian represented as “an effulgence [apau-
Thought gasma} from everlasting light, and an


unspotted mirror of the working of
God, and an image [eikdn] of His goodness” (7 26).
Philo repeatedly calls the Logos or Divine world-
principle the image [eik6n, charaktér] of God, and also
describes it as an effulgence of God. But this use of
current Alexandrian terminology and the superficial
resemblance of ideas are no proof of conscious bor-
rowing on the part of the apostles. There is this
fundamental distinction, that Philo’s Logos is not a
self-conscious personality, still less a historical mdi-
vidual, but an allegorical hypostatizing of an ab-
stract idea; whereas in Paul and He, as in John, the
Divine archetype is actually realized in a historical
person, Jesus Christ, the Son and Revealer of God.

D. Mratt Epwarns

IMAGE OF GOD. See Gon, Imacs or.


IMAGERY, im’aj-ri (MWA, maskith, “carved
figure’): Only in Ezk 8 12, “every man in his
chambers of imagery,’ i.e. dark chambers on whose
walls were pictures in relief representing all kinds
of reptiles and vermin, worshipped by elders of
Israel. Some maintain that the cult was of foreign
origin, either Egyp (Bertholet, Comm. on Ezk), or
Bab (Redpath, Westminster Comm. on Ezk); others
that it was the revival of ancient superstitions of a
totemistic kind which had survived in obscure
circles in Israel (W. R. Smith, Lectures on the Reli-
gion of the Semites, rev. ed, 357). The word here
rendered “imagery” is elsewhere in AV tr¢ “image”
(of stone) (Lev 26 1, RV “figured stone’’), “pic-
tures” (Nu 38 52, RV “figured stones’; Prov 26 11,
RV “network’’); twice it means imagination, con-
ceit, ie. a mental picture (Ps 73 20; Prov 18 11).
“Imagery” occurs once in Apoc (Sir 38 27 AV,
els GuorGoa fwypaglay, eis homordsai zdgraphian, RV
“to preserve likeness in his portraiture’).

D. Mrati Enwarps
IMAGES, im’éj-iz (DDY, celem; elxdv, cikén):
. Definition
. Origin
Early Developments
. Bible References
Palestinian Customs
. Some Technical Terms

(D Maccébhah (“pillar'’)

(2) 'Ashérah (‘‘grove"')

3) Hamman (‘‘sun-image’’)

6. Obscure Bible References

(1) Golden Calf

Jeroboam's Calves

i Brazen Serpent
(3) Teraphim

(4) Image of Jealousy

(5) Chambers of Imagery

(6) Ephod
LITERATURE

Images, as used here, are visible representations
of supposedly supernatural or divine beings or
powers. They may be (1) themselves
objects of worship, (2) pictures, em-
bodiments or dwelling-places (temple,
ark, pillar, priests) of deities wor-
shipped, (3) empowered instruments (amulets,
charms, etc) of object or objects worshipped, (4)
pictures or symbols of deities reverenced though
not worshipped. These images may be shapeless
blocks, or symmetrically carved figures, or objects
of Nature, such as animals, sun, moon, stars, etc.


ao PONS


1. Defi-
nition


These visible objects may sometimes be considered,
esp. by the uninstructed, as deities, while by others
in the small community they are thought of as in-
struments or symbolizations of deity. Even when
they are thought of as deities, this does not exclude
a sense and apprehension of a spiritual godhead,
since visible corporeal beings may have invisible
souls and spiritual attributes, and even the stars
may be thought of as “seats of celestial spirits.”
An idol is usually considered as either the deity it-
self or his permanent tenement; afetish is an object
which has been given a magical or divine power,
either because of its having been the temporary
home of the deity, or because it has been formed or
handled or otherwise spiritually influenced by such
deity. The idol is generally communal, the fetish
private; the idol is protective, the fetish is usually
not for the common good. (See Jevons, Idea of
God in Early Religions, 1910.) Relics and sym-
bolic figures do not become “images” in the objec-
tionable sense until reverence changes to worship.
Until comparatively recent times, the Hebrews
seem to have offered no religious objection to ‘“ar-
tistic”’ images, as is proved not only from the de-
scription of Solomon’s temple, but also from the
discoveries of the highly decorated temple of Jeh
at Syene dating from the 6th cent. BC, and from
ruins of synagogues dating from the pre-Christian
and early Christian periods (PEF, January, 1908;
Expos, December, 1907; Expos T, January and
February, 1908). The Second Commandment was
not an attack upon artists and sculptors but_upon
idolaters. Decoration by means of graven figures
was not anciently condemned, though, as Jos shows,
by the time of the Seleucidae all plastic art was
regarded with suspicion. The brazen serpent was
probably destroyed in Hezekiah's time because it
had ceased to be an ancient artistic relic and had
become an object of worship (see below). So the
destruction of the ark and altar and temple, which
for so long a time had been the means of holy
worship, became at last a prophetic hope (Isa
6 7; Jer 3 6; Am 5 25; Hos 6 6; cf Zec 14 20).
While the temple is not naturally thought of as an
“image,” it was as truly so as any Bethel. An
idol was the temple in miniature—a dwelling-place
of the god. When an image became the object of
worship or a means by which a false god was wor-
shipped, it became antagonistic to the First and

Second Commandments respectively.
The learned author of the art. on “Image Wor-
ship” in the HB (11th ed) disposes too easily of
this question when he suggests that


2. Origin image-worship is “a contmmuance by

adults of their childish games with
dolls... .. Idolatrous cults repose largely on make-
believe.”


Compare the similar statement made from a very
different standpoint by the author of Great Is Diana of
the Ephesians, or the Original of Idolatry (1695): ‘' All
Superstitions are to the People but like several sports to
children, which varying in their several seasons yield
them pretty entertainment," etc.


No universal institution or custom is founded
wholly on superstition. If it does not answer to
some real human need, and “‘if its foundations are
not laid broad and deep in the nature of things, it
must perish” (J. G. Fraser, Psyche’s Task, 1909,
103; cf Salomon Reinach, Revue des études grecques,
1906, 324). Image-worship is too widespread and
too natural to humanity, as is proved In modern
centuries as well as in the cruder earlier times,
to have its basis and source in any mere external
and accidental circumstances. All modern research
tends to corroborate our belief that this is psycho-
logical rather than ecclesiastical in its origin. It
is not imposed externally; it comes from within,


. 1453


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Image of God
Images


and naturally accompanies the organic unfold-
ment of the human animal in his struggle toward
self-expression. This is now generally acknowl-
edged to be true of religious feeling and instinct
(see esp. Rudolf Eucken, Christianity and _ the
New Idealism, 1909, ch i; I. King, The Develop-
ment of Religion, 1910); it ought to be counted
equally true of religious expression. Neither can
the origin of image-worship or even of magical rites
be fully explained, as Fraser thinks, by the ordi-
nary laws of association. These associations only
become significant because the devoted worshipper
already has a body of beliefs and generalizations
which make him attentive to the associations which
seem to him religiously or magically important.
(Jastrow, Aspects of Rel. Belief and Practice in Baby-
lonia and Assyria; cf James H. Leuba, Psy-
chological Origin and Nature of Religion, 1909;
Study of Religions, 1911). So animism must be
regarded as a philosophy rather than as an original
religious faith, since 1t is based on an “explanation
of phenomena rather than an attitude of mind
toward the cause of these phenomena” (#B, 11th ed,
art. ‘‘Animism,” and cf Héfiding, Philosophy of Re-
ligion, 1906, 138). In whatever ways the various
image-worshipping cults arose historically—whether
from a primitive demonology or from the apotheo-
sis of natural objects, or from symbolism, or a false
connection of cause with effect—in any case it had
some human need behind it and human nature
beneath it. The presence of the image testifies to
faith in the supernatural being represented by the
image and to a desire to keep the object of worship
near. Prayer is easier when the worshipper can


see his god or some sacred thing the god has honored’


(ef M. L’abbé E. Van Drival, De Vorigine et des
sources de Vidolatrie, Paris, 1860).

The first man was not born with a totem-pole in
his fist, nor did the earliest historic men possess


images. They lacked temples and
3. Histor- altars and ephods and idols, as they
ical Begin- lacked the fire-stick and _ potter’s
nings and wheel. Religion, which showed itself
Early De- so strong in the next stage of human
velopment life, must have had very firm begin-


nings in the prehistoric period; but
what were its external expressions we do not yet
certainly know, excepting in the methods of burying
and caring for the dead. It seems probable that
primitive historic man saw in everything that moved
an active soul, and that he saw in every extraordi-
nary thing in earth or heaven the expression of a
supernatural power. Yet reflective thinking began
earlier than Tylor and all the older scientific anthro-
pologists supposed. Those earlier investigators
were without extended chronological data, and
although ingenuity was exercised in systematizing
the beliefs and customs of modern savages, it was
necessarily impossible always to determine in this
way which were the most primitive cults. Exca-
vations in Babylonia, Egypt and elsewhere have
enabled us for the first time to trace with some
chronological certainty the religious expressions of
earliest historic man. That primitive man was so
stupid that he could not tell the difference bctween
men and things, and that therefore totemism or
fetishism or a low form of animism was necessarily
the first expression of religious thought is a theory
which can no longer be held very buoyantly in the
face of the new and striking knowledge, material
and religious, which is now seen to be incorporated
in some of the most ancient myths of mankind.
(See e.g. Winckler, Die jingsten Kampfe wider den
Panbabylonismus, 1907; Jeremias, The OT in the
Light of the Ancient Hast, 2 vols, 1911.) The pan-
Bab theory, which makes so much use of these texts,
is not certain, but the facts upon which the theory


depends areclear. It is a suggestive fact that among
the carliest known deities or symbols of deities men-
tioned in the most ancient inscriptions are to be
found the sun, moon, stars and other great forces
of Nature. Out of these conceptions and the mys-
tery of life—which seems to have affected early
mankind even more powerfully than ourselves—
sprang the earliest known religious language, the
myth, which antedated by aeons our oldest written
texts, since some of these myths appear fully formed
in the oldest texts. Rough figures of these solar
and stellar deities are found from very early times
in Babylonia. So in the earliest Egyp texts the
sun appears as divine and the moon as “the bull
among the stars,’ and rough figures of the gods were
carved in human or animal form, or these are rep-
resented pictorially by diadems or horns or ostrich
feathers, as far back as the [id Dynasty, while
even earlier than this stakes and pillars and heaps
of stones are sacred. (See further, HDB, 5th vol,
176 ff; Erman, A Handbook of Egyp Rel.; Steindorf,
Rel. of the Ancient Egyptians, 1905.) These rude
and unshaped objects do not testify, as was once
supposed, to a lower form of religious development
than when sculptured images are found. The
shapeless fetish, which not long ago was generally
accepted as the earliest form of image, really repre-
sents a more advanced stage and higher form of
religious expression than the worship of a beauti-
fully or horribly carved image. It has been gen-
erally conceded since the days of Robertson Smith
that it takes at least as much imagination and
reflection to see an expression of deity in imageless
matter as in the carved forms. Rude objects un-
touched by human hand, even in the most highly
developed worships, have been most prized. The
earliest images were probably natural objects which,
because of their peculiar shapes or functions, were
thought of either as divine or as made sacred by
the touch of deity. Multiplied copies of these ob-
jects would naturally be made when worshippers
increased or migrations occurred. While images
may have been used in the most early cults, yet
the highest development of image-worship has
occurred among the most civilized peoples. Both
deities and idols are less numerous in the early than
in the later days of a religion. This is true in
India, Assyria, Babylonia, and Egypt, as all experts
now agree. Idols are not found among uncivilized
peoples, such as the Bushmen, Fuegians, Eskimos,
etc. (See eg. Allen Menzies, History of fel.,
1895.) Images of the gods presuppose a power of
discrimination that could only be the result of
reflection. The earliest idols known among the
Semites were rude stone pillars or unshapen blocks.
These, as the fetish, were probably adored, not for
themselves, but for the spirit that was supposed to
be in them or to have touched them. Deities and
idols are multiplied easily, not only by philological,
geographical and social causes, but through inter-
tribal and international associations. One thing
absolutely proved by recent excavations has been
the extent to which the representations of local
deities have been modified by the symbolic art of
surrounding nations. Babylonia, for example,
was influenced by the Syro-Hittite religious art at
least as much as by that of Egypt (William Hayes
Ward, Cylinders and Other Ancient Oriental Seals,
1909; Clay, Amurru, 1910). Even in adjacent
localities the same deity varied greatly in its pic-
torial representation. See Pauestins ExpiLora-
TION, and Revue biblique, XIV, 315-48. With the
possible exception of one reign in Egypt, during
which Ikhnaton refused to allow any deities to be
worshipped excepting the sun disc and himself,
idolatry outside of the Heb kingdom was never made
a crime against the state until the days of Con-


Images


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1454


stantine. Theodosius (392 AD) not only placed
sacrifices and divination among the capital crimes,
but placed a penalty upon anyone who entered a

heathen temple.
‘The dignity of the image in common thought in
Bible times may be seen from the fact that man is
said to have been made in God’s image


4. Bible  (D2%, celem; cf 1S 6 5; Nu 33 52),
References and Christ is said to be “the image of
and Pales- the invisible God” (eixdév, eikén;
tinian ef Col 115 with Rom 1 23). The
Customs heathen thought of the sun and stars


and idols as being images of the gods,
but the Hebrews, though Jeh’s temple was image-
less, thought of normal humanity as in some true
sense possessing a sacred resemblance to Deity,
though early Christians taught that only Christ
was the Father’s “image” in unique and absolute
perfection. See Imace. The ordinary words for
“image” by a slight change came to mean vermin,
carrion, false gods, no gods, carcases, dung, etc.
Heathen gods were undoubtedly accounted real
beings by the early Hebrews, and the images of
these enemies of Jeh were doubtless looked upon as
possessing an evil associated (?) power. In the
earlier OT era, images, idols, and false gods are
synonymous; but as early as the 8th cent. BC
Heb prophets begin to reach the lofty conception
that heathen gods are non-existent, or at least practi-
cally so, when compared with the ever-living Jeh,
while the idols are ‘‘worthless things’ or ‘“non-
entities” (Isa 2 8.18.20; 10 10.11; 191; 31 7;
ef Jer 14 14; Ezk 30 13; note the satiric term
*élilim, as contrasted with the powerful ’éldhim).
The many ordinary terms used by the Hebrews for
an idol or image mean “copy,” stmulacrum,
“likeness,” “representation.” These are often,
however, so compounded as technically to express
a particular form, as “graven” or ‘“‘carved” image
(e.g. Ex 20 4; 2 Ch 33 7) of wood or stone, i.e.
one cut into shape by a tool; “molten image” (e.g.
Ex 32 4; Lev 19 4), i.e. one cast out of melted
metal (standing image) (Lev 26 1 AV, and see
below), etc. However, a few of the OT terms and
modes of worship are unusual, or have a more diffi-
cult technical meaning, or have been given a new
interest by new discoveries, and such deserve a more
extended notice.
MA, maccébhah: These were upright stone
_ pillars, often mentioned in the OT, sometimes as
abodes (Bethels) or symbols of deity—


6. Most esp. as used by the heathen—but also
Important as votive offerings, memorial and grave
Technical stones (Gen 28 18; 31 45; 35 14.20;
Terms Josh 24 26; 18712). The rever-


ence for these stones is closely con-
nected with that found among all Sem peoples for
obelisks (Gen 33 20; 365 7), cairns (Gen 28 18;
Josh 4 6), and circles (Josh 4 3.5.20). Rough
stone pillars from time immemorial were used in
Sem worship (Kittel, Hist of the Hebrews, Il, 84).
They were thought of primitively as dwelling-
places of deity, and the stones and the spots where
they stood were therefore accounted sacred. From
very early times the mystery of life pressed itself
upon human attention, and these stones were viewed
as phallic images. These images were at first rough
and undifferentiated, but became later well defined
as maleorgans. At Tell Zakariyah the end of one
is sculptured to represent a human face. Some sort
of phallicism underlies all early Sem religion, the
form of which is determined by the attention paid
to the date palm, to the breeding of flocks, to as-
trology, and to social life. This phallicism did not
always represent coarse thought, but sometimes a
very profound spiritual conception; cf GoLDEN


Car, and note Wiedemann’s statement in HDB,
V, 180 that in Egypt the gods Hu, “Taste,” and
Sa, “Perception,” were created from the blood of
the sun-god’s phallus. These images of fertility
and reproduction were naturally connected im
Canaan with the worship of the Baals or “lords” of
each locality, upon whose favor as possessor of the
land fertility depended. They were also naturally
associated with the cult of Astarte, the female
counterpart of all the Baals (see AstarTs). In the
OT the Baalim and Asherim are almost invariably
classed together, although the latter were wooden
posts dedicated to a particular goddess, while
“Baal” was merely a title which could be given to
any male Sem deity, and sometimes even to_his
female associate. The macgébhoth were set up in a
“high place” (q.v.), attracting reverence because
of its ‘elevation, isolation and mystery” (Vincent).
Originally these pillars were not considered as idols,
but were naturally erected to Jeh (Gen 28 18;
31 45; 35 14; Ex 24 4), and even Isaiah (19 19)
and Hosea (3 4) approve them, though pillars dedi-
cated to idols must of course be destroyed (Ex 23
24; 3413; Jer 43 13; Ezk 26 11). Only im late
times or by very far-sighted law-givers were the
mageebhath erected to Jeh condemned; but after
the centralization of the Jeh-worship in Jerus, these
pillars were condemned, even when set up In the
name of Jeh, and the older places of worship with
their indiscriminate rituals and necessary heathen
affiliations were also wisely discarded (Lev 26 1;
Dt 16 22; see also GoLpEN CaLF).

MTOR, ’dshérah: Perhaps a goddess (see ASHE-
RAH), but as ordinarily used in the OT, a sacred
tree or stump of a tree planted in the earth (Dt 16
21) or a pole made of wood and set up near the
altar (Jgs 6 26; 1 K 16 33; Isa 17 8).

It has been supposed that these were primarily symbols
of a goddess ‘Ashorah or Ashtoreth (Kuenen, Baethgen),
and they were certainly in primitive thought connected
with the tree cult and the sacred groves so univer-
sally honored by the Semites (see esp. W. R. Smith,
Religion of the  Semites, 169, 487; Stade, Geschichte,
160 ff; Fraser, Golden Bough, II, 56-117; John O'Neill,
Night of the Gods, II, 57); but the tree of life is closely
connected in texts and pictures with the human organ of
generation, and there can be no doubt that there is a
phallic meaning connected with this sacred stake or
pole, as with the magcébhéth Uescribed above. See
references in HDB under ‘'‘Asherah,"' and cf Transactions
of the Victoria Institute, XXXIX, 234; Winckler, Keilin-
schriftliches Textbuch zum AT. As these wooden posts
from earliest times represented the ideas of fertility and
were connected with the mystery of life, they naturally
became the signs and symbols in many lands of the local
gods and goddesses of fertility.

Astarte was by far the most popular deity of ancient
Pal. See Asurorets. The figures of Astarte from the
12th to the 9th cent. BC, as found at Gezer, have large
hips, disclosing an exaggerated idea of fecundity. In
close connection with the Astarte sanctuaries in Pal
were found numberless bodies of little children, none
over a week old, undoubtedly representing the sacrifice
of the firstborn by these Canaanites (R.A.S. Macalister,
Excavation of Gezer, 3 vols). These Asherim were erected
at the most sacred Heb sanctuaries, at Samaria (2 K 18
6), Bethel (2 K 23 15), and even in the Temple of Jerus
(2 K 23 6). The crowning act, of King Josiah’s reforma-
tion was to break down these images (2 K 23 14). As
the astrological symbol of Baal was the sun, Astarte is
often thought of as the moon-goddess, but her symbol
was Teally Venus. mr She was, however, sometimes called
“ Queen of Heaven” (Jer 7 18; 44 17.19; butseeZATW,
VI, 123-30).

TOD, hamman, AV “images,” “idols”; RV “sun-
images” (Lev 26 30; 2 Ch 14 5; 34 4.7; Isa 17
8; 27 9; Ezk 6 4. 6): This worship may originally
have come from Babylonia, but the reverence of
the sun under the name Baal-hamman had long
been common in Pal before Joshua and the
Israelites entered the country. These sun-images
were probably obelisks or pillars connected with the
worship of some local Baal. The chariot and
horses of the sun, mentioned (2 K 23 11) as having
an honored place at the western entrance of the


1455


Jerus Temple, represented not a local but a foreign
- cult. In Bab temples, sacrifices were made to the
sun-chariot, which seems to have had a special sig-
nificance in time of war (Pinches, HDB, IV, 629;
see also CHARIOTS OF THE Sun).

(1) Golden Calf and Jeroboam’s Calves (see GoLDEN


CALF).
(2) Brazen Serpent (Nu 21 4-9; 2K
6. Obscure 18 4).—The serpent, because of its
Bible strange, lightning-like power of poison-
References ous attack, its power to shed its
skin, and to paralyze its prey, hasbeen
the most universally revered of all creatures.


Living serpents were kept in Bab temples. So the
cobra was the guardian of royalty in Egypt, sym-
bolizing the kingly power of life and death. Inmy-


thology, the serpent was not always considered a bad
demon, enemy of the Creator,but often appears as the
emblem of wisdom, esp. in connection with health-
giving and life-giving gods, such as Ea, savior of man-
kind from the flood, and special ‘god of the physi-
cians’’ in Babylon; Thoth, thegod of wisdomin DEL
who healed the eye of Horus and brought Osins to
life again; Apollo, the embodiment of physical per-
fection, and his son, Aesculapius, most famous giver
of physical and moral health and curer of disease
among the Greeks. Among the Hebrews also a
seal (1500-1000 BC) shows a worshipper before a
horned serpent raised on a pole (Wm. Hayes Ward).
In Phoen mythology the serpent is also connected
with wisdom and long life, and it is found on the
oldest Heb seals and on late Jewish talismans (Revue
biblique internationale, July, 1908, 382-94); at
Gezer, in Pal, a small “brazen serpent”? (a cobra)
was found in the “cave of oracles,’ and in early
Christian art Jesus the Lord of Life is often repre-
sented standing triumphantly upon the serpent or
holding it in His fist. In the Heb narrative found
in Nu 21, the serpent evidently appears as a well-
known symbol representing the Divine ability to
cure disease, being erected before the eyes of the
Israelites to encourage faith and stop the plague.
It was not a totem, for the totem belongs to a single
family and is never set up for the veneration of
other families (Ramsay, Cities of Si. Paul, 39).
Hezekiah destroyed it because it was receiving
idolatrous worship (2 K 18 4), though there is no
hint that such worship was ever a part of the official
temple cult (Benzinger); for if this had been done,
the earlier prophets could hardly have remained
silent. The above explanation seems preferable
to the one formerly offered that the serpent was
merely a copy of the disease-bearer, as the images
offered by the Philis were copies of the ulcers
that plagued them (1 S 6 4). Sce further Nu-
HUSHTAN.

(3) Teraphim (E°PWA, terdphim)—These are
usually considered household gods, but this does
not necessarily include the idea that they were
images of ancestors, though this is not improbable
(Nowack, Hebrew Archaeology, II, 23; HDB, II,
190); that they were images of Jeh is a baseless
supposition (see Kautasch, HDB, V, 643). Some-
times they appear in the house (1 8 19 13.16);
sometimes in sanctuaries (Jgs 175; 18 14);
sometimes as carried by travelers and armies (Gen
31 30; Ezk 2121). They are never directly
spoken of as objects of worship (yet cf Gen 31 30),
but are mentioned in connection with wizardry (2 K
23 24), and as a means of divination (Ezk 21 21;
Zec 10 2), perhaps not necessarily inconsistent
with Jeh-worship (Hos 3 4). They were some-
times small and could be easily hidden (Gen 31 34);
at other times larger and in some way resembling
a human being (1 5 19 13). Jewish commentators
thought the ¢*raphim were in early times mummi-
fied human heads which were represented in later


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Images


centuries by rude images (Moore, Crit. and Exeg.
Comm. on Jgs, 1895, 382; see esp. Chwolsohn, Die
Ssabier u. der Ssabismus, —

II, 19, 150). Customs of
divination by means of
such heads were not un-
known. In Israel the
tréphim were sometimes
certainly used in consult-
ing Jeh(Jgs 17 5; 18 14 ff),
though their use was later
officially condemned (2 K
23 24). The traphim in
the home doubtless corre-
spond in use to the Epxop
(which see) in the sanctu-
ary, and therefore these
are frequently connected.
Certain small rude images
have lately been uncovered
in Pal by Bliss, at Tell el-
Hesy, and by Sellin,’ at
Tell Ta‘annuk, which are
supposed to be teraphim.


(4) Image of jealousy QD , semel).—It is not cer-


tain what this statue was which was set up by the
door of the inner gate of the Jerus temple (Ezk 8 3).
It was no doubt some idol, perhaps the image of the
Asherah (2 K 21 7; 23 6), which certainly had
penouey been set up in the temple and may have

een there again in this day of apostasy. ‘‘Jeal-
ousy” is not the name of the idol, but it was prob-
ably called “image of jealousy’’ because in a peculiar
manner this partic image seems to have been
drawing the people from the worship of Jeh and
therefore provoking Him to jealonsy.

(5) Chambers of imagery (MDW “WT, hadhré
maskithd).—Does Ezekiel mean that in his heart
every man in his chambers of imagery was an
idol-worshipper, or does this refer to actual wall
decorations in the Jerus Temple (Ezk 8 11.12)?
Most expositors take it literally. W. R. Smith
has been followed almost if not quite universally
in his supposition that a debased form of vermin-
worship is described in the “creeping things and
abominable beasts” (ver 10). But while this low
and ignorant worship was an ancient cult, it had
been banished for centuries from respectable heathen
worship, and it seems inconceivable that these
Israelites who were of the highest class could have
fallen to these depths, or if they had done so that
the Tammuz and sun-worship should have been
considered so much worse (vs 13.14). To the
writer it seems more probable that the references are
to Egyp or Gr mysteries which would be described
by a Hebrew just as Ezekiel describes this secret
chamber. It is now known that the Gr mysteries
experienced a revival at exactly this era, and it
was probably this revival which was making itself
felt in Jerus, for Gr influence was at this time
greatly affecting Pal (see Duruy, Hist of Greece, II,
126-80, 374; Cobern, Comm. on Ezk and Dn,
80-83, 280-82; and separate arts., CHAMBERS OF
Imacury; Imacery).

(6) Ephod (T°DN, ’éphddh).—There is no doubt
that this was the name of a vestment or ritual loin
cloth of linen worn by common priests and temple
servants and on special occasions by the king (1 8
218; 22 18; 2 36 14). The ephod of the high
priest was an ornamental waist coat on the front
of which was fastencd the holy breastplate con-
taining the pocket in which were the Urim and
Thummim (Ex 28 6.30; 29 5; 39 2-5; Lev 8 28).


There are several passages, however, which have con-
vinced many scholars that another ephod is mentioned
which must be an image of Jeh (see Epson). The chief


from


“Household God’
Gezer.


Imagination
Immanuel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1456


passages relied upon are Jgs 8 26.27, where Gideon
made an ephod with 1,700 shekels of gold and ‘‘set"’ this
in Ophrah, where it became an object of worship. So
in Jgs 17 4; 18 14-20, Micah provides an ephod as well
as an image and pillar for his sanctuary; in 1S 21 9
the sword of Goliath is preserved behind the ephod;
while in various places the will of Jeh is ascertained, not
by putting on the ephod, but by “bringing it near” and
‘‘bearing’’ and ‘‘carrying” it (1 S 23 6.9; 30 7, etc).
On the basis of these passages Kautzsch (HDB, V, 641)
concludes most inconsistently that the ephod appears
“exclusively as an image of Jeh.”” Driver, after an
examination of each text, concludes that just in one
passage (Jgs 8 27) the term ‘‘ephod” is certainly used
of the gold casing of an image, and that therefore it may
also have this meaning in other passages (HDB, I, 725).
It does not seem quite certain, however, that a cere-
monial vestment heavily ornamented with gold might
not have been ‘‘set” or “‘erected”’ in a holy place where
later it might become an object of worship. If this had
been an idolatrous image, would Hosea have deplored
its loss (Hos 3 4), and would its use not have been for-
bidden in some Bible passage ?

Kautzsch's view that the ephod meant primarily the
garment used to clothe the Divine image, which after-
ward gave its name to the image itself, is a guess unsus-
tained by the Scriptures quoted or, I think, by any
archaeological parallel. We conclude that there is no
certain proof that this was an image of Jeh, though it
was used ritualistically in receiving the oracles of Jeh
(cf Kuenen, Religion of Israel, I, 100; Kittel, Hist of
the Hebrews, II, 42; Konig, Die Hauptprobleme, 59-63).
See also IpoLatry; Catr, GOLDEN.

LITERATURE.—See esp. W. R. Smith, Religion of the
Semites; E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture; J. G. Frazer,
Golden Bough (8 vols); Baethgen, Beztrdge zur sem.
Rel.-Gesch.; Kittel, Hist of the Hebrews; Nowack, Heb

rch., ; Banudissin, Studien 2. sem. Rel.-Gesch. For
recent excavations, L. P. H. Vincent, Canaan d'aprés
Vexpl. récente, 1907; R.A. S. Macalister, The Excavation
of Gezer (1912); m. Hayes Ward, Cylinders and Other
Ancient Oriental Seals, 1909.

Campen M. Copern

IMAGINATION, i-maj-i-na’shun (A271, yécer,
MAIMW, sheriruth; Sidveva, didnoia): ‘Imagina-
tion’’ is the tr of yécer, properly “a shaping,’’ hence
“a thonght”’ (Gen 6 5; 8 21; Dt 31 21; 1 Ch 28
9; 29 18). In Isa 26 3 yécer is tr? “mind” (AVm
“thought” or ‘‘imagination”’), ‘‘whose mind is stayed
on thee” (RVm “or imagination”); in Ps 103 14 it
is “frame”; of sh*rtrdth, “obstinacy,” “stubborn-
ness’ (Dt 29 19; Jer 317; 7 24; 9 14; 118;
13 10; 16 12; 18 12; 23 17); m Ps 81 12 AV it
is, ‘‘lust,” m “hardness or imaginations’; 3 + of
mahdshebheth, “thought” or “purpose” in AV (Prov
618; Lam 3 60.61); once of dianoia, “mind,”
“understanding” (Lk 1 51); of logismés, “reason-
ing’ (2 Cor 10 5); and of dialogismés, “reasoning
through’ (Rom 1 21 AV). — :

RV gives “stubbornness’’ in each instance where
sh'rirtth is in AV tr? “imagination”; in Prov 6 18
ARV has “purposes”; RV has “devices’’ (Lam 3
60.61) and “reasonings’”’ (Rom 1 21), ‘“imagina-
tion” for “conceit”? (Prov 18 11), and (ERV) for
“device’’ (Lam 3 62). ‘

“Imagination” is frequent in Apoe, e.g. Ecclus
22 18 (dianééma); 37 3 (enthimema, “wicked imagi-
nation’’); 40 2 (dialogismos, RV ‘“‘expectation’’).

W. L. WALKER

IMAGINE, i-maj‘in (QUM, hadshabh; pedrerda,
meletdd): The word most frequently tr? “to im-
agine’’ in the OT, only in AV and ERV, not in ARV,
is hdshabh, ‘to bind,” “combine,” “think’’ (Job 6
26; Ps 10 2; 2111; 140 2; Hos 7 15; Nah 1
9.11; Zec 7 10; 8 17); we have also haghah in
AV and ERV, but not in ARV, “to meditate,”
“mutter,” “speak” (Ps 2.1; 38 12); zamam, “to
devise” (Gen 11 6 AV); harash, “to grave,” “de-
vise’ (Prov 12 20 AV); hathath, “to break in
upon,” to “attack unjustly” (Ps 62 3 AV); mele-
tad, “‘to meditate’ (Acts 4 25). W. L. WaLKER


IMALCUE, i-mal-kii’é (Ipadxovh, Imalkoué; AV
Simalcue): An Arabian prince to whom Alexander
Balas entrusted the upbringing of his young son
Antiochus. Tryphon, who had formerly been on the
side of Alexander, persuaded Imalcue to set up the


young Antiochus (Antiochus VI) against Demetrius,
who had incurred the enmity of his men of war
(1 Mace 11 39.40). Antiochus confirmed Jonathan
in the high-priesthood and appointed him to be one
of the king’s friends (ver 57). In Jos (Ant, XIII,
v, 1) the name is given as Malchus.
J. Hurcsison

IMLA, im’la, IMLAH (72°07, yimlah, “fulness’’?):
ier) of the prophet Micaiah (1 K 22 8.9; 2 Ch
18 7.8).


IMMACULATE CONCEPTION, i-mak’t-lat kon-
sep’shun, THE: ‘
The historic designation of the Roman Catholic
dogma promulgated by Pope Pius IX on December
8, 1854, in the Papal Bull entitled
1. Defini- “Ineffabilis Deus.”” The term is often
tion incorrectly applied, even by those
: whose intelligence should make such
an error impossible, to the VizGiIn BirTH or CHRIST


v.).
Fy central affirmation of this proclamation,
which was read in St. Peter’s in the presence of over
two hundred bishops, is expressed in
2. State- the following words: It is proclaimed
ment of the “by the authority of Our Lord Jesus
Dogma Christ and the blessed Apostles Peter
and Paul and in our own authority,
that the doctrine which holds the blessed Virgin
Mary to have been, from the first instant of her
conception, by a singular grace and privilege of
Almighty God, in view of the merits of Christ Jesus
the Saviour of Mankind, preserved free from all
stain of original sin, was revealed by God, and is,
therefore, to be firmly and constantly believed by
all the faithful’’ (see Schaff, A History of the Creeds
of Christendom, I, 211, 212).
(1) Drawn from specifically Protestant principles.
—Objections to the dogma are mainly two: (a)
the claim to authority upon which the
3. Objec- proclamation rests. There is every
tions to the reason to believe that one of the major
Dogma motives to the entire transaction was
the wish, on the part of Pius and his
advisers, to make an unmistakable assertion of
absolute doctrinal authority by the Rom pontiff.
To Protestants of all shades of opinion there would
be unbearable offence in the wording of the decree,
even if assent could be given to the doctrine it-
self. The whole vital issue of the Reformation is
involved in the use by an ecclesiastic of the words
‘Gn our own authority” in addition to the words
“by the authority of Our Lord Jesus Christ and the
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.’ (b) The ten-
dency to Mariolatry in the entire movement. As
we shall see, the ascription of Divine honors to
Mary is avoided in the public statement of the
dogma and in the defence of it by Roman Catholic
writers, but one has but to survey the course of
discussion leadmg up to the publication of 1854,
and subsequent to it, to discover a growing tendency
to lift Mary out of the realm of human beings and
to endow her with Divine attributes and functions.
An extended discussion of Mariolatry lies beyond
the range of this art. (see Mary); it is only neces-
sary to point out the obvious connections (see
Roman Catholic Dictionary and church histories,
sub loce.). a
_ (2) Drawn from Roman Catholic principles —It
is far from the truth to suppose that there are no
objections to this modern dogma save those which
are specifically Protestant. From the viewpoint
of the devout Roman Catholic, and for the sake of
the prestige of the papacy, this particular dogma
seems to have been unfortunately chosen.
(a) It has no basis in Scripture. The only at-
tempt made to provide a Scriptural argument is


1457


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Imagination
Immanuel


by using a vague and unsatisfactory || between Mary
and Eve before the Fall, to be found in the writings
of certain church Fathers who did not hold the papal
dogma but unconsciously provided a slender and
most insecure basis for it (see infra). Most Roman
Catholic writers are intelligent enough to admit
that the theory of inspired tradition alone can be
appealed to in support of the idea. The ordinary
and ouly tenable argument is that the ecclesiastical
promulgation and acceptance of the doctrine prove
its apostolic origin (see Catholic Dictionary, sub loc.).

(b) It weakens the authority of the church. It
would almost seem as if the doctrines of ecclesias-
tical authority and particularly of papal infalli-
bility had, in this uufortunate proclamation, reached
a reductio ad absurdum for the comfort of their foes.
Notice with care the historical standing of this
dogma: (a) The acknowledged absence of all posi-
tive evidence for apostolic origin and primitive
authority (see Catholic Dictionary ut supra). (8)
The abundant positive evidence that the principal
Fathers of the early church did not believe in the
sinlessness of Mary (see list of names and references
given by H. C. Sheldon, Histpry of the Christian
Church, sub loc.). (vy) The uncertain and equivocal
testimony per contra drawn from the early Fathers.
They are practically confined to the following:
Ephrem Syrus (Carmina, Hymn 27, strophe 8),
where he says ‘Truly it is Thou and Thy mother
only who are fair altogether. For in Thee there is
no stain and in Thy mother no spot”; St. Augustine
(De Natura et Gratia, cap. 26), ‘Two were made
simple, innocent, perfectly like each other, Mary
and Eve,” etc. To these may be added the words
of Irenaeus: ‘The knot of Eve’s disobedience was
untied by Mary’s obedience’”’ (Catholic Dictionary,
422). In regard to these three passages it may
reasonably be contended that even if these state-
ments necessarily implied the Immaculate Con-
ception of Mary, which they certainly do not, they
would still have to be estimated against the many
weighty statements which may be brought forward
on the other side. (8) The prolonged coutroversy
over the doctrine. From the earliest time when
the idea of Mary’s miraculous freedom from sin
appears, up to the Old Catholic agreement of 1874,
devout and faithful Roman Catholics have pro-
tested against the addition of this unscriptural
dogma to the faith of the church. Bonaventura
(Locus Theol., VII, 1) says: ‘‘All the saints who have
made mention of this matter, with one mouth have
asserted that the blessed Virgin was conceived in
original sin.” With the statement of the Old
Catholic agreement we may safely sum up the
ecclesiastical situation, even from the viewpoint
of those who hold to the doctrinal validity of tradi-
tion. Art. K reads: ‘We reject the New Rom
doctrine of the Immaculate Conception of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, as being contrary to the tra-~
dition of the first 13 centuries, according to which
Christ alone is conceived without siu.”

(3) Drawn from general considerations of Chris-
tian doctrine—The most serious objectious to this
offensive and gratuitous dogma are not at all
specifically Protestant but, rather, broadly Chris-
tian. It is necessary at this point to assure our-
selves that we understand (as many Protestants
evidently do not) just what is meant by the doctrine
as a doctrine. According to the accepted Roman
Catholic explanation, Mary, at the supposed stage
of her conception when the soul was actually in-
fused into the body waiting for it, received the
special grace of God whereby she was delivered
from all stain of original sin. The point which
Protestants need esp. to note is that, according to
Roman Catholic ideas, this gracious act of God was
performed on the basis of the foreseen merits of


Christ’s sacrifice. This tones down the offensive-
ness of the doctrine in that it does not per se imply
the equality of Mary with Christ, but rather the
contrary, in so far as the grace betowed upon her
was gained by anticipation from Him. Roman
Catholic writers naturally emphasize this fact in
recommending the doctrine to Protestant mlnds.
None the less the offence remaius. The “Immacu-
late Conception” necessarily implies the “immacu-
late life,” and on the same basis of supernatural
grace, else would the special miracle have occurred
in vain and the fall of Adam been repeated in Mary.
Hence, a full account of the doctrine would be that
Mary was completely and miraculously redeemed
at her conception and completely and miraculously
kept from sin throughout her whole life. Apart
from all questious as to the rightful place of Mary
in Christian thought, this idea involves utter doc-
trinal confusion. It means that Mary never be-
came a true human being and never lived a true
human life. Redemption by a miraculous process
begun at conception and carried on throughout the
life is an utter impossibility, for the Holy Spirit
does not work impersonally, and miraculous holiness
which is holiuess of a purely Divine character, with-
out a free, codperating human factor, is no human
holiness at all. This dogma reads Mary out of the
human family, reduces her to an image and makes
her life a phantasm. Moreover, the parallels which
a adduced in its support are not true parallels at
all.

Our Lord’s sinlessness was not mechanically
guaranteed by His miraculous conception (sce
VirRGIN BrrtH) but was His own achievement
through the Holy Spirit granted to Him and per-
sonally appropriated. The Hallowing of Children
at the Font (see Catholic Dictionary, 470a), the
sanctifying of those “separated from the womb’’
(Gal 1 15) to God’s service, does not imply the
miraculous guarantee of artificial sinlessness, but
such a gracious influeuce as enables the subject
freely co6perating to obtain victory over sin as a
controlling principle. Actual sin and need of for-
giveness is not praetermitted by such special grace.

We can only say, in conclusion, that every reason,
which usually operates in a Christian mind to insure
rejection of a false teaching, ought to preclude the
possibility of accepting this peculiar dogma which
is Seripturally baseless, historically unjustified and
doctrinally unsound.


Lireraturs.—The best simple and reasonably fair-
minded discussion of this dogma from the Roman
Catholic viewpoint is to be found in the Catholic Dic-
tionary already mentioned, where wide references will be
found. For the Protestant view consult any authori-
tative church history, esp. that of Professor H. C. Sheldon
where copious references to Patristic lit. will be found.

Louis MatrHzews SwEET


IMMANUEL, i-man’ti-el (OS IBY, ‘immana’él):
The name occurs but 3 t, twice in the OT (Isa 7
14; 8 8), and once in the NT (Mt 1 23). Itisa
Heb word signifying ‘‘God is with us.” The form
“Emmanuel” appears in LXX (’Eupavoupd, Em-
manouél).

In 735 BC Ahaz was king of Judah. The king-
dom of Israel was already tributary to Assyria

(2 K 16 19.20). Pekah, king of Is-


1. Isaiah rael, a bold and ambitious usurper,
Rebukes and Rezin, kiug of Syria, formed an
Ahaz alliance, the dual object of which was,


first, to organize a resistance against
Assyria, and second, to force Ahaz to codperate
in their designs against the common tyrant. Inthe
event of Ahaz’ refusal, they planned to depose him,
and to set the son of Tabeel, a choice of their own,
upon the throne of David. To this end they waged
war against Judah, advancing as far as Jerus itself,
but without complete success (Isa 7 1). Ahaz, a


Immanuel
Immortal


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1458


weak king, and now panic-stricken, determined to
invoke the aid of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria
(2 K 16 7). This he actually did at a later stage
in the war (6 9; 15 29). Such a course would in-
volve the loss of national independence and the
payment of a heavy tribute. At this period of
crisis, Isaiah, gathering his disciples around him
(Isa 8 16), is told to deliver a message to the king.
Ahaz, though making a show of resistance against
the coalition, is in reality neither depending upon
the help of Jeh nor upon the courage of his people.
Isaiah, in an effort to calm his fears and prevent the
fatal alliance with Assyria, offers him a sign. This
method is specially characteristic of this prophet.
Fearing to commit himself to the policy of Divine
dependence, but with a pretense at religious scruples,
“Neither will I tempt Jeh,” the king refuses (Isa
7 12). The prophet then chides him bitterly for
his lack of faith, which, he says, not only wearies

men, but God also (7 18).
He then proceeds to give him a sign from God
Himeelf, the sign of “Immanuel” (7 14). Theinter-
pretation of this sign is not clear, even


2. The apart from its NT application to
Sign of hrist. The Heb word tr ‘virgin’
“Imman- in EV means, more correctly, “bride,”
uel” in the OE sense of one who is about

to become a wife, or is still a young
wife. Ps 68 25 EV gives ‘‘damsels.”’


Isaiah predicts that a young bride shall conceive
and bear a son. The miracle of virgin-conception,
therefore, is not implied. The use of the definite
article before ‘“‘virgin” (hd-‘almah) does not of it-
self indicate that the prophet had any particular
FOUnE woman in his mind, as the Heb idiom often
uses the definite article indefinitely. The fact that
two other children of the prophet, like Hosea’s,
bore prophetic and mysterious names, invites the
conjecture that the bride referred to was his own
wife. The hypothesis of some critics that a woman
of the harem of Ahaz became the mother of Heze-
kiah, and that he was the Immanuel of the prophet’s
thought is not feasible. Hezckiah was at least 9
years of age when the prophecy was given (2 K
16 2).

Immanuel, in the prophetic economy, evidently
stands on the same level with Shear-jashub (7 3)
as the embodiment of a great idea, to which Isaiah
again appeals in Isa 8 8 (see Isarau, VII).

The question as to whether the sign given to Ahaz
was favorable or not presents many difficulties.

Was it a promise of good or a threat of
3. Was Ita judgment? It is evident that the
Promise or prophet had first intended an omen of
a Threat? deliverance and blessing (7 4.7). Did

the king’s lack of faith alter the nature
of the sign? Ver 9, ‘‘If ye will not believe,” etc,
implies that it might have done so. The omission
of ver 16, and esp. the words “‘whose two kings thou
abhorrest,” greatly simplifies this theory, as “the
land,’ singular, would more naturally refer to
Judah than to Syria and Ephraim collectively.
The omen would then become an easily interpreted
threat, referring to the overthrow of Judah rather
than that of her enemies. Immanuel should eat
curdled milk and honey (ver 15), devastation re-
ducing the land from an agricultural to a pastoral
one. The obscure nature of the passage as it
stands suggests strongly that it has suffered from
interpolation. The contrary theory that the sign
was a promise and not a prediction of disaster, has
much to commend it, though it necessitates greater
freedom with the text. The name “Immanuel” im-
plies the faith of the young mother of the child in
the early deliverance of her country, and a rebuke
to the lack of that quality in Ahaz. It is certain
also that Isaiah looked for the destruction of Syria


and Ephraim, and that, subsequent to the Assyr
invasion, salvation should come to Judah through
the remnant that had been faithful (11 11). The
fact that the prophet later gave the name of Maher-
shalal-hash-baz to his new-born son, a name of good
omen to his country, further strengthens this posi-
tion. The omission of vs 15.17 would make the
sign a prophecy of the failure of the coalition. It is
plain, whichever theory be accepted, that something
must be eliminated from the passage to insure a
consistent reading.

The question now presents itself as to what was
the relation of Immanuel to the Messianic prophe-
Should the emphasis be laid


cies.
4. Its Re- upon ‘‘a virgin,’”’ the son, or the name
lation to itself? For traditional interpretation
the Mes- the sign lay in the virgin birth, but


sianic Hope the uncertainty of implied virginity
in the Heb noun makes this interpre-
tation improbable. The identification of the young
mother as Zion personified, and of the ‘‘son’’ as the
future generation, is suggested by Whitehouse and
other scholars. But there is no evidence that the
term ‘almah was used at that time for_personifi-
cation. The third alternative makes Immanuel
a Messiah in the wider use of the term, as antici-
pated by Isaiah and his contemporaries. There
can be little doubt but that there existed in Judah
the Messianic hope of a national saviour (2 8 7
12). Isaiah is expecting the arrival of one whose
character and work shall entitle him to the great
names of 9 6. In him should dwell all the fulness
of God. He was to be “of the stem of Jesse,’ the
bringer of the Golden Age. The house of David
is now beset by enemies, and its reigning repre-
sentative is weak in faith. The prophet therefore
announces the immediate coming of the deliverer.
If he had intended the virgin-conception of Christ
in the distant future, the sign of ‘‘Immanuel” would
have possessed no immediate significance, nor would
it have heen an omen to Ahaz. With regard to the
Messianic idea, Mic 5 3 (‘‘until the time that she
who travaileth hath brought forth’) is of impor-
tance as indicating the prevalent thought of the time.
Recent evidence shows that even in Babylonia and
Egypt there existed expectations of a divinely born
and wonderful saviour. To this popular tradition
the prophet probably appealed, his hearers being
easily able to appreciate the force of oracular lan-
guage that is to us obscure. There is much to con-
firm the view, therefore, that the prophecy is
Messianic.
The use of the word as it relates to the virgin
birth of Christ and the incarnation cannot be dealt
with here (see PrERson oF Cunist).


5. The These facts, however, may be noted.
Virgin The LXX (which has parthénos,
Birth “virgin’”) and the Alexandrian Jews


_ interpreted the passage as referring
to the virgin birth and the Messianic ministry.
This interpretation does not seem to have been
sufficiently prominent to explain the rise of the idea
of miraculous virgin conception and the large place
it has occupied in Christological thought. See
Vircin BIrts. ARTHUR WALWYN Evans


IMMER, im’ér (V8 , ’immaér):

(1) A priest of David’s time (1 Ch 24 14), whose
descendants are mentioned in Ezr 2 37; 10 20;
Neh 3 29; 7 40; 11 13.

(2) A priest of Jeremiah’s time (Jer 20 1).

(3) A place in Babylonia (Ezr 2 59; Neh 7 61).


IMMORTAL, i-mér’tal, IMMORTALITY, im-or-
tal’i-ti (G@avacla, athanasia, 1 Cor 16 53; 1 Tim
6 16, dp0apola, aphiharsta, lit. “incorruption,” Rom
27; 1 Cor 15; 2 Tim 1 10, &d@aptos, dphthartos,


1459


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Immanuel
Immortal


ie eee ’ Rom 1 23; 1 Cor 15 52; 1 Tim


1, Preliminary—Need of Definition and Distinction
2. Bihiicai Conception
I. Tue Narourat Berrer
1. Its Origin
2. Phiiosophicai Arguments
(1) The Soul Spirituai
Soul not Inherentiy Indestructihie
a Capacities of Human Nature
3) The Moral Argument
Il. Tue Brsticat Docrrinz—txs OT
1. Starting-Point—Man's Reiation to God
Man's Nature
2. Sin and Death
3. Grace and Redemption—The True Immortaiity
Deliverance from Sheol
4. Later Jewish Thought
Til. Tue Crristian Hore
1. Immortality through Christ
(1) Survival of the Soul
2) Union with Christ in Unseen Worid
3) The Resurrection
4) The Wicked Also Raised
5) Eternal Life
2. Contrasts
LITERATURE


In hardly any subject is it more necessary to be


careful in the definition of terms and clear dis-
tinction of ideas, esp. where the Bib.


1. Prelimi- doctrine is concerned, than in this of
nary— ‘Immortality.’ By “immortality” is
Need of frequently meant simply the survival
Definition of the soul, or spiritual part of man,
and Dis- after bodily death. It is the assertion
tinction of the fact that death does not end all.


The soul survives. This is commonly
what is meant when we speak of “a future life,”
“a future state,” ‘a hereafter.” Not, however, to
dwell on the fact that many peoples have no clear
conception of an immaterial “soul” in the modern
sense (the Egyptians, e.g. distinguished several
parts, the Ka, the Ba, etc, which survived death;
often the surviving self is simply a ghostly resem-
blance of the earthly self, nourished with food,
offerings, etc), there is the more serious considera-
tion that the state into which the surviving part
is supposed to enter at death is anything but a state
which can he described as “‘ife,’’ or worthy to be
dignified with the name “immortality.” It is a
state peculiar to “death” (see DEATH); in most
cases, shadowy, inert, feeble, dependent, joyless;
a state to be dreaded and shrunk from, not one to
be hoped for. If, on the other hand, as in the hope
of immortality among the nobler heathen, it is con-
ceived of, as for some, a state of happiness—the clog
of the body being shaken off—this yields the idea,
which has passed into so much of our modern think-
ing, of an “immortality of the soul,” of an imperish-
ableness of the spiritual part, sometimes supposed
to extend backward as well as forward; an inherent
indestructibility.

It will be seen as we advance, that the Bib. view
is different from all of these. The soul, indeed, sur-
vives the body; hut this disembodied
2. Biblical state is never viewed as one of com-
Conception - plete “life.”’ For the Bible “immor-
tality’’ is not merely the survival of the
soul, the passing into “Sheol” or “Hades.” This
is not, in itself considered, “life’’ or happiness.
The “immortality” the Bible contemplates is an
immortality of the whole person—body and soul
together. It implies, therefore, deliverance from
the state of death. It is not a condition simply of
future existence, however prolonged, but a state of
hlessedness, due to redemption and the possession
of the “eternal life’ in the soul; it includes resur-
rection and perfected life in both soul and body.
The subject must now he considered more particu-
larly in its different aspects.
I. The Natural Belief.—In some sort the belief
in the survival of the spirit or self at death is a


practically universal phenomenon. To what is it
taccabler A favorite hypothesis with anthro-
pologists is that it has ita origin in
1. Its dreams or visions suggesting the con-
Origin tinued existence of the dead (cf H.
Spencer, Eccles. Instit., chs i, xiv).
Before, however, a dream can suggest the survival
of the soul, there must be the idea of the soul, and
of this there seems a simpler explanation in the con-
sciousness which even the savage possesses of some-
thing within him that thinks, feels and wills, in
distinction from his bodily organs. At death this
thinking, feeling something disappears, while the
body remains. What more natural than to sup-
pose that it persists in some other state apart from
the body? (Cf Max Miiller, Anthrop. Religion, 281.)
Dreams, etc, may help this conviction, hut need
not create it. It1s only as we assume such a deeper
root for the belief that we can account for its uni-
versality and persistence. Iiven this, however,
while an instinctive presumption, can hardly be
called a proof of survival after death, and it does not
yield an idea of “immortality” in any worthy sense.
It is at most, as already said, a ghostly redupli-
cation of the earthly life that is thus far reached.

(1) The soul spiritual—The more philosophical
arguments that are adduced for the soul’s immor-

tality (or survival) are not all of equal
2. Phil- weight. The argument based on the
osophical metaphysical essence of the soul (see
Arguments Plato’s Phaedo) is not in these days

felt to be satisfying. On the other
hand, it can be maintained against the materialist
on irrefragable grounds that the soul, or thinking
spirit, in man is immaterial in Nature, and, where
this is granted, there is, or can be, no proof that
death, or physical dissolution, destroys this con-
scious spirit. The presumption is powerfully the
other way. Cicero of old argued that death need
not even be the suspension of its powers (cf Tusc.
Disp. i.20); Butler reasons the matter from analogy
(Anal., I, ch i); modern scientists like J. S. Mill
(Three Essays, 201) and Professor Huxley (Life
and Letters, I, 217 ff; cf William James, Ingersoll
Lecture) concede that immortality cannot be dis-
proved. The denial one hears from various sides
more frequently than formerly is therefore not
warranted. Still possibility is not certainty, and
there is nothing as yet to show that even if the soul
survives death, its new state of existence has in it
anything desirable.

It was hinted that one use which the Greeks made
of the metaphysical argument was to prove the
indestructibility of the soul—its immortality in the
sense of having no beginning and no end. This is
not the Christian doctrine. The soul has no such
inherent indestructibility. It is dependent on God,
as everything else is, for its continued existence.
Did He withdraw His sustaining power, it would
cease to exist. That it does continue to exist is
not doubted, but this must be argued on other
grounds.

(2) Capacities of human nature—A much more
apprehensihle argument for immortality—more
strictly, of a future state of existence—is drawn
from the rich capacities and possibilities of human
nature, for which the earthly life affords so brief
and inadequate a sphere of exercise. It is the
characteristic of spirit that it has in it an clement
of infinitude, and aspires to the infinite. The best
the world can give can never satisfy it. It has in it
the possibility of endless progress, and ever higher
satisfaction. It was this consideration which led
Kant, with all his theoretical skepticism, to give
immortality a place among his “doctrinal belicfs”
(see his Critique of Pure Reason, Bohn’s tr, 590-91),
and moved J. §. Mill to speak of it as the only hope


Immortal
Impediment


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1460


which gave adequate scope to the human faculties
and feelings, ‘‘the loftier aspirations being no longer
kept down by a sense of the insignificance of human
life by the disastrous feeling of ‘not worth while’”’
(Three Essays, 249). Yet when these arguments
are calmly weighed, they amount to no more than
a proof that man is constituted for immortality; they
do not afford a guarantee that this destiny might
not be forfeited, or if they yield such a guarantee for
the good, they hardly do so for the wicked. The
belief, in their case, must depend on other con-
siderations.

(3) The moral argument.—It is, as Kant also felt,
when we enter the moral sphere that immortality,
or the continued existence of the soul, becomes a
practical certainty to the earnest mind. With
moral personality is bound up the idea of moral law
and moral responsibility; this, in turn, necessitates
the thought of the world as a moral system, and of
God as moral Ruler. The world, as we know it, is
certainly a scene of moral administration—of pro-
bation, of discipline, of reward and penalty—but
as obviously a scene of incomplete moral adminis-
tration. The tangled condition of things in this
life can satisfy no one’s sense of justice. Goodness
is left to suffer; wickedness outwardly triumphs.
The evil-doer’s own conscience proclaims him
answerable, and points to future judgment. There
is need for a final rectification of what is wrong here.
But while a future state seems thus called for, this
does not of itself secure eternal existence for the
wicked, nor would such existence be “immortality’’
in the positive sense. In view of the mystery of
sin, the lamp of reason grows dim. For further
light we must look to revelation. :

Il. The Biblical Doctrine—the OT.—The Bib.
view of immortality starts from man’s relation to

God. Man, as made in the image
i. Starting- of God (Gen 1 27), is fitted for the
Point— knowledge of God, for fellowship with


Man’s Him. This implies that man is more
Relation than an animal; that he has a life
to God which transcends time. In it already


lies the pledge of immortality if man
is obedient.

Man’s nature-—With this corresponds the ac-
count given of man’s creation and original state.
Man is a being composed of body and soul; both
are integral parts of his personality. He was
created for life, not for mortality. The warning,
“In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt
surely die’? (Gen 2 17), implies that if man con-
tinued obedient he would live. But this is not an
immortality of the soul only. It is a life in the
body (cf Gen 3 22). Its type is such cases as
Enoch and Flijah (Gen 6 24; 2K 2 11.12; ef
Ps 49 15; 73 24).

The frustration of this original destiny of man
comes through sin. Sin entails death (see DEATH).

Death in its physical aspect is a sepa-
2. Sin and ration of soul and body—a breaking
Death up of the unity of man’s personality.

In one sense, therefore, it is the de-
struction of the immortality which was man’s
original destiny. It does not, however, imply the
extinction of the soul. That survives, but not in a
state that can be called “‘life.’’ It passes into Sheol
—the sad, gloomy abode of the dead, in which there
is no joy, activity, knowledge of the affairs of earth,
or (in the view of Nature) remembrance of God, or
praise of His goodness (on this subject, and the Heb
belief in the future state generally, see Escra-
ToLoGY or THE OT; Deatx; Sueon). This is
not future “life’’-—not “immortality.”

It is the part of grace and redemption to restore
immortality in the true sense. Had the world been
left to develop in sin, no further hope could have


come to it. The picture of Sheol would have
become ever darker as the idea of retribution grew


stronger; it could never become
8. Grace brighter. But God’s grace iter-
and Re- vened: “Deliver him from going down


demption— to the pit, I have found a ransom”
the True (Job 33 24). God’s mercy breaks in
Immortality on the hopelessness of man’s lot. He

gives to man His promises; makes His
covenant with man; admits man to His fellowship
(Gen 3 15; 44; 6 24; 6 8.9; 12 1-3; 16, etc).
In this fellowship the soul was raised again to its
true life even on earth. But this held in it also a
hope for the future. The promises placed in the
forefront as tokens of God’s favors were indeed
predominatingly temporal—promises for this life
-—but within these (the kernel within the shell)
was the supreme possession of God Himself (Ps 4
6f; 16 2). This held in it the hope of redemption
and the principle of every good.

Deliverance from Sheol.—Here we reach the core
of the OT hope of immortality. Such fellowship
as the believer had with God could not be lost, even
in Sheol; beyond that was deliverance from Sheol.
In their highest moments it was this hope that
sustained patriarchs, psalmists, prophets, in their
outlook on the future. Doubt might cloud their
minds; there might be seasons of darkness and even
despair; but it was impossible in moments of strong
faith to believe that God would ever really desert
them. The eternal God was their dwelling-place;
beneath them were everlasting arms (Dt 33 27;
cf Ps 90 1). Their hope of immortality, therefore,
was, in principle, the hope not merely of an “immor-
tality of the soul,” but likewise of resurrection—of
complete deliverance from Sheol. Thus it is clearly
in the impassioned outburst of Job (19 25-27; ef
14 13 ff), and in many of the psalms. The hope
always clothes itself in the form of complete deliv-
erance from Sheol. Thus in Ps 17 141i, the wicked
have their portion “in this life,’ but, “‘As for me,
I shall behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness’? (ARV
“with beholding thy form’’); and in Ps 49 14{,
the wicked are “appointed as a flock for Sheol,” but
“God will redeem my soul from the power of Sheol;
for he will receive me” (same expression as that
regarding Enoch, Gen 6 24; ef Ps 73 24). It
will be remembered that when Jesus expounded the
declaration, “I am the God of Abraham,’ ete, it
was as a pledge of resurrection (Mt 22 31f). The
idea comes to final expression in the declaration in
Dnl of a resurrection of the just and unjust (12 2).
For further development and illustration see Es-
CHATOLOGY OF THE OT.

Later Jewish thought carried out these ideas
of the OT to further issues. A blessed future for

the righteous was now accepted, and


4, Later was definitely connected with the idea
Jewish of resurrection. The wicked remained
Thought in Sheol, now conceived _of as a place

of retribution. The Gentiles, too,


shared this doom. See EscHatouoey.
Il. The Christian Hope.—In full consonance
with what is revealed in part in the OT is the hope
of immortality discovered in the NT.


1. Immor- The ring of this joyful hope is heard
tality in every part of the apostolic writings.
through “Blessed be the God and Father of our
Christ Lord Jesus Christ,” says Peter, “who


' according to his great mercy begat us
again unto a living hope by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, unto an inheritance incor-
ruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away,
reserved in heaven for you” (1 Pet 1 3f). Paul
declares, “‘Our Saviour Christ Jesus, who... .
brought life and immortality [incorruption] to


1461


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Immortal
Impediment


light through the gospel” (2 Tim 1 10). In Rom
27 he had spoken of those who “by patience in
well-doing seek for glory and honor and incorrup-
tion, eternal life.’ This immortality, it is seen, is
pat of the eternal life bestowed through Jesus on

elievers. Itis guaranteed by Christ’s own resurrec-
tion and life in glory. The nature of this hope of
the gospel may now he further analyzed.

(1) Survival of the soul.—The soul survives the
body. A future state for both righteous and wicked
is plainly declared by Jesus Himself. ‘He that be-
ieveth on me,” He said to Martha, “though he die,
yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth and be-
lieveth on me shall never die’ (Jn 11 25f). To
His disciples He said, “If I go and prepare a place
for you, I come again, and will receive you unto
myself; that where J am, there ye may be also” (Jn
14 3). Cf His words to the penitent thief: “To-day
shalt thou be with me in Paradise’ (Lk 23 43).
The survival of both righteous and wicked is implied
in the parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus (Lk
16 19-31). So in many other places (e.g. Mt 5
29f; 10 28; 11 21-24; 12 41, etc). The same is
the teaching of the epp. The doctrine of a future
judgment depends on and presupposes this truth
(Rom 2 5-11; 2 Cor 5 10, ete).

(2) Union with Christ in unseen world.—Death
for the redeemed, though a result of sin, does not
destroy the soul’s relation to God and to Christ.
The eternal life implanted in the soul in time blos-
soms in its fruition into the life and blessedness of
eternity (Rom 8 10f; Phil 1 21; Col 1 27). The
soul is, indeed, in an incomplete state till the resur-
rection. It ‘‘waits for our adoption, to wit, the
redemption of our body” (Rom 8 23). But its
state, though incomplete, is still a happy one.
Hades has lost its gloom, and is for it a “Paradise”
(Lk 23 43). It dwells in a chamber of the Father’s
house (Jn 14 2f; 17 24). It is to be, even in the
unclothed state (“absent from the body’’), ‘‘at home
with the Lord” (2 Cor 6 8). It is for it an object
of desire to be “with Christ” in that state after
death (Phil 1 21). The pictures in Rev, though
highly figurative, indicate a condition of great
blessedness (Rev 7 9-17).

(3) The resurrection —The fulness of the blessed-
ness of immortality implies the resurrection. The
resurrection is a cardinal article of Christ’s teaching
(Mt 22 29-32; Jn 5 25-29; 11 23-26). He Him-
self is the Lord of life, and life-giver in the resur-
rection (Jn 6 21.25.26; 11 25, “I am the resurrec-
tion, and the life’). The resurrection of believers
is secured by His own resurrection. Jesus died;
He rose again (see Resurrection). His resur~
rection carries with it the certainty of the resur-
rection of all His people. This is the great theme
of 1 Cor 16. As Christ lives, they shall live also
(Jn 14 19). The believers who are alive at His
Parousia shall be changed (1 Cor 16 51; 1 Thess
4 17); those who are dead shall be raised first of all
(1 Thess 4 16). The resurrection body shall be
a body like to Christ’s own (Phil 3 21)—incor-
ruptible, glorious, powerful, spiritual, immortal
(1 Cor 16 42 ff.58f). This is not to be confused
with sameness of material particles (vs 37f), yet
there is the connection of a vital bond between the
old body and the new. This is the hope of the be-
liever, without which his redemption would not be
complete.

(4) The wicked also raised—The wicked also are
raised, not, however, to glory, but for judgment
(Jn 5 29; Acts 24 15; Rev 20 12-15). Thesame
truth is implied in all passages on the last judgment.
Excluded from the blessedness of the righteous,
their state is described by both Jesus and His
apostles as one of uttermost tribulation and an-
guish (eg. Mt 25 46; Mk 9 43-50; Rom 2 8f).


This is not “immortality” or “life,” though the con-
tinued existence of the soul is implied in it (see
PounisuMentT, Evertastinc; Herxzt; Rerrisv-
TION).

(5) Eternal life—The condition of the blessed in
their state of immortality is one of unspeakable
felicity of both soul and body forever. ‘There are,
indeed, degrees of glory—this is carefully and con-
sistently taught (Mt 26 14 ff; Lk 19 12ff; 1 Cor
3 10-15; 16 41; Phil 3 10-14; 2 Tim 47f; 1 Jn
2 28)—but the condition as a whole is one of perfect
satisfaction, holiness and blessedness (cf Mt 13 43;
26 34; Rom 2 7.10; Rev 22 3 ff, etc). The bless-
edness of this eternal state includes such elements
as the following: (1) restoration to God’s image
and likeness to Christ (1 Cor 16 49; 2 Cor 3 18;
Eph 4 24; Col 3 10; 1 Jn 3 2); (2) perfect holi-
ness in the possession of God’s Spirit (2 Cor 7 1;
Phil 1 6; Rev 21 27; 22 4.11); (8) the unveiled
vision of God’s glory (Rev 22 4; ef Ps 17 15);
(4) freedom from all sorrow, pain and death (Rev
21 3f); (5) power of unwearied service (Rev 22 3).

The contrast between the Bib. view of immor-
tality and that of heathenism and of the schools

will now be obvious. It is not mere
2. Contrasts future existence; not a bare, abstract

immortality of the soul; it is the result
of redemption and of renewal by God's spirit; it
embraces the whole personality, soul and body; itis
not shared by the unholy; it includes the perfec-
tion of rational, moral and spiritual blessedness, in
an environment suitable to such glorified existence.
As such it is the supreme prize after which every
believer is called to strive (Phil 3 13 f).

Lireratvury.—Ingersoll Lectures on Immortality, by
Professor William James, Professor Osler, etc; Salmond,
Christian Doctrine of Immortality; Orr, Christian View


of God and the World, Lects iv, v, with App. to v; works
specified in art. on EscuatoLooyr.
James ORR


IMMUTABILITY, i-mi-ta-bil’i-ti, IMMUTA-
BLE, i-mii‘ta-b’l (Gperd@eros, ametdihetos): Occurs
in He 6 17.18 of the unchangeableness of the Di-
vine counsel. It is the perfection of Jeh that He
changes not in character, will, purpose, aim (Mal
3 6; so of Christ, He 13 8). See FarraruLness;
UNCHANGEABLE.


IMNA, im‘na (72907, yimna'): A descendant of
Asher (1 Ch 7 35).


IMNAG, im’na (1}"0", yémnah):

(1) Eldest son of Asher (Gen 46 17, AV “‘Jim-
nah’; Nu 26 44, AV “Jimna’; 1 Ch 7 30).

(2) A Levite of Hezekiah’s time (2 Ch 31 14).


IMNITES, im/nits ((272", yimni): Descendants
of Imnan (q.v.[1]) (Nu 26 44, AV “Jimnites”).


IMPART, im-pArt’ (perab(Sap1, metadidomi, ‘to
share’): “They... . imparted [AV “added”]
nothing to me’’ (Gal 2 6); that is, did not propose
any correction or addition to my teaching. ‘That
T may impart unto you some spiritual gift’? (Rom 1
11) expresses the apostle’s hope that the Rom be-
lievers may increase in faith and love through his
teaching and influence.

“To impart unto you... . our own souls”
(1 Thess 2 8) meant to spend their utmost strength
and to expose their lives in their service.


IMPEDIMENT, im-ped’i-ment: Found in Mk 7
32, “had an impediment in his speech,” as a tr of
poylharos, mogilalos, comp. of péyos, mégos, “toil”
and Ad2os, ldlos, “‘speech,’”’ i.e. one who speaks with
difficulty. In the LXX the word is used as a tr


of DON, lam, “dumb” (Isa 36 6).


Implead
Imputation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1462


_ IMPLEAD, im-pléd’ (Acts 19 38 AV, “Let them
implead one another’): ‘“Implead’”’ means ‘‘to sue
at law,” hence RV “Let them accuse one another.”
Court days are kept, let them prosecute the suit in
court and not settle matters in riot. é¢yxanely,
egkalein, means “‘to call in,” “to call to account.”


IMPORTABLE, im-pdor’ta-b’]  (8veBderakros,
dusbdstaktos): An obsolete word, meaning ‘‘unbear-
able’’ (Lat im, ‘not,’ portabilis, ‘“bearable’’) found
in Pr Man, “Thine angry threatening [RV “the
anger of thy threatening’’] toward sinners is im-
portable”; cf Rheims version, Mt 23 4, “heavy
burdens and importable’’; Chaucer (“Clerk’s Tale”
C.T.), “For it were importable though they wolde.”


IMPORTUNITY, im-por-ti’ni-ti: Occurs only
in Lk 11 8, where it is the rendering of dvatdea,
anaideia (WH, évaidla, anaidia). This Gr word
implies an element of impudent insistence rising
to the point of shamelessness which the Eng. word
‘importunity” fails to express, thus weakening the
argument of the parable, which is that if by shame-
less insistence a favor may be won, even from one
unwilling and ungracious, still more surely will God
answer the earnest prayer of His people. God’s
willingness to give exceeds our ability to ask. The
parable teaches by way of contrast, not by parallel.

Davin Foster Estzs

IMPOSITION, im-pé-zish’un, OF HANDS. See

Hanns, Imrosition (LAYING oN) OF.


IMPOSSIBLE, im-pos’i-b’l (vb. a$vvaréo, adu-
natéd; adj &Btvaros, adtnatos): “To be impossi-
ble” is the tr of adunated, “to be powerless,” “im-
potent” (Mt 17 20; Lk 1 37, RV “void of power’);
adunatos, ‘powerless,’ etc, is tr? “impossible” (Mt
19 26; Mk 10 27; Lk 18 27; He 6 4.18; 11 6;
‘“Gmpossible”’ in He 6 4 is in RV transferred to ver
6); anéndektos, ‘not to be received” or “accepted,”
is also tr? “impossible’’ (Lk 17 1). In several of
these passages it is affirmed that “nothing is impos-
sible with God,’”’ but, of course, this means nothing
that is consistent with the Divine nature, e.g. (as
He 6 18) it is not possible for God to lie. So, when
it is said that nothing is impossible to faith, the same
limitation applies and also that of the mind or will
of God for us. But much more is possible to a
strong faith than a weak faith realizes, or even
believes. WALKER


IMPOTENT, im’pé-tent (do¥evéo, asthenéa,
aSbvatos, adunatos): The vb. signifies “to be with-
out strength,’”’ and derivatives of it are used inJn
5 3.7 AV and Acts 4 9 to characterize the paralyzed
man at Bethesda and the cripple at the Temple gate.
For the same condition of the Lystra lame man the
word adunatos is used, which is synonymous. In
these cases it is the weakness of disease. In this
sense the word is used by Shakespeare (Love’s Labor
Lost, V, ii, 864; Hamlet, I, ii, 29). The impotent
folk referred to n the Epistle of Jeremy (Bar 6 28)
were those weak and feeble from age and want; cf
‘impotent and snail-paced beggary” (Richard [I],


IV, iii, 53). ALEX. MACALISTER
IMPRISONMENT, im-priz’n-ment. See Poun-
ISHMENTS; PRISON.


IMPURITY, im-pi’ri-ti. See UNCLEANNEsS.


IMPUTATION, im-pii-ta’shun:
I. Meanino anp UsE oF THE TERM
II. Tre Tureeroup Ust& or THE TERM IN THEOLOOY
Original Sin, Atonement, Justification
III. Tse Scriprorat Basis or THese Doctrines
1. Imputation of Adam’s Sin to His Posterity


2. Imputation of the Sins of His People to Christ
3. Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ to
His People
LivERATURE

I. Meaning and Use of the Term.—The word
“imputation,” according to the Scriptural usage,
denotes an attributing of something to a person, or
a charging of one with anything, or a setting of
something to one’s account. This takes place some-
times in a judicial manner, so that the thing im-
puted becomes a ground of reward or punishment.
The word is used in AV a number of times to trans-
late the Heb vb. hashabh and the Gr vb. logizomav.
These words, both of which occur frequently in
Scripture, and which in a number of instances mean
simply ‘‘to think,” express the above idea. That
this is the case is clear also from the other Eng.
words used in AV to translate these Heb and Gr
words, as, for example, “to count,” “‘to reckon,” ‘“‘to
esteem.” Thus hdshabh is tr? in AV by the vb. “‘to
impute” (Lev 718; 17 4; 28 19 19); by the
vb. “to reckon” (2 8 4 2); by “to count’’ as some-
thing (Lev 26 31 EV). The vb. in 158 22 15 is
DW, stm. Similarly, logizomat is tr¢ by the vb. “‘to
impute’ (Rom 4 6.8.11.22.23.24; 2 Cor 5 19; Jas
2 23); by the vb. “to count” (Rom 2 26; 4 3.5);
“to account’ (Gal 3 6); and by the vb. ‘‘to reck-
on” (Rom 4 4.9.10). In RV the word used to
render logizomai is the vb. ‘‘to reckon.”

These synonyms of the vb. “to impute” bring
out the idea of reckoning or charging to one’s ac-
count. It makes no difference, so far as the meaning
of imputation is concerned, who it is that imputes,
whether man (1 8 22 15) or God (Ps 32 2); it
makes no difference what is imputed, whether a
good deed for reward (Ps 106 301) or a bad deed
for punishment (Lev 17 4); and it makes no differ-
ence whether that which is imputed is something
which is personally one’s own prior to the imputa-
tion, as in the case above cited, where his own good
deed was imputed to Phinehas (Ps 106 301), or
something which is not personally one’s own prior
to the imputation, as where Paul asks that a debt
not personally his own be charged to him (Philem
ver 18). In all these cases the act of imputation is
simply the charging of one with something. It
denotes just what we mean by our ordinary use of
the term. It does not change the inward state or
character of the person to whom something is im-
puted. When, for example, we say that we impute
bad motives to anyone, we do not mean that we
make such a one bad; and just so in the Scripture
the phrase “to impute iniquity’? does not mean to
make one personally bad, but_simply to lay iniquity
to his charge. Hence when God is said ‘‘to impute
sin’ to anyone, the meaning is that God accounts
such a one to be a sinner, and consequently guilty
and liable to punishment. Similarly, the non-
imputation of sin means simply not to lay it to one’s
charge as a ground of punishment (Ps 32 2). In
the same manner, when God is said “to impute
righteousness’’ to a person, the meaning is that He
judicially accounts such a one to be righteous and
entitled to all the rewards of a righteous person
(Rom 4 6.11).

Hl. The Threefold Use of the Termin Theology.—
Three acts of imputation are given special promi-
nence in the Scripture, and are implicated in the
Scriptural doctrines of Original Sin, Atonement
and Justification, though not usually expressed by
the words hashabh and logizomai. “Because, how-
ever, of its “forensic” or “judicial” meaning, and
possibly through its use in the Vulg to translate
logizomai in Rom 4 8, the term “imputation” has ~
been used in theology in a threefold sense to denote
the judicial acts of God by which the guilt of Adam’s
sin is imputed to his posterity; by which the sing


1463


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Implead
Imputation


of Christ’s people are imputed to Him; and by
which the righteousness of Christ is imputed to His
people. The act of imputation is precisely the same
in each case. It is not meant that Adam’s sin was
personally the sin of his descendants, but that it
was set to their account, so that they share its guilt
and penalty. It is not meant that Christ shares
personally in the sins of men, but that the guilt of
His people’s sin was set to his account, so that He
bore its penalty. It is not meant that Christ’s
people are made personally holy or inwardly right-
eous by the imputation of His righteousness to
them, but that His righteousness is set to their ac-
count, so that they are entitled to all the rewards of
that perfect righteousness.

These doctrines have had a place in the theology
of the Christian church from the earliest Christian
cents., though the doctrine of the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ was first fully and clearly
stated at the time of and following the Reformation.
The first two of these doctrines have been the pos-
session of the entire Christian church, while the
third one of them is affirmed by both the Reformed
and Lutheran branches of Protestantism.

iif. The Scriptural Basis of These Doctrines.—
These three doctrines have a basis in the Scripture,
and underlie the Scripture doctrines of Original
Sin, Atonement, and Justification.

The doctrine of the imputation of Adam’s sin to
his posterity is implied in the account of the Fall

in Gen 2 and 3, taken in connection


1. Imputa- with the subsequent history of the
tion of human race as recorded in Gen and
Adam’s Sin in the rest of the OT. Many ancient
to His and modern interpreters regard this
Posterity narrative as an allegorical, mythical


or symbolical representation in his-
torical form, either of a psychological fact, i.e. of
something which takes place in every individual,
or of certain general truths concerning sin. By
some exegetes, following Kant, it has been held to
depict an advance of the race in culture or ethical
knowledge (Reuss; against which view cf Budde,
Clemen); by others it has been regarded as a sym-
bolical representation of certain truths concerning
sin (Oehler, Schultz); by others it has been regarded
as historical (Delitzsch). This latter view is the
one which accords with the narrative itself. It is
evidently intended as historical by its author, and
is so regarded by the NT writers. It is, moreover,
introduced to explain, not an advance of the race,
but the entrance of sin into the world, and the con-
nection of certain penal evils with sin. It does this
by showing how these evils came upon Adam as
a punishment for his disobedience, and the sub-
sequent history shows that his posterity were sub-
jected to the same evils. It is true that the threat
of punishment to Adam in case of disobedience was
made to him alone, and that the penalties threat-
ened are said to have come only upon him and Eve
(Gen 3 16-19). Nevertheless, it is clear from the
account of the subsequent history of the race that
it actually shared in the punishments inflicted upon


Adam, and that this was in consequence of his sin. .


This implies that in Gen 2 16f are contained the
terms of a covenant in which Adam acted as the
representative of the race. If, therefore, the race
shares in the penalty of Adam’s sin, it must also
share in his guilt or the judicial obligation to suffer
punishment. And this is precisely what the the-
ology of the entire Christian church has meant by
saying that the guilt of Adam’s sin was imputed to
his posterity. This is in accordance with God’s
method of dealing with men in other recorded in-
stances (Gen 19 15; Ex 20 5; Dt 1 37; 3 26);
and the assertion of the principle of personal re-
sponsibility by Ezekiel and Jeremiah against an


abuse of the principle of representative responsi-
bility implies a recognition of the latter (Ezk 18
2.4; 33 12; Jer 31 29).

The universality of sin and death is not brought
into connection with the Fall of Adam by the other
OT writers. This is done, however, by Paul. In
1 Cor 16 21f, Paul says that the death of all men
has its cause in the man Adam in the same way in
which the resurrection from the dead has its cause
in the man Christ. The death of all men, accord-
ingly, is not brought about by their personal sins,
but has come upon all through the disobedience of
Adam. Upon what ground this takes place, Paul
states in the passage Rom 5 12-21. He intro-
duces the subject of Adam’s relation to the race to
illustrate his doctrine of the justification of sinners
on the ground of a righteousness which is not per-
sonally their own. In order to do this he takes the
truth, well known to his readers, that all men are
under condemnation on account of Adam’s sin.
The comparison is between Adam and Christ, and
the specific point of the comparison is imputed sin
and imputed righteousness. Hence in ver 12 Paul
does not mean simply to affirm that as Adam sinned
and consequently died, so men sin and die. Nor
can he mean to say that just as God established a
precedent in Adam’s case that death should follow
sin, so He acts upon this precedent in the case of all
men because all sin, the real ground of the reign of
death being the fact that all sin, and the formal
ground being this precedent (B. Weiss); nor that
the real ground is this precedent and the subordi-
nate ground the fact that all sin (Hiinefeld).
Neither can Paul intend to say that all men are sub-
ject to death because they derive a corrupt nature
from Adam (Fritzsche); nor that men are con-
demned to die because all have sinned (Pfleiderer).
Paul’s purpose is to illustrate his doctrine of the
way in which men are delivered from sin and death
by the way in which they are brought into con-
demnation. The main thought of the passage is
that, just as men are condemned on account of the
imputation to them of the guilt of Adam’s sin, so
they are justified on account of the imputation to
them of the righteousness of Christ. Paul says
that it was by one man that sin and death entered
into the world, and it was by one man that death
passed to all men, because all were implicated in
the guilt of that one man’s sin (ver 12). In proof
of this the apostle cites the fact that death as a
punishment was reigning during a period in which
the only possible judicial ground of this fact must
have been the imputation of the guilt of that one
man’s sin (vs 13.14). Hence there is a precise
parallel between Adam and Christ. Just as men are
condemned on account of Adam’s disobedience, so
they are justified on account of the obedience of
Christ (vs 18.19). The thought of the passage is
imputed sin and imputed righteousness as the ground
of condemnation and of justification respectively.

That our sins are imputed to Christ is not ex-
pressly stated in the Scripture, but is implied in those

passages which affirm that Christ “bore


2. The our sins,” and that our iniquities were
Imputation “laid upon him” by Jeh. To bear
of the Sins inquity or sin, though it may some-
of His times mean to bear it away or remove
People to it, is an expression often applied in
Christ Seripture to persons charged with guilt


and subjected to the punishment of
their own sin (Lev 5 17; 7 18; 19 8; 22 9).
That the Heb vb. nasd@’ has this meaning is also
indicated by its being interchanged with the vb.
sabhal, which means ‘‘to bear as a burden” and is
used to denote the bearing of the punishment of sin
(Isa 53 11). In the OT sacrificial system, which
according to the NT is typical of the sacrifice of


Imputation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1464


Christ, the imposition of hands on the head of the
victim signified the substitution of it for the offender
and the transfer of his guilt to it. This idea is
brought out clearly in the case of the two goats on
the great Day of Atonement (Lev 16). When,
therefore, the Servant of Jeh in Isa 58 is said ‘“‘to
bear iniquity” (ver 11), or that “the chastisement
of our peace was upon him ’’(ver 5), or that ‘‘Jeh
hath laid [lit. “‘caused to fall’’] on him the iniquity
of us all’’ (ver 6), the idea expressed is that Christ
bore the punishment of our sin vicariously, its guilt
having been imputed to Him. The thought of the
prophecy is, as Delitzsch says, that of vicarious
punishment, which implies the idea of the imputa-
tion of the guilt of our sins to Christ.

The same idea underlies these expressions when
they occur in the NT. When Peter wishes to hold
up Christ as an example of patience in suffering, he
takes up the thought of Isa, and adduces the fact
that Christ “his own self bare our sins in his body
upon the tree’ (1 Pet 2 24). The context indi-
eates that Peter had the prophecy of Isa 63 in
mind, so that his meaning is, not that Christ carried
our sins even up to the cross, but that in His death
on the cross Christ bore the punishment of our sin,
its guilt having been imputed to Him. The same
thought is expressed by the writer of the Ep. to the
He, where the contrast between the first and second
advents of Christ is made to hinge upon the fact
that in the first He came to be sacrificed as a sin-
bearer, burdened with the guilt of the sin of others,
whereas in His second coming He will appear with-
out this burden of imputed or vicarious guilt (He
9 28). Paul also gives expression to the same
thought when he says that Christ was “made to
be sin on our behalf?’ (2 Cor 5 21), and that He
became ‘‘a eurse for us” (Gal 3 13). In the former
passage the idea of substitution, although not ex-
pressed by the preposition hupér which indicates
that Christ’s work was for our benefit, is neverthe-
less clearly implied in the thought that Christ,
whose sinlessness is emphasized in the ver, is made
sin, and that we sinners become righteous in Him.
Paul means that Christ was made to bear the

enalty of our sin aud that its guilt was imputed to
Flim in precisely the same way in which we sinners
become the righteousness of God in Him, ie. by
the imputation of His righteousness to us. The
same thought is expressed in Gal 3 13, where the
statement that Christ was made a curse for us means
that He was made to eudure the curse or penalty of
the broken law. In all these passages the under-
lying thought is that the guilt of our sin was
imputed to Christ.

The righteousness upon the ground of which
God justifies the ungodly is, according to Paul,

witnessed to in the OT (Rom 8 21).
3. The Im- In order to obtain the blessedness
putation of which comes from a right relation to
the Right- God, the pardon or non-imputation of
eousness of sin is necessary, and this takes place
Christ to through the ‘‘covering” of sin (Ps 32
His People 1.2). The nature of this covering by

the viearious bearing of the penalty
of sin is made elear in Isa 63. It is, moreover, the
teaching of the OT that the righteousness which
God demands is not to be found among men (Ps
130 3; 143 2; Isa 64 6). Accordingly, the proph-
ets speak of 9 righteousness which is not from man’s
works, but which is said to be in Jeh or to come
from Him to His people (Isa 32 16f;, 46 23 ff;
54 17; 568 8; 61 3; Jer 61 10; Hos 10 12). This
idea finds its clearest expression in connection with
the work of the Messiah in Jer 33 16, where Jerus
is called “Jeh our righteousness” because of the
coming of the Messianic king, and in Jer 23 6 where
the same name is given to the Messiah to express


His significance for Israel. Although the idea of
the imputation of righteousness is not explicitly
asserted in these passages, the idea is not merely
that the righteousness spoken of is recognized by
Jeh (Cremer), but that it comes from Him, so that
Jeh, through the work of the Messiah, is the source
of His people’s righteousness. me

This idea is taken up by Paul, who makes explicit
the way in which this righteousness comes to sin-
ners, and who puts the idea of imputed righteous-
ness at the basis of his doctrine of Justification.
By the righteousness of Christ Paul means Christ’s
legal status, or the merit acquired by all that He
did in satisfying the demands of God’s law, includ-
ing what has been called His active and passive
obedience. Notwithstanding the fact that most
of the modern expositors of Paul’s doctrine have
denied that he teaches the imputation of Christ’s
obedience, this doctrine has a basis in the apostle’s
teaching. Justification leads to life and final glori-
fication (Rom 5 18; 8 30); and Paul always con~
ceives the obtaining of life as dependent on the ful-
filment of the law. _ If, therefore, Christ secures life
for us, it can only be in accordance with this prin-~
ciple. Accordingly, the apostle emphasizes the
element of obedience in the death of Christ, and
places this act of obedience at the basis of the
sinner’s justification (Rom 5 18). He also repre--
sents the obedience of the cross as the culminatin
point of a life of obedience on Christ’s part (Ph
2 8). Moreover, Paul affirms that our redemption
from all the demands of the law is secured by the
fact that Christ was born under law (Gal 4 4).
This cannot be restricted to the fact that Christ
was under the curse of the law, for He was born
under law and the result of this is that we are free
from all of its demands. This doctrine is also im-
plied in the apostle’s teaching that Justification is
absolutely gracious, taken in connection with the
fact that it leads to a complete salvation.

The importance in Paul’s thought of the doctrine
of the imputation of the righteousness of Christ to
the believer can be seen from the fact that the ques-
tion how righteousness was to be obtained occupied
a central place in his religious consciousness, both
before and after his conversion. The apostle’s
conversion by the appearance of the risen Christ
determined his conception of the true way of ob-
taining righteousness, since the resurrection of
Christ meant for Paul the condemnation of his
ee past search for righteousness by works of the
aw.

That the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ to the believer does lie at the basis of Paul’s
doctrine of Justification can be further seen from
the fact that Justification is absolutely free and
unmerited so far as the sinner is concerned (Rom
3 24; 6 15; Gal 5 4; Tit 3 7); its object being
one who is ungodly (Rom 4 5); so that it is not by
works (Rom 3 20.28; Gal 2 16; 3 11; 5 4; Phil
3 9); and yet that it is not a mere pardon of sin,
but is a strictly ‘forensic’? or judicial judgment
freeing the sinner from all the elaims of the law, an
granting him the right to eternal life. This last
truth is plain because God’s retributive righteous-
ness lies at the basis of Paul’s doctrine of Justifi-
cation (Rom 2); is manifested in it (Rom 8 25 f);
because Christ’s expiatory work is its ground (Rom
3 25); and because our redemption from the curse
of the law rests upon Christ’s having borne it for
us, and our redemption from all the demands of the
law depends upon their fulfilment by Christ (Gal
3 13; 4 4). Hence the gracious character of Jus-
tification, according to Paul, does not consist in its
being merely a gracious pardon without any judi-
cial basis (Ritsch!); or in God’s acceptance of a
subjective righteousness produced by Him in the


1465


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Imputation


sinner (Tobac); or in the acceptance of faith in-
stead of a perfect righteousness (Cremer). The
gracious character of Justification consists for Paul
in the fact that the righteousness on the ground of
which God justifies the ungodly is a righteous-
ness which is graciously provided by God, and
which Paul contrasts with his own righteousness
which comes from law works (Phil 3 9). The
sinner, therefore, is pardoned and accepted as a
righteous person, not on account of anything in
himself, but only on account of what Christ has
done for him, which means that the merits of
Christ’s suffering and obedience are imputed to the
sinner as the ground of his justification.

This truth is explicitly affirmed by Paul, who
speaks of God’s imputing righteousness without
works, and of righteousness being imputed (Rom
46.11). The idea of the imputation of righteous-
ness here is made clear by the context. The one
who is declared righteous is said to be “ungodly”
(4 5). Hence he is righteous only by God’s impu-
tation of righteousness to him. This is also clear
from the contrast between imputation according
to grace and according to debt (4 4). He who seeks
righteousness by works would be justified as a
reward for his works, in antithesis to which, impu-
tation according to grace would be the charging
one with a righteousness which he does not possess.
Accordingly, at the basis of Justification there is a
reckoning to the sinner of an objective righteous-
ness. This same idea is also implied and asserted
by Paul in the parallel which he draws between
Adam and Christ (Rom 5 18f). The apostle says
that just as men are condemned on account of a sin
not their own, so they are justified on account of a
righteousness which is not their own. The idea of
imputed sin and imputed righteousness, as was said,
js the precise point of the parallelism between con-
demnation in Adam and justification in Christ.
This is also the idea which underlies the apostle’s
contrast of the Old and New Covenants (2 Cor 3
9). The New Covenant is described as a “ministry
of righteousness,” and contrasted with the Old
Covenant which is described as a ‘‘ministry of con-
demnation.” If, therefore, this last expression
does not denote a subjective condition of men under
the old dispensation, but their relation to God as
objects of His condemnation, righteousness must
denote the opposite of this relation to the law, and
must depend on God’s judicial acquittal. Thesame
truth is expressed by Paul more concretely by say-
ing that Christ has been “‘made unto us righteous-
ness from God”’ (1 Cor 1 30). Here the concrete
mode of expression is chosen because Paul speaks
also of Christ being our sanctification and redemp-
tion, so that an expression had to be chosen which
would cover all of these ideas. One of the clearest
statements concerning this objective righteousness
is Phil 39. The apostle here affirms that the
righteousness which the believer in Christ obtains
is directly opposite to his own righteousness. This
latter comes from works of the law, whereas the
former comes from God and through faith in Christ.
It is, therefore, objective to man, comes to him
from God, is connected with the work of Christ,
and is mediated by faith in Christ.

The idea clearly stated in this last passage of a
righteousness which is objective to the sinner and
which comes to him from God, i.e. the idea of a new
legal standing given to the believer by God, explains
the meaning, in most cases, of the Pauline phrase
“righteousness of God.’’ This phrase is used by
Paul 9 t: Rom 1 17; 3 5.21f.25f; 103 (twice);
2 Cor 5 21. It denotes the Divine attribute of
righteousness in Rom 3 5.25f. The customary
exegesis was to regard the other instances as de-
noting the righteousness of a sinner which comes


to him from God, in accordance with Phil 3 9.
More recently Hacring, following Kélbing in general,
has interpreted all these instances as denoting God’s
justifying action. But this interpretation is most
strained in 2 Cor 5 21, where we are said to “be-
come the righteousness of God,” and in Rom 10
3-6, where the righteousness of God is identified
with the righteousness which comes from faith, this
latter being contrasted with man’s own inward
righteousness. That a righteousness of man which
he receives from God is here referred to, is confirmed
by the fact that the reason given for the error of the
Jews in seeking a righteousness from law works is
the fact that the work of Christ has made an end of
this method of obtaining righteousness (Rom 10 4).
This righteousness, therefore, is one of which man
is the possessor. The phrase, however, cannot
mean a righteousness which is valid in God’s sight
(Luther), although this thought is elsewhere ex-
pressed by Paul (Rom 3 20; Gal 3 11). It means
a righteousness which comes from God and of which
He is the author. This is not, however, by making
man inwardly righteous, since all the above passages
show the purely objective character of this right-
eousness. It is the righteousness of Phil 3 9; the
righteousness which God imputes to the believer in
Christ. Thus we “become the righteousness of
God” in precisely the same sense in which Christ
was ‘made to be sin’ (2 Cor 5 21). Since Christ
was made sin by having the guilt of our sin im-
puted to Him so that He bore its penalty, Paul
must mean that we “become the righteousness of
God” in this same objective sense through the impu-
tation to us of the righteousness of Christ. In the
same way, in Rom 10 3, the contrast between God’s
righteousness and the Jew’s righteousness by works
of the law shows that in each case righteousness
denotes a legal status which comes from God by
imputation. It is this same imputed righteousness
which makes the gospel the power of God unto sal-
vation (Rom 1 17), which has been revealed by
the law and the prophets, which is received by faith
in Christ by whose expiatory death God’s retrib-
utive righteousness has been made manifest (Rom
3 21.22.25.26), and which is represented by Peter
as the object of Christian faith (2 Pet 1 1).

In two passages Paul affirms that Abraham be-
lieved God and “it was imputed to him for right-
eousness’ (Rom 43AV; Gal36). The old
Arminian theologians, and some modern exegetes
(H. Cremer) assert that Pau] means that Abraham’s
faith was accepted by God instead of a perfect
righteousness as the meritorious ground of his justi-
fication. This, however, cannot be the apostle’s
meaning. It is diametrically opposed to the context
where Paul introduces the ease of Abraham for the
very purpose of proving that he was justified _with-
out any merit on his part; it is opposed to Panl’s
idea of the nature of faith which involves the renun-
ciation of all claim to merit, and is a simple resting
on Christ from whom all its saving efficacy is de-
rived; and this interpretation is also opposed to
Paul’s doctrine of the absolutely gracious character
of Justification. The apostle in these passages wishes
to illustrate from the case of Abraham the gracious
character of Justification, and quotes the untech-
nical language of Gen 15 6. His meaning is simply
that Abraham was justified as a believer in God, and
not as one who sought rightcousness by works. See
Sin; ATONEMENT; JUSTIFICATION.

Litzrarurs.—Besides the Comm., see works on OT
Theology by Dillmann, Davidson, Oehler, Schultz; and
on NT Theology by H. Holtzmann, B. Weiss, Schmidt;
also Chemnitz, De Vocabulo Imputationis, Loc. Theol.,
1594, II, 326 ff; J. Martin, The Imputation of Adam's
Sin, 1834, 20-46; Clemen, Die Christliche Lehre von der
Sunde, I, 1897, 151-79; Dietzsch, Adam_und_ Christus,
1871; Hiinefeld, Rom § 12-21, 1895; Crawford, The
Doctrine of the Holy Scripture Respecting the Atonement?,


Imrah
Infinite


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1466


1876, 33-45, 188-90. Cf also the appropriate sections
in the works on the Scripturo doctrine of Justification,
aad esp. on Paul's doctrine of Justification, e.g. Owen,
Justification, Ist Am. ed, 185-310; Ritschl, Die Christ-
liche Lehre von der Rechtfertigung und Verséhnung, IT,
1882, 303-31; B6hl, Von der Rechtfertigung durch den
Glauben, 1890, 115-23; Ndésgen, Schriftbeweis fir die
evangel, Rechfertiquagslehre, 1901, 147-96; Pfleiderer,
Die Paulinische Rechtfertigung, ZWT (Hiigenfeid her-
ausg.), 1872, 161-200, Paulinism, ET, I, 171-86; with
which compare Pfleiderer’s later view of Paul's teach-
ings, 2d ed, 1890, 178-89, G. Schwarz, Justitia Impu-
tata? 1891; H. Cremer, Paulinische Rechtfertigungslehre’,
1900, 329-49; Tobac, Le probléme de la justification dans
Saint Paul, 1908, 206-25. On Paul's doctrine of the
righteousness of God, of the many monographs the follow-
ing may be mentioned: Fricke, Der Paulinische Grund-
begriff der Stxatogivy Geou, erértert auf Grund v. Rém.
III, 21-26, 1888, Kdibing, Studien zur Paulinische
Theologie, TSK, 1895, 7-51; Hiring, Accatocivy deod,
bet Paulus, 1896.
CaspaR WisTaR HopcE
IMRAH, im’ra (1707, yimrah): A descendant


of Asher (1 Ch 7 36).

IMRI, im’ri (78 , *imri):

(1) A Judahite (1 Ch 9 4).

(2) Father of Zaccur who helped to rebuild the
walls of Jerus under Nehemiah (Neh 3 2).


IN: A principal thing to notice about this prep.,
which in AV represents about 16 Heb and as many
Gr words and preps., is that, in hundreds of cases
(esp. in the OT, but frequently also in the NT) in
RV the rendering is changed to more exact forms
(“‘to,”’ “unto,” “by,” “pon,” Hate “with,”
“among,” “for,” “throughout,” etc; ef e.g. Gen 6
16; 13 8; 17 7.912; 181; Ex 817; Lev 19,
etc); while, nearly as often, “in” is substituted for
divergent forms of AV (eg. Gen 2 14; 17 11;
31 54; 407; 4917; Ex 8 14.24; Lev 3 17;
4 2, etc). The chief Gr prep. év, en, is frequently
adhered to as ‘in’? in RV where AV has other forms
(‘Swith,” “among,” ete; cf “in” for “with”? in
John’s baptism, Mt 3 11, and ||; ‘in the tombs”
for “among the tombs,” Mk 6 3). In 2 Thess
22, “shaken in mind” in AV is more correctly
rendered in RV “shaken from [apé] your mind.”
There are numerous such instructive changes.

JAMES ORR

IN THE LORD (& Kvplo, en Kurid): A
favorite Pauline expression, denoting that intimate
union and fellowship of the Christian with the Lord
Jesus Christ which supplies the basis of all Chris-
tian relations and conduct, and the distinctive ele-
ment in which the Christian life has its specific
character. Cf the synonymous Pauline phrases,
“in Christ,’ ‘in Christ Jesus,” and the Johannine
expressions, “being in Christ,” “abiding in Christ.”
“In the Lord’’ denotes: (1) the motive, quality, or
character of a Christian duty or virtue, as based
on union with Christ, e.g. “Free to be married to
whom she will; only in the Lord’ (1 Cor 7 39),
i.e. provided the marriage be consistent with the
Christian life. Cf 1 Cor 15 58; Phil 3.1; 4 1.2.
4.10; Eph 6 1.10; Col 3 18, ete; (2) the ground
of Christian unity, fellowship, and brotherly salu-
tation, e.g. Rom 16 2.8.22; 1 Cor 16 19; Col 4 7;
(3) it is often practically synonymous with ‘“Chris-
tian” (noun or adj.), ‘as Christians’ or “as a
Christian,” e.g. ‘Salute them of the household of
Narcissus, that are in the Lord,’’ ie. that are
Christians (Rom 16 11); “I... . the prisoner in
the Lord,’’ ie. the Christian prisoner (Eph 4 1);
ef Rom 16 13; 1 Cor 9 1.2; Eph 6 21 (‘faith-
ful minister in the Lord’’=faithful Christian min-
ister); Col 4 17 (see Grimm-Thayer, Lez. of NT,
év, en, I, 6) D. Miatu Enwarns


INCANTATION, in-kan-ta’shun. See Macic.


INCARNATION, in-kar-na/shun. See Prrson
or CHRIST.


INCENSE, in’sens (WTOP, ktérah; in Jer 44
21, "OP, kitter; in Mal 1 11, "OP, batar, “In
every place incense shall be offered unto my name”;
the word m2, lebhonah, tr4 “incense” in several
passages in Isa and Jer in AV, is properly “‘frankin-
cense,”’ and is so rendered in RV): The offering of
incense, or burning of aromatic substances, is
common in the religious ceremonies of nearly all
nations (Egyptians, Babylonians, Assyrians,
Phoenicians, etc), and it is natural to find it holding
@ prominent place in the tabernacle and temple-
worship of Israel. The newer critical theory that
incense was a late importation into the religion of
Israel, and that the altar of incense described in
Ex 30 1 ff is a post-exilian invention, rests on pre-
suppositions which are not here admitted, and is in
contradiction to the express notices of the altar of
incense in 1 K 6 20.22; 7 48; 9 25; ef 2 Ch 4
19 (see discussion of the subject by Delitzsch in
Luthardt’s Zeitschrift, 1880, 113 ff). In the de-
nunciation of Eli in 1S 2 27 ff, the burning of
incense is mentioned as one of the functions of the
priesthood (ver 28). The “smoke” that filled the
temple in Isaiah’s vision (Isa 6 4) may be pre-
sumed to be the smoke of incense. The word
ketorah itself properly denotes “smoke.” For the
altar of incense see art. on that subject, and TaBER-
NACLE and TEMPLE. The incense used in the tab-
ernacle service—called ‘sweet incense’ (k*toreth
ha-sammim, Ex 25 6, etc)—was compounded ac-
cording to a definite prescription of the perfumes,
stacte, onycha, galbanum and pure frankincense
(Ex 30 34f), and incense not so compounded was
rejected as “strange incense” (ktdrah zérah, 30 9).
In the offering of incense, burning coals from the
altar of burnt offering were borne in a censer and.
put upon the altar of incense (the “golden altar”
before the oracle), then the fragrant incense was
sprinkled on the fire (cf Lk 1 9f). Ample details
of the rabbinical rules about incense may be seen
in the art. “Incense,” in DB. See CENnsER.

Figuratively, incense was symbolical of ascending
prayer. The multitude were praying while Zach-
arias offered incense (Lk 1 10, @vulaua, thumiama),
and in Rev 5 8; 8 3f, the incense in the heavenly
temple is connected and even identified (5 8) with
‘the prayers of the saints.” James ORR


INCEST, in’sest.


INCONTINENCY, in-kon’ti-nen-si (dxpacia,
akrasia, ‘without control’): In 1 Cor 7 5, it evi-
dently refers to lack of control in a particular matter,
and signifies unchastity. In Mt 23 25, the Gr
word is tr4 in both AV and ARV by “excess.”


INCORRUPTION, in-ké-rup’shun (4d@apeta,
aphtharsia): Occurs in 1 Cor 16 42.50.53.54, of the
resurrection body, and is twice used in RV for AV
‘Gmmortality’ (Rom 27; 2 Tim110m). See
IMMORTALITY.


See CrIMEs.


INCREASE, in’krés (noun), in-krés’ (vb.): Em-
ployed in the Eng. Bible both as vb. and as noun,
and in both cases to represent a number of different
words in the original. As a vb. it is used in the
ordinary sense of the term. As a noun it is usually
used of plant life, or of the herds and flocks, to denote
the fruitage or the offspring; more rarely of money,
to denote the interest. As examples of the different
terms tr? by this word, students who read Heb or
Gr may compare Dt 7 22; Prov 16 21; Job 10
16 AV; 12 23; Nu 18 30; Dt 7 13; Ezk 22 12
in the OT, and Jn 3 30; 1 Cor 3 6; Col 2 19;
Eph 4 16 in the NT. :

Russett BensaMIn MILLER


1467


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Imrah
Infinite


INDIA, in’di-a (3M, hodda; 4 "Iv8unh, hz
Indiké): The name occurs in canonical Scripture
only in Est 1 1; 8 9, of the country which marked
the eastern boundary of the territory of Ahasuerus.
The Heb word comes from the name of the Indus,
Hondu, and denotes, not the peninsula of Hindu-
stan, but the country drained by that great river.
This is the meaning also in 1 Esd 3 2; Ad Est
3 2; 16 1. Many have thought that this country
is intended by Havilah in Gen 2 11 and that the
Indus is the Pishon. The drivers of the elephants
(1 Mace 6 37) were doubtless natives of this land.
The name in 1 Macc 8 9 is certainly an error.
India never formed part of the dominions of An-
tiochus the Great. It may possibly be a clerical
error for “Tonia,’’ as Media is possibly a mistake for
Mysia. Ifthe Israelites in early times had no direct
relations with India, many characteristic Indian
products seem to have found their way into Pales-
tinian markets by way of the Arabian and Syrian
trade routes, or by means of the Red Sea flects
(1 K 10 11.15; Ezk 27 15 ff, etc). Among these
may be noted “horns of ivory and ebony,’’ “cassia
and calamus,” almug (sandalwood), apes and pea~-
cocks. : W. Ewine


INDIGNITIES, in-dig’ni-tiz. See PunisHMENTs.


INDITE, in-dit’: AV Ps 45 1, “My heart is in-
diting a good matter’; RV “My heart overfloweth
with a goodly matter,” is in harmony with UN,
rdhash, “to bubble up”; cf LXX é&npetéaro,
exéreixato, “to pour out.’ “Indite”’ in Eng. is
becoming obsolete. It may mean “to dictate,”
“to invite,” ‘to compose.” In the latter meaning
it is used in the above passage.


INFANCY, in’fan-si, GOSPEL OF THE. See
APOCRYPHAL GOSPELS.


INFANT, in‘fant, BAPTISM. See Baptism.
INFANTICIDE, in-fan’ti-sid. See Crimes.


INFIDEL, in’fi-del (Gmoros, dpistos, “unbe-
lieving,” ‘“incredulous’”’): AV has this word twice:
“What part hath he that believeth with an infidel?”
(2 Cor 6 15); “If any provide not for his own,
.... 48 worse than an infidel” (1 Tim 5 8). In
both passages ERV and ARV have “‘unbeliever” in
harmony with numerous other instances of the use
of the Gr apistos. The word nowhere corresponds
to the modern conception of an infidel, one who
denies the existence of God, or repudiates the Chris-
tian faith; but always signifies one who has not be-
come a believer in Christ. It was formerly so used
in Eng., and some of the older VSS have it in other

- passages, besides these two. It is not found in the
OT, but “infidelity” (incredulity) occurs in 2 Esd
7 44 [114]. Wiiuiam OwrEn CarvER


INFINITE, in’fin-it, INFINITUDE, in-fin’i-vid:
The word “infinite” occurs 3 t only in the text of
AV (Job 22 5; Ps 147 5; Nah 3 9)
1. Scripture and once in m (Nah 2 9). In Ps 147
Use 5, “His understanding is infinite,’’ it
represents the Heb “WO PR, ’én
mispar, “no number’; in the other passages the
Heb Vp TR, ’an kee Job 22 5, of iniquities) and
MEP PR, en kéceh (Nah 8 9, of strength of Ethio-
pia and Egypt; AVm 2 9, of “spoil’’), meaning ‘“‘no
end.” RV, therefore, renders in Job 22 5, “Neither
is there any end to thine iniquities,”” and drops the
marginal reference in Nah 2 9.
Pg 147 5 is thus the only passage in which the
term is directly applied to God. It there correctly


conveys the idea of absence of all limitation. There
is nothing beyond the compass of God’s understand-
ing; or, positively, His understanding
2. Applica- embraces everything there is to know.
tion to God Past, present and future; all things pos-
sible and actual; the inmost thoughts
and purposes of man, as well as his outward actions,
lie bare to God’s knowledge (He 4 13; see Om-
NISCIENCE).
While, however, the term is not found, the truth
that God is infinite, not only in His understanding,
but in His being and all His perfec-
8. Infinity tions, natural and moral, is one that
Universally pervades all Scripture. It could not
Implied be otherwise, if God was unoriginated,
exalted above all limits of time, space
and creaturehood, and dependent only on Himself.
The Dib. writers, certainly, are far from thinking
in metaphysical categories, or using such terms as
“Self-existence,”’ ‘“absoluteness,”’ “unconditioned,”
yet the ideas for which these terms stand were all of
them attributed in their conceptions to God. They
did not, e.g. conceive of God as having been born,
or as having a beginning, as the Bab and Gr gods
had, but thought of Him as the ever-existing One
(Ps 90 1.2), and free Creator and Disposer of all
that exists. This means that God has self-existence,
and for the same reason that He is not bound by
His own creation. He must be thought of as raised
above all creaturely limits, that is, as infinite.
The anthropomorphisms of the Bible, indeed, are
often exceedingly naive, as when Jeh is said to “go
down”’ to see what is being done (Gen


4. Anthro- 11 5.7; 18 21), or to “repent” of His
pomor- actions (Gen 6 6); but these repre-
phisms sentations stand in contexts which


show that the authors knew God to be
unlimited in time, space, knowledge and power (cf
Gen 6 7, God, Creator of all; 11 8.9, universal
Ruler; 18 25, universal Judge; Nu 23 19, inca-
pable of repentance, etc). Like anthropomorphisms
are found in Dt and the Prophets, where it is not
doubted that the higher conceptions existed. In
this infinity of God is implied His unsearchableness
(Job 117; Ps 145 3; Rom 11 33); conversely,
the latter attribute implies His infinity.
This infinitude of God is displayed in all His
attributes—in His eternity, omnipresence, ornis-
cience, omnipotence, ete—on which see
5. Infinity the separate arts. As regards the
a Perfection proper conception of infinity, one has
Nota chiefly to guard against figuring it
Quantity under too quaniitative an aspect.
Quantitative boundlessness is the nat-
ural symbol we employ to represent infinity, yet
reflection will convince us that it is inadequate as
applied to a spiritual magnitude. Infinitude in
power, e.g. is not an infinite quantity of power, but
the potentiality in God of accomplishing without
limit everything that is possible to power. It is a
perfection, not a quantity. Still more is this appar-
ent in moral attributes like love, righteousness,
truth, holiness. These attributes are not quanti-
ties (a quantity can never be truly infinite), but
perfections; the infinity is qualitative, consisting in
the absence of all defect or limitation in degree, not
in amount.
The recollection of the fact now stated will free
the mind from most of the perplexities that have
been raised by metaphysical writers


6. Errors as to the abstract possibility of the
Based on coexistence of infinite attributes in
Quantita- God (thus e.g. Mansel); the recon-
tive Con- _cilability of God’s infinity with His
ceptions Personality, or with the existence of


a finite world; the power of the human
mind to conceive infinity, etc. How, it is asked,


Infirmity
Ink-horn


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1468


can the idea of infinity get into our finite minds?
It might as well be asked how the mind can take in
the idea of the sun’s distance of some 90 millions of
miles from the earth, when the skull that holds the
brain is only a few cubic inches in capacity. The
idea of a mile is not a mile big, nor is the idea of
infinity too large to be thought of by the mind of
man. The essence of the power of thought is its
capacity for the universal, and it cannot rest till it
has apprehended the most universal idea of all—
the infinite. JAMES ORR


INFIRMITY, in-far’mi-ti (71, dawah, Ten;
halah, T1270, mahdlah; doévera, asthéneia): This
word is used either in the sing. or pl. (the latter
only in the NT) and with somewhat varying sig-
nification. (1) As sickness or bodily disease (Jn 5
5; Mt 817; Lk 6 15; 82; I Tim 6 23). In
the last instance the affections seem to have been
dyspeptic, the discomfort of which might be re-
lieved by alcohol, although the disease would not be
cured thereby. It is probable that this condition
of body produced a certain slackness in Timothy’s
work against which Paul several times cautions
him. In Lk 7 21 RV has ‘diseases,’’ which is a
better rendering of the Gr nosén, used here, than the
AV ‘‘nfirmities.”’ (2) Imperfections or weaknesses
of body (Rom 6 19; 2 Cor 11 30 AV; 12 5.9.10
AV; Gal 4 13). (8) Moral or spiritual weaknesses
and defects (Ps 77 10; Rom 8 26; 151; He 4
15; 5 2; 7 28). In this sense it is often used by
the classic Eng. writers, as in Milton’s ‘the last
infirmity of noble minds”; cf Caesar, IV, iii, 86.


The infirmity which a man of resolution can keep.


under by his will (Prov 18 14) may be either moral
or physical. In Lk 13 11 the woman’s physical
infirmity is ascribed to the influence of an evil spirit.
Avex. MacarisTER

INFLAME, in-flam’, ENFLAME, en-flim’ (p27,
dalak): ‘“To inflame’ in the meaning ‘‘to excite
passion” is found in Isa 6 11, “till wine inflame
them.’’ In some AV passages (e.g. Isa 57 5) we
find ‘‘enflaming’’ with the same meaning; cf AV
Sus ver 8 and Sir 28 10 AV (RV “‘inflame’’).


INFLAMMATION, in-fla-ma’shun (Mp3, dal-
leketh; $tyos, rhigos): Only in Dt 28 22, was con-
sidered by Jewish writers as “burning fever,” by
LXX asaformofague. Both this and typhoid fever
are now, and probably were, among the commonest
of the diseases of Pal. See Fever. In Lev 13 28
AV has “inflammation” as the rendering of ¢dre-
bheth, which LXX reads charaktér, and for which
the proper Eng. equivalent is “scar,” as in RV.


INFLUENCES, in’fldc-ens-iz (DIY, ma-
‘ddhannéth): This word occurs only in Job 38 31
AV, “Canst thou bind the sweet influences of
Pleiades?’ RV “the cluster of the Pleiades,” m
“or chain, or sweet influences’; Delitzsch, Dillmann
and others render “fetters,”’ that which binds the
group together; “‘influences,” if correct, would
refer to the seasons, which were believed to be regu-
lated, so far, by the Pierapes (q.v.). In Wisd 7
25, it is said of Wisdom that she is ‘‘a pure influence
[apérrhoia, RV “effluence’”’] flowing from the glory
of the Almighty.” W. L. WALKER


INGATHERING, in’gath-ér-ing, FEAST OF.
See Feasts anp Fasts; Booru.


INHABIT, in-hab’it, INHABITANT, in-hab’it-
ant (BW, ydshabh, “to sit,” ‘Temain, ‘‘dwell,”
“inhabit,” j2UW, shakhén, “to settle down,”
“tabernacle,” “dwell”; sarowéw, katoikéd, “‘to
settle,” dwell”): See Dwrtt. The vb. “to in-


habit,”? now used only transitively, had once an
intransitive meaning as well. Cf Cowper, Olney
Hymns, XIV,

“Who built it, who inhabits there?"


So in 1 Ch 6 9 AV, “‘And eastward he inhabited
unto the entering in of the wilderness’ (but RV
“dwelt’’). We have the obsolete inhabiters for
‘nhabitants’ in Rev 8 18 AV (but RV ‘‘them that
dwell”) and Rev 12 12 AV (but omitted in RV).
The rare inhabitress (fem.) is found only in Jer 10
17m; ‘the church called the inhabitress of the
gardens” (Bishop Richardson).
D. Mratt Epwarps

INHERITANCE, in-her'i-tans (M2732, nahdlah,
“something inherited,” “occupancy,” “heirloom,”
“estate,” “portion”): The word is used in its widest
application in the OT Scriptures, referring not only
to an estate received by a child from its parents, but
also to the land received by the children of Israel
asa gift from Jeh. And in the figurative and poeti-
cal sense, the expression is applied to the kingdom
of God as represented in the consecrated lives of
His followers. In a similar sense, the Psalmist is
represented as speaking of the Lord as the portion
of his inheritance. In addition to the above word,
the King James Version tr* as inheritance, TWA,
morashah, ‘a, possession,” ‘‘heritage”’ (Dt 33 4;
Ezk 33 24); MW, yrushshah, “something occu-
pied,” “a patrimony,” “‘possession” (Jgs 21 17);
P2, héek, “smoothness,” “allotment” (Ps 16 5);
kAnpovopéw, kléronoméé, “to inherit’ (Mt 5 5, ete);
xAnpovéuos, kléronédmos, “heir? (Mt 21 38, ete);
KAnpovoula, kléronomia, “heirship,” ‘patrimony,’
“possession”; or xAfpos, kléros, “‘an acquisition,”
“portion,” “heritage,’ from «Anpbw, klérdd, ‘to
assign,’’ ‘‘to allot,” ‘‘to obtain an inheritance’ (Mt
21 38: Lk 12 13; Acts 7 5; 20 32; 26 18; Gal 3
18; Eph 1 11.14.18; 5 5; Col 1 12; 3 24: Hel
4,915; 11 8; 1 Pet 1 4).

The Pent distinguishes clearly between real and
personal property, the fundamental idea regarding
the former being the thought that the land is God’s,
given by Him to His children, the people of Israel,
and hence cannot be alienated (Lev 26 23.28).
In order that there might not be any respecter of
persons in the division, the lot was to determine the
specific piece to be owned by each family head (Nu
26 52-56; 33 54). In case, through necessity of
circumstances, a homestead was sold, the title
could pass only temporarily; for in the year of
Jubilee every homestead must again return to the
original owner or heir (Lev 25 25-34). Real
estate given to the priesthood must be appraised,
and could be redeemed by the payment of the ap-
praised valuation, thus preventing the transfer of
real property even in this case (Lev 27 14-25).
Inheritance was controlled by the following regu-
lations: (1) The firstborn son inherited a double
portion of all the father’s possession (Dt 21 15-17);
(2) the daughters were entitled to an inheritance,
provided there were no sons in the family (Nu 27
8); (3) in case there were no direct heirs, the
brothers or more distant kinsmen were recognized
(vs 9-11); in no case should an estate pass from one
tribe to another. The above points were made the
subject of statutory law at the instance of the
daughters of Zelophehad, the entire case being
clearly set forth in Nu 27, 36.

Frank E. Hirsca

INIQUITY, in-ik’wi-ti (1, ‘awon; dvopta,
anomia): In the OT of the 11 words tr4 “iniquity,”
by far the most common and important is ‘awén
{about 215 t). Etymologically, it is customary to
explain it as meaning lit. “crookedness,” ‘“per-


1469


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Infirmity
Ink-horn


verseness,”’ i.e. evil regarded as that which is not
straight or upright, moral distortion (from MY,
‘iwwah, “to bend,” “make crooked,” “‘pervert’’),
Driver, however (following Lagarde), maintains
that two roots, distinct in Arab., have been confused
in Heb, one=‘‘to bend,” “pervert”? (as above),
and the other=“‘to err,” ‘‘go astray’; that ‘dwénis
derived from the latter, and consequently ex-
presses the idea of error, deviation from the right
path, rather than that of perversion (Driver, Notes
on Sam, 135n.) Whichever etymology is adopted,
in actual usage it has three meanings which almost
imperceptibly pass into each other: (1) iniquity,
(2) guilt of iniquity, (3) punishment of iniquity.
Primarily, it denotes “not an action, but the char-
acter of an action’’ (Oehler), and is so distinguished
from “sin” (hatta’th). Hence we have the expres-
sion “the iniquity of my sin’’ (Ps 32 5). Thusthe
meaning glides into that of “guilt,” which might
often take the place of “iniquity” as the tr of ‘awén
(Gen 16 16; Ex 847; Jer 2 22, etc). From
“suilt” it again passes into the meaning of “punish-
ment of guilt,” just as Lat piaculum may denote
both guilt and its punishment. The transition is all
the easier in Heb because of the Heb sense of the in-
timate relation of sin and suffering, e. g. Gen 4 13,
“My punishment is greater than I can bear’; which
is obviously to be preferred to AVm, RVm “Mine
iniquity is greater than can be forgiven,” for Cain
is not so much expressing sorrow for his sin, as com-
plaining of the severity of his punishment; cf 2 K
79 (RV “punishment,’’ RVm “iniquity”); Isa
6 18 (where for “iniquity” we might have ‘‘punish-
ment of iniquity,’ as in Lev 26 41.43, ete); Isa
40 2 (‘iniquity,’ RVm “punishment’’). The
phrase ‘‘bear iniquity’’ is a standing expression for
bearing its consequences, i.e. its penalty; generally
of the sinner bearing the results of his own iniquity
(Lev 17 16; 2017.19; Nu 14 34; Ezk 44 10,
etc), but sometimes of one bearing the iniquity ot
another vicariously, and so taking it away (e.g.
Ezk 4 4f; 18 19f). Of special interest in the
lattcr sense are the sufferings of the Servant of Jeh,
who shall “bear the iniquities’ of the people (Isa
63 11; cf ver 6).

Other words frequently tr4 “iniquity” are: TJS,
’awen, lit. ‘“‘worthlessness,” ‘‘vanity,’’ hence
“naughtiness,” “mischief” (47 t in AV, esp. in the
phrase ‘workers of iniquity,’ Job 4 8; Ps 5 5;
6 8; Prov 10 29, etc); ‘adwel and ‘awiah, lit. “per-
verseness” (Dt 32 4; Job 6 29 AV, etc).

In the NT “iniquity” stands for anomia=prop.,
‘the condition of one without law,” “lawlessness”
(so tri in 1 Jn $ 4, elsewhere “iniquity,” e.g. Mt
7 23), a word which frequently stood for ‘a@wdn in
LXX; and adikia, lit. “unrighteousness” (e.g.
Lk 13 27). D. Miaut Epwarps


INJOIN, in-join’.


INJURIOTUS, in-j6d’ri-us, in-ji’ri-us (bBpiorhs,
hubristés, ‘‘insolent’’): In former usage, the word
was strongly expressive of insult as well as hurtful-
ness. Soin 1 Tim 1 13. In Rom 1 380 the same
adj. is tr? ‘‘insolent’”’ (AV “despiteful’’).


IN JURY, in’ju-ri, in’j66-ri.


See Ensoin.


See CRIMEs.


INK, ink (11, d*y, from root meaning “slowly
flowing,” BDB, 188; pédav, mélan, “black’’): Any
fluid substance used with pen or brush to form
written characters. In this sense ink is mentioned
once in the Heb Bible (Jer 36 2) and 3 t in the Gr
NT (2 Cor 3 3; 2 Jn ver 12; 3 Jn ver 13), and it
is implied in all references to writing on papyrus
or on leather. The inference from the “blotting
out” of Ex 82 33 and Nu 6 23 that the Heb ink


was a lamp-black and gum, or some other dry ink,
is confirmed by the general usage of antiquity, by
the later Jewish prejudice against other inks (OTJC,
71 n.) and by a Jewish receipt referring to ink-
tablets (Drach, ‘‘Notice sur l’encre des Hébreux,’’
Ann. philos. chrét., 42, 45, 358). The question is,
however, now being put on a wholly new basis by
the study of the Elephantine Jewish documents
(Meyer, Papyrusfund?, 1912, 15, 21), and above
all of the Harvard Ostraca from Samaria which give
actual specimens of the ink in Pal in the time of
Ahab (Harvard Theol. Review, Jan. 1911, 136-43).
It is likely, however, that during the long period of
Bible history various inks were used. The official
copy of the law in the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus
was, according to Jos (Ant, XII, ii, 11), written in
gold, and the vermilion and red paints and dyes men-
tioned in Jer 22 14; Ezk 23 14, and Wisd 13 14
(miltd kat phiket) were probably used also for
writing books or coloring incised inscriptions. See
literature under Writinc; esp. Krauss, Talm, Arch.
3, 148-53; Gardthausen, Gr Pal, 1911, I, 202-17,
and his bibliographical references passim.
E. C. Ricnarnpson

INK-HORN, ink’hérn (NOP=NUP, keseth=
keseth, BDB, 903): This term “inkhorn” occurs 3 t
in Ezk 9 (vs 2.3.11), in the phrase “writer’s inkhorn
upon his loins” (or ‘“‘by his side’). The word is
more exactly “implement case,” or ‘‘writing-case”’


(a) Ink-Wells and Pen-Case with Ink-Well.


(calamarium atramentarium, theca calamaria, theca
libraria, graphiaria). This may have heen the
Egyp palette (Budge, Mummy, 350-52) seen so
often in the monuments of all periods, or the later
form of pen-case with ink-well attached, which is a
modified form adapted for ink carried in fluid form.
The Egyp palette was carried characteristically over
the shoulder or under the arm, neither of which
methods is strictly “upon the loins.” The manner
of carrying, therefore, was doubtless in the girdle, as
in modern oriental usage (Benzinger, Heb Archaeol.,
185). A good example of the pen-case and ink-
well writing-case (given also in Garucci, Darem-


(b) Scribe’s Palette.


berg-Saglio, Gardthausen, etc) is given from the
original in Birt, Die Buchrolle in der Kunst, 220, and
is reproduced (a) in this article, together with (6) an
Egyp palette. Whether the form of Hzekiel’s case
approached the palette or the ink-well type prob-
ably depends on the question of whether dry ink
or fluid ink was used in Exekiel’s time (see Ivx).
Compare Hieronymus ad loc., and for literature,


Inn
Innocents


see Writine, and esp. Gardthausen, Gr Pal, 1911,
IT, 193-94. E. C. Ricnarpson


INN (oa, malon; twavSoxetov, pandocheton, ka-
tadkupa, katdluma): The Heb word malén means
lit. a “night resting-place,” and might
1. Earliest be applied to any spot where caravans
Night Rest- (Gen 42 27; 43 21 AV), individuals
ing-Places (Ex 4 24; Jer 9 2), or even armics
(Josh 4 3.8; 2 K 19 23; Isa 10 29)
encamped for the night. In the slightly altered
form m¢lénah, the same word is used of a night-
watchman’s lodge in a garden (Isa 1 8; 24 20,
AV “cottage”’). The word in itself does not imply
the presence of any building, and in the case of
caravans and travelers was doubtless originally, as
very often at the present day, only a convenient level
bit of ground near some spring, where baggage
might be unloaded, animals watered and tethered,
and men rest on the bare ground. Nothing in the
OT suggests the occupancy of a house in such cases.
The nearest approach to such an idea occurs in Jer
41 17m, where géraih kimham is tr4 ‘the lodging-
place of Chimham,” but the text is very doubtful
and probably refers rather to sheepfolds. We can-
not say when buildings were first used, but the need
of shelter for caravans traveling in winter, and of
protection in dangerous times and districts, would
lead to their introduction at an early period in the
history of trade.
It is noteworthy that all the indisputable desig-
nations of “inn” come in with the Gr period. Jos
(Ant, XV, v, 1; BJ, I, xxi, 7) speaks
2. Public of “public inns” under the name of
Inns katagogai, while in the Aram. Jewish
writings we meet with ’ushpiza’, from
Lat hospitium, and ’akhsanya’ from the Gr xenia;
the NT designation pandocheion has passed into the
Aram. pundhek@’ and the Arab. funduk. All these
are used of public inns, and they all correspond to
the modern “khan” or ‘‘caravanserai.’”? These are
to be found on the great trade routes all over the
East. In their most elaborate form they have
almost the strength of a fortress. They consist of a
great quadrangle into which admission is gained
through a broad, strong gateway. The quad-
rangle is inclosed on all sides by a 2-story building,
the windows in the case of the lower story opening
only to the interior. The upper story is reached
by stairways, and has a gangway all around, giving
access to the practically bare rooms which are at
the disposal of travelers.


Interior of Vizir Khan, Aleppo.


There is usually a well of good water in the center
of the quadrangle, and travelers as a rule bring
their own food and often that of their

3. Their animals (Jgs 19 19) withthem. There
Evil Name are no fixed payments, and on depar-
ture, the arranging of hagg el-khan gon-

erally means a disagreeable dispute, as the inn-
keepers are invariably untruthful, dishonest and


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1470


oppressive. They have ever been regarded as of
infamous character. The Rom laws in many places
recognize this. In Mish, Yebhamdth, xvi.7 the word
of an innkeeper was doubted, and Mish, ‘Abbodhah
Zarah, ii.4 places them in the lowest scale of deg-
radation. The NT is quite clear in speaking of
“Rahab the harlot”? (He 11 31; Jas 2 25). he
Tg designates her an ‘innkeeper,’ while Rashi
tr? zonah as “a seller of kinds of food,” a mean-
ing the word will bear. Kimhi, however, accepts
both meanings. This evil repute of public inns,
together with the Sem spirit of hospitality, led
the Jews and the esrly Christians to prefer to
recommend the keeping of open house for the en-
tertainment of strangers. In the Jewish Morning
Prayers, even in our day, such action is linked
with great promises, and the NT repeatedly (He
13 2; 1 Pet 4.9; 3 Jn ver 5) commends hospi-
tality. It is remarkable that both the Talm (Shab
127a) and the NT (He 13 2) quote the same passage
(Gen 18 3) in recommending it.

The best-known khans in Pal are Khan Jubb-
Yusuf, N. of the Lake of Galilee, Khan el-Tujjar,
under the shadow of Tabor, Khan el-Lubban (ct
Jgs 21 19), and Khan Hadrur, midway between
Jerus and Jericho. This last certainly occupies the
site of the inn referred to in Lk 10 34, and it is not
without interest that we read in Mish, Yebhamath,
xvi.7, of another sick man being left at that same
inn. See illustration, p. 64.

The Gr word kataluma, though implying a ‘“‘loos-
ing’’ for the night, seems rather to be connected with

the idea of hospitality in a private
4. Guest house than in a public inn. Luke
Chambers’ with his usual care distinguishes be-
tween this and pandocheion, and his
use of the vb. katalud (Lk 9 12; 19 7) makes his
meaning clear. In the LXX, indeed, malin is
sometimes tr? kataluma, and it appears in 1 8 9 22
for lishkah, AV “parlour.’”’ It is the word used of
the “upper room” where the Last Supper was held
(Mk 14 14; Lk 22 11, “guest-chamber’’), and of
the place of reception in Bethlehem where Joseph
and Mary failed to find quarters (Lk 2 7). It thus
corresponds to the spare or upper room in a private
house or in a village, i.e. to the manzil adjoining the
house of the sheikh, where travelers received: hos-
pitality and where no payment was expected, except
a trifle to the caretaker. In Jerus such payments
were made by leaving behind the earthenware
vessels that had been used, and the skins of the ani-
nals that had been slaughtered (Ydmda’ 12a).

Judging from the word used, and the conditions
implied, we are led to believe that Joseph and Mary

had at first expected reception in the
5. Birth upper room or manzil at the house of
of Christ the sheikh of Bethlehem, probably a
; friend and member of the house of
David; that in this they were disappointed, and
had to content themselves with the next best, the
elevated platform, alongside the interior of the
stable, and on which those having the care of the
animals generally slept. It being now the season
when they were in the fields (Lk 2 8), the stable
would be empty and clean. There then the Lord
Jesus was born and laid in the safest and most con-
venient place, the nearest empty manger alongside
of this elevated platform. Humble though the cir-
cumstances were, the family were prescrved from
all the annoyance and evil associations of a public
khan, and all the demands of delicacy and privacy
were duly met. W. M. Curistip


INNER MAN. Sec Inwanp Man.


INNOCENCE, in’6-sens, INNOCENCY, in’-
sen-si, INNOCENT, in’é-sent (127, zakhu, TP,


1471


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Inn
Innocents


nikkayon, DIT, hinndém, OD, haph, “p2, naki;
G8g0s, athéos): AV and ARV have innocency in
Gen 20 5; Ps 26 6; 73 13; Dnl 6 22; Hos 8 5.
In Dnl the Heb is 2akhu, and the innocence ex-
pressed is the absence of the guilt of disloyalty to
God. In all the other places the Heb is nikkayon,
and the innocence expressed is the absence of pollu-
tion, Hos having reference to the pollution of idol-
atry, and the other passages presenting the cleansing
under the figure of washing hands. AV has in-
nocent not fewer than 40 +t. In one place (1 K
2 31) the Heb is hinndém, meaning ‘‘undeserved,”
or “without cause,’ and, accordingly, ARV, in-
stead of “innocent blood .. . . shed,” has ‘“‘blood
. . . .8hed without cause.’ In another place (Job
33 9) the Heb is haph, meaning “scraped,” or
‘Molished,” therefore “clean,” and refers to moral
purity. In all the other places the Heb is nahi, or
its cognates, and the idea is doubtless the absence
of pollution. In more than half the Passages ‘Gn-
nocent”’ is connected with blood, as “blood of the
innocent,” or simply “innocent blood.” In some
places there is the idea of the Divine acquittal, or
forgiveness, asin Job 9 28: “I know that thou wilt
not hold me innocent” (cf Job 10 14, where the
the same Heb word is used). The NT has “inno-
cent’ twice in connection with blood—‘innocent
blood,” and “innocent of the blood” (Mt 27 4.24).
EH. J. Forrester

INNOCENTS, in’é-sents, MASSACRE, mas’‘a-
kér, OF THE:

. MEANING AND HisTorY OF THE TERM
II. Awnatysis or Narrative wita SreciaL REFER-

ENCE TO Motive

1. Focus of Narrative—Residence at Nazareth
2. Corollaries from Above Facts

3. Marks of Historicity

I. Meaning and History of the Term.—The con-
ventional, ecclesiastical name given to the slaughter
by Herron I (q.v.) of children two years old and
under in Bethlehem and its environs at the time of
the birth of Christ (Mt 2 16). The accepted title
for this event may be traced through Augustine to
Cyprian.

Trenaeus (d. 202 AD) calls these children “mar-
tyrs,”’? and in a very beautiful passage interprets
the tragedy which ended their brief lives as a gra-~
cious and tender ‘‘sending before’’ into His kingdom
by the Lord Himself.

Cyprian (d. 258 AD) says: “That it might be
manifest that they who are slain for Christ’s sake
are innocent, innocent infancy was put to death
for his name’s sake’”’ (Ep. lv.6).

Augustine (b. 354 AD), following Cyprian, speaks
of the children, formally, as ‘the Innocents’’ (Comm.
on Ps 43 5).

The ecclesiastical treatment of the incident is
remarkable because of the exaggeration which was
indulged in as to the extent of the massacre and the
number of victims. At an early date the Gr church
canonized 14,000, and afterward, by a curious mis-
interpretation of Rev 14 1.38, the number was
increased to 144,000.

According to Milman the liturgy of the Church
of England retains a reminiscence of this ancient
error in the use of Rev 14 on Holy Innocents’ Day
(see History of Christianity, I, 107, n. e). This
exaggeration, of which there is no hint in the NT,
is worthy of note because the most serious general
argument against the historicity of the narrative is
drawn from the silence of Jos. As in all probability
there could not have been more than twenty chil-
dren involved (ef Farrar, Life of Christ, I, 45, n.),
the incident could not have bulked very largely in
the series of horrors perpetrated or planned by
Herod in the last months of his life (see Farrar,
The Herods, 144).


Il. Analysis of Narrative with Special Reference
to Motive.—In estimating the value of such a nar-
rative from the viewpoint of historicity, the first
and most important step is to gauge the motive.
Why was the story told? This question is not
always easy to answer, but in the present instance
there is a very simple and effective test at hand.

In Mit’s infancy section (chs 1 and 2) there are five
quotations from the OT which are set into the nar-

rative of events. These five quotations
1. Focus of represent the cardinal and outstanding
Narrative— points of interest. The quotations are
Residence placed thus: (1) at the Virgin Birth
at Nazareth (1 23); (2) at the birth at Bethlehem

(2 6); (8) at the visit to Egypt (2 15);
(4) at the murder of the children (2 18); (5) at the
Nazareth residence (2 23). It will be noticed at
once as peculiar and significant that no quotation is
attached to the visit of the Magi. This omission
is the more noteworthy because in Nu 24 7; Ps 72
15; Isa 60 6, and numerous references to the in-
gathermg of the Gentiles there are such beautiful
and appropriate passages to link with the visit of
the strangers from thefar East. This peculiar omis-
sion, on the part of a writer so deeply interested in
prophecy and its fulfilment and so keen to seize
upon appropriate and suggestive harmonies, in a
section constructed with a view to such harmonies,
can be explained only on the ground that the visit
of the Magi did not, in the writer's view of events,
occupy a eritical point of especial interest. Their
visit is told, not for its own sake, but because of its
connection with the murder of the children and the
journey to Egypt. The murder of the children is of
interest because it discloses the character of Herod
and the perils surrounding the newborn Messiah.
It also explains the visit to Egypt and the sub-
sequent residence at Nazareth. The latter is evi-
dently the objective point, because it is given a place
by itself and marked by a quotation. Moreover,
the one evidence of overstrain in the narrative is in
the ambiguous and obscure statement by which the
OT is brought into relationship with the Nazareth
residence. ‘The center of interest in the entire sec-
tion which is concerned with Herod and the Magi
isthe Nazareth residence. The story is told for the
express purpose of explaining why the heir of David,
who was born at Bethlehem, lived at Nazareth.

This brings the narrative of Mt into striking
relationship with that of Lk. The latter’s concern
is to show how it was that the Messiah who lived
at Nazareth was born at Bethlehem. We have here
one of the undesigned unities which bind together
these two narratives which are seemingly so diver-
gent. That Mt says nothing about a previous
residence at Nazareth and that Lk says nothing
about a forced return thither may be explained, in
accordance with the balance of probabilities, on the
ground, either that each evangelist was ignorant of
the fact omitted by himself, or that in his condensed
and rapid statement he did not see fit to mention it.
In any case the harmony immeasurably outweighs
the discrepancy.

The fact that the focus of the entire narrative lies in


the residence of Jesus at Nazareth effectually disposes
of a number of current hypotheses as to its


; origin.

2. Corol- (1) The idea that it is merely legend told
laries from for the purpose of literary embellishment.
Above Facts The dovetailing of what would be the main -
item into the rest of the narrative and its
subordination to secondary features cannot

be explained on this hypothesis. The absence of adorn-
ment by available passages from the OT alone is con-
clusive on this point (see Allen, ‘‘ Matthew,’ ICC, 14, 15).
(2) The idea that the story is told for the Durpece of
illustrating the scope of the Messiah's influence beyond
Israel. Here, again, the subordinate position assigned
to the story of the Magi together with the absence of OT
material is conclusive. Moreover, the history of the
Magi is abruptly dropped with the statement of their


Innocents
Inspiration


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1472


return home. Interest in them flags as soon as_their
brief connection with the movement of the history
through Herod ceases. And the intensely Hebraic char-
acter of Mt’s infancy section as a whole is incidental
evidence pointing in the same direction (cf remarks of
the writer, Birth and Infancy of Jesus Christ, 70f

(3) The idea that the story is told to emphasize the
wonder-element in connection with the birth of Christ.
The facts contradict this. In addition to the primary
consideration, the pupordtaate position, there are others
of great value. That the agi were providentially
guided to the fect of the Messiah is evidently the firm
conviction of the narrator. The striking feature of the
story is that with this belief in his mind he keeps so strictly
within the limits of the natural order. In vs 9 and 12
only is there apparent exception. Of these the state-
ment in ver 9 is the only one peculiar to this part of the
narrative. Two things are to be remembered concerning
it: It is clear that the verse cannot be interpreted apart
from a clear understanding of the whole astronomical
occurrence of which it forms a part.

It is also evident that ver 9 must not be interpreted
apart from the context. From the viewpoint of a
wonder-tale the writer makes a fatal blunder at the most
critical point of his story. The popular notion that the
Magi were miraculously led to the Messiah finds no
support in the text. The Magi did not come to Beth-
lehem, but to Jerus, asking: ‘‘ Where is he that is born
King of the Jews?'’ Ver 9 comes after this statement
and after the conclave called by Herod in which Beth-
\ehem was specified. In view of all this it seems clear
that the Magi were led, not miraculously, but in accord-
ance with the genius of their own system, and that the
Providential element lay in the striking coincidence of
their visit and the birth of Jesus. The interest of the
writer was not in the wonder-element, else, infallibly,
he would have sharpened its outlines and expurgated all
amhiguity as to the nature of the occurrence.


We may now glance at the positive evidence for

the historicity of the event.
(1) The centering of the narrative
3. Marks of upon the residence of Jesus at Naza-
Historicity reth. This not only brings Lk’s Gospel
in support of the center, but groups
the story around a point of known interest to the
first generation of believers. It is interesting to
note that the residence in Egypt has independent
backing of a sort. There are in existence two
stories, one traced by Origen through Jews of his
own day to earlier times, and the other in the Talm,
which connect Jesus with Egypt and attempt to
account for His miracles by reference to Egyp magic
(see Plummer, “Matthew,” Fx. Comm., 17,18).

(2) The fact that the story of the Magi is told
so objectively and with such personal detachment.
Both Jews and early Christians had strong views
both as to astrology and magic in genera] (see
Plummer, op. cit., 15), but the author of this Gospel
tells the story without emphasis and without com-
ment and from the viewpoint of the Magi. His
interest is purely historical and matter-of-fact.

(3) The portrait of Herod the Great. So far as
Herod is concerned the incident is usually discussed
with exclusive reference to the savagery involved.
By many it is affirmed that we have here a hostile
and unfair portrait. This contention could hardly
be sustained even if the question turned entirely
upon the point of savagery. But there is far more
than savagery in the incident. (a) In the first place
there is this undeniable element of inherent proba-
bility in the story. Practically all of Herod’s
murders, including those of his beloved wife and
his sons, were perpetrated under the sway of one
emotion and in obedience to a single motive. They
were in practically cvery instance for the purpose
of consolidating or perpetuating his power. He
nearly destroyed his own immediate family in the
half-mad jealousy that on occasion drove him to
the very limits of ferocity, simply because they were
accused of plotting against him. The accusations
were largely false, but the suspicion doomed those
accused. The murder of the Innocents was another
crime of the same sort. The old king was obsessed
by the fear of a claimant to his petty throne; the
Messianic hope of the Jews was a perpetual secret
torment, and the murder of the children, in the


attempt to reach the child whose advent threatened
him, was at once so original in method and so char-
acteristic in purpose as to give an inimitable veri-
similitude to the whole narrative. There are also
other traits of truth. (6) Herod’s prompt discovery
of the visit of the Magi and their questions is in
harmony with what we know of the old ruler’s
watchfulness and his elaborate system of espionage.
(c) Characteristic also is the subtlety with which he
deals with the whole situation. How striking and
vivid, with all its rugged simplicity, is the story
of the king’s pretended interest in the quest of the
strangers, the solemn conclave of Jewish leaders
with himself in the réle of earnest inquirer, his ur-
gent request for information that he may worship
also, followed by his swift anger (note that é@v-
ud0n, ethumdthé, “was wroth,” ver 16, is not used
elsewhere in the NT) at being deceived, and the
blind but terrible stroke of his questing vengeance.
All these items are so true to the man, to the
atmosphere which always surrounded him, and to
the historic situation, that we are forced to conclude,
either that we have veracious history more or less
directly received from one who was an observer of
the events described, or the work of an incomparably
clever romancer. Louis MattHews SWEET


INORDINATE,  in-ér’di-nat (“‘ll-regulated,”’
hence “immoderate,’”’ “excessive”; Lat in, “not,”
ordinatus, ‘set in order’): Only twice in AV. In
each case there is no corresponding adj. in the orig-
inal, but the word was inserted by the translators
as being implied in the noun. It disappears in RV:
Ezk 23 11, ‘in her inordinate love’ (RV ‘in her
doting’); 332, ‘dghabhah, “lust”; Col 3 5 “‘in-
ordinate affection” (RV ‘“passion’’); mds, pdthos,
a word which in classical Gr may have either a good
or a bad sense (any affection or emotion of the
mind), but in the NT is used only in a bad sense
(passion). D. Miatt Epwarps


INQUIRE, in-kwir' OND, sha@’al, “to ask,’ “de-
sire’; {nréw, zatéd, “to seek’); A form sometimes
employed with reference to the practice of divina-
tion, as where Saul “inquires of” (or ‘‘consults’’)
the witch of Endor as to the issue of the coming
battle (1 S 28 6.7) (see Divination).

In Job 10 6, “to inquire [WP3, bakash] after
iniquity’’ signifies to bring to light and punish for
it, and Job asks distractedly if God’s time is so short
that He is in a hurry to find him guilty and to pun-
ish him as if He had only a man’s few days to live.

“To inquire of Jeh’’ denotes the consultation of
oracle, priest, prophet or Jeh Himself, as to a certain
course of action or as to necessary supplies (Jgs 20
27 AV, “to ask”; 1K 225; 1899 [WOT, da
rash]; 10 22AV; 28 21; 6 19.23; Ezk 36 37).

“To inquire [1p3, bakar) in his temple” (palace)
means to find out all that constant fellowship or
unbroken intercourse with God can teach (Ps 27 4).

Prov 20 25 warns against rashness in making a
vow and afterward considering (bakar, “to make
inquiry”’) as to whether it can be fulfilled or how it
may be cluded.

In the AV, the tr of several Gr words: diaginésko,
“‘to know thoroughly” (Acts 28 15); epizétéd, ‘to
seck after’ (Acts 19 39); suzetéo, “to seek to-
gether” (Lk 22 23); exetdzo, “to search out” (Mt
10 11). M. O. Evans


INQUISITION, in-kwi-zish’un (WTI, darash,
“to follow,” “diligently inquire,” ‘‘question,”
“search” [Dt 19 18; Ps 9 12], WPA, bakash, “to
search out,” “‘to strive after,” “inquire” [Est 2 23]):
The term refers, as indicated by these passages,
first of all to a careful and diligent inquiry necessary


1473


to ascertain the truth from witnesses in a court, but
may also refer to a careful examination into circum-
stances or conditions without official authority.


INSCRIPTION, in-skrip’shun (vb. émypido,
epigrdpho, “to write upon,” “inseribe’’): The word
occurs once in EV in Acts 17 23 of the altar at
Athens with the inscription ‘“To an Unknown God.”
On inscriptions in archaeology, see ARCHAEOLOGY;
Assyria; Bapyion1a, etc.


INSECTS, in’sckts: In EV, including the mar-
ginal notes, we find at least 23 names of insects or
words referring to them: ant, bald locust, bee,
beetle, cankerworm, caterpillar, creeping thing,
cricket, crimson, flea, fly, gnat, grasshopper, honey,
hornet, locust, louse, (lice), moth, palmer-worm,
sandfly, scarlet-worm, silk-worm. These can be
referred to about 12 insects, which, arranged sys-
tematically, are: Hymenoptera, ant, bee, hornet;
Lepidoptera, clothes-moth, silk-worm; Sitphonap-
tera, flea; Diptera, fly; Rhynchota, louse, scarlet-
worm; Orthoptera, several kinds of grasshoppers
and locusts.

The word ‘“‘worm”’ refers not only to the scarlet-
worm, but to various larvae of Lepidoptera, Coleop-
tera, and Diptera. ‘“‘Creeping things” refers indefi-
nitely to insects, reptiles, and beasts. In the list
of 23 names given above honey and bee refer to one
insect, as do crimson and scarlet. Sandfly has no
place if “lice” be retained in Ex 8 16 ff. Bald
locust, beetle, canker-worm, cricket, and palmer-
worm probably all denote various kinds of grass-
hoppers and locusts. When the translators of EV
had to do with two or more Heb words for which
there was only one well-recognized Eng. equivalent,
they seem to have been content with that alone, if
the two Heb words occurred in different passages;
e.g. 2bhabh, “fly” (Eccl 101; Isa 7 18), and
‘arabh, ‘fly’ (Ex 8 21 ff). On the other hand, they
were put to it to find equivalents for the insect
names in Lev 11 22; Joel 1 4,andelsewhere. For
sal’ am (Lev 11 22) they evidently coined “bald
locust,” following a statement of the Talm that it
had a smooth head. For gézém and yelek they im-
ported “palmer-worm” and “canker-worm,” two
old Eng. names of caterpillars, using ‘caterpillar’
for hastt. The AV ‘‘beetle’”’ for hargol is absolutely
inappropriate, and the RV “cricket,” while less
objectionable, is probably also incorrect. The
Eng. language seems to lack appropriate names for
different. kinds of grasshoppers and locusts, and it
is difficult to suggest any names to take the places
of those against which these criticisms are directed.
See under the names of the respective insects. See
also ScorPIon and Sprpger, which are not included
here because they are not strictly insects.

Aurrep Evy Day

INSPIRATION, in-spi-ra’shun:

1. Meaning of Terms
. Occurrences in the Bible


. Consideration of Important Passages
(1) 2 Tim 3 16


we


4
filled

5. His Testimony That God Is Author of Scripture

6. Similar Testimony of His Immediate Followers

7. Their Identification of God and Scripture

8. The ‘‘Oracles of God” :

9. The Human Element _iu Scripture

10. Activities of God in Giving Scripture

11. General Problem of Origin: God's Part

12. How Human Qualities Affected Scripture.
dential Preparation i

13. ‘“Inspiration’’ More than Mere ‘‘ Providence”

14. Witness of NT Writers to Divine Operation

15. ‘Inspiration”’ and ‘‘Revelation”’

16. Scriptures a Divine-Human Book ?

17. Scripture of NT Writers Was the OT

18. Inclusion of the NT

LiveRaTURE


Provi-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
SS


Innocents
Inspiration


The word ‘inspire’ and its derivatives seem to
have come into Middle Eng. from the Fr., and have
been employed from the first (early in
1. Meaning the 14th cent.) in a considerable num-
of Terms ber of significations, physical and meta-
phorical, secular and religious. The
derivatives have been multiplied and their applica-
tions extended during the procession of the years,
until they have acquired a very wide and varied use.
Underlying all their use, however, is the constant
implication of an influence from without, producing
in its object movements and effects beyond its
native, or at least its ordinary powers. The
noun “inspiration,” although already in use in the
14th eent., seems not to occur in any but a theo-
logical sense until late in the 16th cent. The
specifically theological sense of all these terms is
governed, of course, by their usage in Lat theology;
and this rests ultimately on their employment in
the Lat Bible. In the Vulg Lat Bible the vb. in-
spiro (Gen 2 7; Wisd 15 11; Ecclus 4 12; 2 Tim
3 16; 2 Pet 1 21) and the noun inspiratio (28
22 16; Job 32 8; Ps 18 15; Acts 17 25) both
occur 4 or 5 t in somewhat diverse applications.
In the development of a theological nomenclature,
however, they have acquired (along with other
less frequent applications) a technical sense with
reference to the Bib. writers or the Bib. books.
The Bib. books are called inspired as the Divinely
determined products of inspired men; the Bib.
writers are called inspired as breathed into by the
Holy Spirit, so that the product of their activities
transcends human powers and becomes Divinely
authoritative. Inspiration is, therefore, usually
defined as a supernatural influence exerted on the
sacred writers by the Spirit of God, by virtue of
which their writings are given Divine trustworthi-
ness.
Meanwhile, for Eng.-speaking men, these terms
have virtually ceased to be Bib. terms. They natur-
ally passed from the Lat Vulg into the


2. Occur- Eng. VSS made from it (most fully
rencesin into the Rheims-Dovay: Job 32 8;
the Bible Wisd 1511; Ecclus 412; 2 Tim


3 16; 2 Pet 1 21). But in the de
velopment of the Eng. Bible they have found ever-
decreasing place. In the EV of the Apoc (both
AV and RY) “inspired” is retained in Wisd 15 11;
but in the canonical books the nominal form alone
occurs in AV and that only twice: Job 32 8, “But
there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of te
Almighty giveth them understanding’; and 2 Ti
3 16, “All scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for cor-
rection, for instruction in righteousness.” RV
removes the former of these instances, substituting
“breath” for “inspiration”; and alters the latter
so as to read: ‘Every scripture inspired of God is
also profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correc-’
tion, for instruction which is in righteousness,”
with a marginal alternative in the form of, “Every
scripture is inspired of God and profitable,” ete.
The word “inspiration” thus disappears from the
Eng. Bible, and the word “inspired” is left in it
only once, and then, let it be added, by a distinct
and even misleading mistranslation.

For the Gr word in this passage—edrvevoros,
theépneustos—very distinctly does not mean ‘‘in-
spired of God.’’ This phrase is rather the render-
ing of the Lat, divinitus inspirata, restored from the
Wyclif (‘Al Scripture of God ynspyridis . .. .’’)
and Rhemish (‘‘All Scripture inspired of God is
...”) V8S of the Vulg. The Gr word does not
even mean, as AV tr? it, “given by inspiration of
God,’”’ although that rendering (inherited from
Tindale: “All Scripture given by inspiration of
God is... .”? and its successors; cf Geneva: ‘The


Inspiration


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1474


whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God and
is... .”) bas at least to say for itself that it is a
somewhat clumsy, perhaps, but not misleading,
paraphrase of the Gr term in the theological lan-
guage of the day. The Gr term has, however,
nothing to say of inspiring or of inspiration: it
speaks only of a “spiring’’ or “spiration.”” What
it says of Scripture is, not that it is “breathed into
by God” or is the product of the Divine “inbreath-
ing’’ intoits human authors, but that it is breathed
out by God, ‘“God-breathed,” the product of the
creative breath of God. In a word, what is de-
clared by this fundamental passage is simply that
the Scriptures are a Divine product, without any
indication of how God has operated in producing


them. No term could have been chosen, however, -


which would have more emphatically asserted the
Divine production of Scripture than that which is
here employed. The “breath of God” is in Scrip-
ture just the symbol of His almighty power, the
bearer of His creative word. ‘By the word of Jeh,”’
we read in the significant parallel of Ps 33 6, ‘were
the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth.” And it is particularly where
the operations of God are energetic that this term
(whether 1, rah, or WW), neshamah) is em-
ployed to designate them—God’s breath is the
irresistible outflow of His power. When Paul de-
clares, then, that ‘every scripture,” or ‘all scripture”
is the product of the Divine breath, ‘is God-
breathed,”’ he asserts with as much energy as he
could employ that Scripture is the product of a

specifically Divine operation.
(1) 2 Tim 3 16: In the passage in which Paul
makes this energetic assertion of the Divine origin
of Scripture be is engaged in explain-


3. Impor- ing the greatness of the advantages
tant which Timothy had enjoyed for learn-
Passages ing the saving truth of God. He had


had good teachers; and from his very
infancy he had been, hy his knowledge of the Scrip-
tures, made wise unto salvation through faith in
Jesus Christ. The expression, “‘sacred writings,”
here employed (ver 15), is a technical one, not found
elsewhere in the NT, it is true, but occurring cur-
rently in Philo and Jos to designate that body of
authoritative books which constituted the Jewish
‘“Law.’? It appears here anarthrously because it
is set in contrast with the oral teaching which Timo-
thy had enjoyed, as something still better: he
had not only had good instructors, but also always
“an open Bible,” as we should say, in his hand.
To enhance yet further the great advantage of the
possession of these Sacred Scriptures the apostle
adds now a sentence throwing their nature strongly
up to view. They are of Divine origin and there-
fore of the highest value for all holy purposes.


There is room for some difference of opinion as to the
exact construction of this declaration. Shall we render
“Bvyery Scripture’ or ‘‘All Scripture'’?_ Shall we render
“Every (or all] Scripture is God-hreathed and [there-
fore] profitable,’ or ‘Every for all) Scripture, being
God-hreathed, is as well profitahle’’? No douht both
questions are interesting, but for the main matter
now engaging our attention they are hoth indifferent.
Whether Paul, looking hack at the Sacred Scriptures he
had just mentioned, makes the assertion he is ahout
to add, of them distributively, of all their parts, or col-
lectively, of their entire mass, is of no moment: to say
that every part of these Sacred Scriptures is God-hreathed
and to say that the whole of these Sacred Scriptures is
God-hreathed, is, for the main matter, all one. Nor is
the difference great hetween saying that they are in all
their parts, or in their whole extent, God-hreathed and
therefore profitable, and saying that they are in all their
parts, or in their whole extent, because God-breathed
as well profitahle. In hoth cases these Sacred Scriptures
are declared to owe their value to their Divine origin;
andin both cases this their Divine origin is energetically
asserted of their entire fabric. On the whole, tho prefer-
able construction would seem to be, "Every Scripture,
seeing that it is God-hreathed, is as well profitable.


In that case, what the apostle asserts is that the Sacred
Scriptures, in their every several passage—for it is just
“passage of Scripture’ which “Seripture'' in this dis-
tributive use of it signifles—is the product of the cre-
ative breath of God, and, hecause of this its Divine origi-
nation, is of supreme value for all holy purposes.

It is to he ohserved that the apostle does not stop here
to tell us either what particular books enter into the
collection which he calls Sacred Scriptures, or hy what
precise operations God has produced them. Neither of
these subjects entered into the matter he had at the mo-
ment in hand. It was the value of the Scriptures, and
the source of that value in their Divine origin, which
he required at the moment to assert; and these things he
asserts, leaving to other occasions any further facts con-
cerning them which it might be well to emphasize. It
is also to he ohserved that the apostle does not tell us
here everything for which the Scriptures are made val-
uahle by their Divine origination. He speaks simply
to the point immediately in hand, and reminds Timothy
of the value which these Scriptures, by virtue of their
Divine origin, have for the ‘‘man of God.” Their spirit-
ual power, as God-breathed, is all that he bad occasion
here to advert to. Whatever other qualities may accrue
to them from their Divine origin, he leaves to other
occasions to speak of.

(2) 2 Pet 119-21: What Paul tells us here
about the Divine origin of the Scriptures is en-
forced and extended by a striking passage in 2 Pet
(1 19-21). Peter is assuring his readers that what
had been made known to them of “the power and
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ” did not rest on
‘cunningly devised fables.” He offers them the testi-
mony of eyewitnesses of Christ’s glory. And then
he intimates that they have better testimony than
even that of eyewitnesses. ‘We have,” says he,
“the prophetic word” (EV, unhappily, ‘the word of
prophecy”): and this, he says, is “more sure,” and
therefore should certainly be heeded. He refers, of
course, to the Scriptures. Of what other “prophetic
word” could he, over against the testimony of the
eyewitnesses of Christ’s ‘excellent glory” (AV) say
that ‘ we have” it, that is, it isin ourhands? And
he proceeds at once to speak of it plainly as ‘‘Serip-
tural prophecy.” You do well, he says, to pay
heed to the prophetic word, because we know this
first, that ‘every prophecy of scripture... .” It
admits of more question, however, whether by this
phrase he means the whole of Scripture, designated
according to its character, as prophetic, that is, of
Divine origin; or only that portion of Scripture
which we discriminate as particularly prophetic,
the immediate revelations contained in Scripture.
The former is the more. likely view, inasmuch as
the entirety of Scripture is elsewhere conceived and
spoken of as prophetic. In that case, what Peter has
to say of this “every prophecy of scripture’’—the
exact equivalent, it will be observed, in this case of
Paul’s ‘every scripture’ (2 Tim 3 16)-——applies to
the whole of Scripture in allits parts. What hesays
of it is that it does not come “of private interpre~
tation”; that is, it is not the result of human inves-
tigation into the nature of things, the product of its
writers’ own thinking. This is as much as to say
it is of Divine gift. Accordingly, he proceeds at
once to make this plain in a supporting clause
which contains both the negative and the positive
declaration: ‘For no prophecy ever came [m “was
brought”’} by the will of man, but it was as borne
by the Holy Spirit that men spoke from God.” In
this singularly precise and pregnant statement there
are several things which require to be carefully
observed. There is, first of all, the emphatic de-
nial that prophecy—that is to say, on the hypothesis
upon which we are working, Scripture—owes its
origin to human initiative: ‘No prophecy ever was
brought—‘came’ is the word used in the EV text,
with ‘was brought’ in RVm—by the will of man.”
Then, there is the equally emphatic assertion that
its source lies in God: it was spoken by men, in-
deed, hut the men who spoke it “spake from God.”
And a remarkable clause is here inserted, and
thrown forward in the sentence that stress may fall


1475


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Inspiration


on it, which tells us how it could be that men, in
speaking, should speak not from themselves, but
from God: it was “as borne’’—it is the same word
which was rendered “was brought’? above, and
might possibly be rendered “brought” here—“by
the Holy Spirit” that they spoke. Speaking thus
under the determining influence of the Holy Spirit,
the things they spoke were not from themselves,
but from God.

Here is as direct an assertion of the Divine origin
of Scripture as that of 2 Tim 3 16. But there is
more here than a simple assertion of the Divine
origin of Scripture. We are advanced somewhat
in our understanding of how God has produced the
Scriptures. It was through the instrumentality
of men who “spake from him.” More specifically,
it was through an operation of the Holy Ghost on
these men which is described as “bearmg” them.
The term here used is a very specific one. It is
not to be confounded with guiding, or directing, or
controlling, or even leading in the full sense of that
word. It goes beyond all such terms, in assigning
the effect produced specifically to the active agent.
What is “borne” is taken up i the “bearer,’”’ and
conveyed by the “bearer’s’”’ power, not its own, to
the “bearer’s” goal, not its own. The men who
spoke from God are here declared, therefore, to have
been taken up by the Holy Spirit and brought by
His power to the goal of His choosing. The things
which they spoke under this operation of the Spirit
were therefore His things, not theirs. And that
is the reason which is assigned why “the prophetic
word’’ is so sure. Though spoken through the in-
strumentality of men, it is, by virtue of the fact
that these men spoke “‘as borne by the Holy Spirit,”
an immediately Divine word. It will be observed
that the proximate stress is laid here, not on the
spiritual value of Scripture (though that, too, is seen
in the background), but on the Divine trustworthi-
ness of Scripture. Because this is the way every
prophecy of Scripture “has been brought,”’ it affords
a more sure basis of confidence than even the tes-
timony of human eyewitnesses. Of course, if we
do not understand by ‘the prophetic word” here
the entirety of Scripture described, according to
its character, as revelation, but only that element
in Scripture which we call specifically prophecy,
then it is directly only of that element in Scripture
that these great declarations are made. In any
event, however, they are made of the prophetic
element in Scripture as written, which’ was the only
form in which the readers of this Ep. possessed it,
and which is the thing specifically intimated in the
phrase “every prophecy of scripture.” ‘These great
declarations are made, therefore, at least_of large
tracts of Seripture; and if the entirety of Scripture
is intended by the phrase ‘‘the prophetic word,”’ they
are made of the whole of Scripture.

(3) Jn 10 34f: How far the supreme trust-
worthiness of Scripture, thus asserted, extends may
be conveyed to us by a passage in one of Our Lord’s
discourses recorded by John (Jn 10 34-35). The
Jews, offended by Jesus’ “making himself God,”
were in the act to stone Him, when He defended
Himself thus: “Is it not written in your law, I said,
Ye are gods? If he called them gods, unto whom
the word of God came (and the scripture cannot be
broken), say ye of him, whom the Father sancti-
fied [m “consecrated’’] and sent unto the world,
Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son
of God?” It may be thought that this defence
is inadequate. It certainly is incomplete: Jesus
made Himself God (Jn 10 33) in a far higher sense
than that in which “Ye are gods’’ was said of those
“unto whom the word of God came’: He had just
declared in unmistakable terms, ‘I and the Father
areone.’”’ But it was quite sufficient for the imme-


diate end in view—to repel the technical charge of
blasphemy based on His making Himself God: it
is not blasphemy to call one God in any sense in
which he may fitly receive that designation; and
certainly if it is not blasphemy to call such men as
those spoken of in the passage of Scripture adduced
gods, because of their official functions, it cannot
be blasphemy to call Him God whom the Father
consecrated and sent into the world. The point for
us to note, however, is merely that Jesus’ defence
takes the form of an appeal to Scripture; and it is
important to observe how He makes this appeal.
In the first place, He adduces the Scriptures as
law: “Is it not written in your law?” He demands.
The passage of Scripture which He adduces is not
written in that portion of Scripture which was more
specifically called “the Law,” that is to say, the
Pent; nor in any portion of Scripture of formally
legal contents. It is written in the Book of Pss;
and in a particular psalm which is as far as possible
from presenting the external characteristics of legal
enactment (Ps 82 6). When Jesus adduces_this
passage, then, as written in the “law’’ of the Jews,

e does it, not because it stands in this psalm, but
because it is a part of Scripture at large. In other
words, He here ascribes legal authority to the
entirety of Scripture, in accordance with a con-
ception common enough among the Jews (cf Jn 12
34), and finding expression in the NT occasionally,
both on the lips of Jesus Himself, and in the writings
of the apostles. Thus, on a later occasion (Jn 15
25), Jesus declares that it is written in the “law’’
of the Jews, ‘“‘They hated me without a cause,” a
clause found in Ps 35 19. And Paul assigns pas-
sages both from the Pss and from Isa to “the Law”
(1 Cor 14 21; Rom 3 19), and can write such a
sentence as this (Gal 4 21f): “Tell me, ye that
desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?
For it is written ... .”’ quoting from the narra-
tive of Gen. We have seen that the entirety of
Scripture was conceived as “prophecy”; we now
see that the entirety of Scripture was also conceived
as “law’’: these three terms, the law, prophecy,
Scripture, were indeed, materially, strict synonyms,
as our present passage itself advises us, by varying
the formula of adduction in contiguous verses from
“law? to “scripture.’ And what is thus implied
in the manner in which Scripture is adduced, is
immediately afterward spoken out in the most
explicit language, because it forms an_ essential
element in Our Lord’s defence. It might have been
enough to say simply, ‘Is it not written in your
law?” But Our Lord, determined to drive His
appeal to Scripture home, sharpens the point to
the utmost by adding with the highest emphasis:
“and the scripture cannot be broken.’ This is the
reason why it is worth while to appeal to what is
‘“written in the law,” because ‘‘the scripture cannot
be broken.” The word “broken” here is the com-
mon one for breaking the law, or the Sabbath, or
the like (Jn 6 18; 7 23; Mt 5 19), and the mean-
ing of the declaration is that it is impossible for the
Scripture to be annulled, its authority to be with-
stood, or denied. The movement of thought is to
the effect that, because it is impossible for the
Scripture—the term is perfectly general and wit-
nesses to the unitary character of Scripture (it is
all, for the purpose in hand, of a piece)—to be with-
stood, therefore this particular Scripture which is
cited must be taken as of irrefragable authority.
What we have here is, therefore, the strongest pos-
sible assertion of the indefectible authority of Scrip-
ture; precisely what is true of Scripture is that it
“cannot be broken.’ Now, what is the particular
thing in Scripture, for the confirmation of which the
indefectible authority of Scripture is thus invoked?
It is one of its most casual clauses—more than that,


Inspiration


the very form of its expression in one of its most
casual clauses. This means, of course, that in the
Saviour’s view the indefectible authority of Scrip-
ture attaches to the very form of expression of its
most casualclauses. It belongs to Scripture through
and through, down to its most minute particulars,
that it is of indefectible authority.

It is sometimes suggested, it is true, that Our
Lord’s argument here is an argumentum ad homi-
nem, and that His words, therefore, express not His
own view of the authority of Scripture, but that
of His Jewish opponents. It will scarcely be de-
nied that there is a vein of satire running through
Our Lord’s defence: that the Jews so readily al-
lowed that corrupt judges might properly be called
“gods,” but could not endure that He whom the
Father had consecrated and sent into the world
should call Himself Son of God, was a somewhat
pungent fact to throw up into such a high light.
But the argument from Scripture is not ad hominem
but e concessu; Scripture was common ground with
Jesus and His opponents. If proof were needed
for so obvious a fact, it would be supplied by the
circumstance that this is not an isolated but a rep-
resentative passage. The conception of Scripture
thrown up into such clear view here supplies the
ground of all Jesus’ appeals to Scripture, and of
all the appeals of the NT writers as well. Every-
where, to Him and to them alike, an appeal to
Scripture is an appeal to an indefectible authority
whose determination is final; both He and they
make their appeal indifferently to every part of
Scripture, to every element in Scripture, to its most
incidental clauses as well as to its most fundamental
principles, and to the very form of its expression.
This attitude toward Scripture as an authoritative
document is, indeed, already intimated by their
constant designation of it by the name of Scripture,
the Scriptures, that is “the Document,” by way of
eminence; and by their customary citation of it with
the simple formula, “It is written.’ What is
written in this document admits so little of question-
ing that its authoritativeness required no asserting,
but might safely be taken for granted. Both modes
of expression belong to the constantly illustrated
habitudes of Our Lord’s speech. The first words
He is recorded as uttering after His manifestation
to Israel were an appeal to the unquestionable
authority of Scripture; to Satan’s temptations He
opposed no other weapon than the final “It is writ-
ten’! (Mt 4 4.7.10; Lk 4 4.8). And among the
last words which He spoke to His disciples before
He was received up was a rebuke to them for not
understanding that all things “which are written in
the law of Moses, and the prophets, and psalms”
concerning Him—that is (ver 45) in the entire
“Scriptures’—‘must_ needs be’ (very emphatic)
“fulfilled” (Lk 24 44). “Thus it is written,” says
He (ver 46), as rendering all doubt absurd. For,
as He had explained earlier upon the same day (Lk
24 25 ff), it argues only that one is “foolish and
slow of heart’ if he does not ‘believe in” (if his
faith does not rest securely on, as on a firm founda-
tion) “all” (without limit of subject-matter here)
“that the prophets’ (explained in ver 27 as equiva-
lent to “all the scriptures’’) ‘have spoken.”

The necessity of the fulfilment of all that is written
in Seripture, which is so strongly asserted in these

last instructions to His disciples, is


4. Neces- frequently adverted to by Our Lord.
sary Ful- He repeatedly explains of occurrences
filment of occasionally happening that they have
Scripture come to pass ‘that the scripture might


be fulfilled” (Mk 14 49; Jn 13 18;
17 12; cf 12 14; Mk 9 12.13). On the basis of
Scriptural declarations, therefore, He announces
with confidence that given events will certainly


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA |


1476


occur: ‘All ye shall be offended [lit. “scandalized”’]
in me this night: for it is written... .” (Mt 26
31; Mk 14 27; cf Lk 20 17). Although holding
at His command ample means of escape, He bows
before on-coming calamities, for, He asks, how
otherwise “should the scriptures be fufilled, that
thus it must be?’ (Mt 26 54). It is not merely
the two disciples with whom He talked on the
way to Emmaus (Lk 24 25) whom He rebukes
for not trusting themselves more perfectly to the
teaching of Scripture. ‘Ye search the scriptures,”
he says to the Jews, in the classical passage (Jn
5 39), “because ye think that in them ye have eter-
nal life; and these are they which bear witness of
me; and ye will not come to me, that ye may have
life’ These words surely were spoken more in
sorrow than in scorn: there is no blame implied
either for searching the Scriptures or for thinking
that eternal life is to be found in Scripture; ap-
proval rather. What the Jews are blamed for is
that they read with a veil lying upon their hearts
which He would fain take away (2 Cor 3 15f).
“Ye search the scriptures’—that is right: and
“even you” (emphatic) “think to have eternal life
in them’’—that is right, too. But “it is these very
Scriptures’ (very emphatic) “which are bearing
witness” (continuous process) “of me; and” (here
is the marvel!) “ye will not come to me and have
life!’’—that you may, thatis, reach the very end you
have so properly in view in searching the Scriptures.
Their failure is due, not to the Scriptures but to
themselves, who read the Scriptures to such little

purpose. .
Quite similarly Our Lord often finds occasion to
express wonder at the little effect to which Scrip-
ture had been read, not because it had


5. Christ’s heen looked into too curiously, but


Testimony because it had not been looked into
That God earnestly enough, with sufficiently
Is Author simple and robust trust in its every

declaration. ‘‘Have ye not read even


this scripture?’ He demands, as He adduces Ps 118
to show that the rejection of the Messiah was al-
ready intimated in Scripture (Mk 12 10; Mt 21 42
varies the expression to the equivalent: ‘Did ye
never read in the scriptures?’’). And when the
indignant Jews came to Him complaining of the
Hosannas with which the children in the Temple
were acclaiming Him, and demanding, ‘‘Hearest thou
what these are saying?” He met them (Mt 21 16)
merely with; “Yea: did ye never read, Out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings thou has perfected
praise?” The underlying thought of these passages
is spoken out when He intimates that the source of
all error in Divine things is just ignorance of the
Scriptures: “Ye do err,’ He declares to His ques-
tioners, on an important occasion, “not knowing the
scriptures” (Mt 22 29); or, as it is put, perhaps
more forcibly, in interrogative form, in its || in
another Gospel: “Is it not for this cause that ye err,
that ye know not the scriptures?’ (Mk 12 24).
Clearly, he who rightly knows the Scriptures does
not err. The confidence with which Jesus rested
on Scripture, in its every declaration, is further
illustrated in a passage like Mt 19 4. Certain
Pharisees had come to Him with a question on
divorce and He met them thus: ‘Have ye not read,
that he who made them from the beginning made
them male and female, and said, For this cause
shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall
cleave to his wife; and the two shall become one
flesh? .... What therefore God hath joined to-
gether, let not man put asunder.”’ The point to be
noted is the explicit reference of Gen 2 24 to God
as its author: “He who made them... . said”;
“what therefore God hath joined together.” Yet
this passage does not give us a saying of God’s


1477


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Inspiration


recorded in Scripture, but just the word of Scripture
itself, and can be treated as a declaration of God’s
only on the hypothesis that all Scripture is a decla-
ration of God’s. The || in Mk (10 5 ff) just as truly,
though not as explicitly, assigns the passage to God
as its author, citing it as authoritative law and
speaking of its enactment as an act of Gad’s. And
it is interesting to observe in passing that Paul,
having occasion to quote the same passage (1 Cor
6 16), also explicitly qnotes it as a Divine word:
“For, The twain, saith he, shall become one flesh’’—
the ‘“‘he” here, in accordance with a usage to be
noted later, meaning just “God.”

Thus clear is it that Jesus’ occasional adduction
of Seripture as an anthoritative document rests on
an ascription of it to God as its author. His tes-
timony is that whatever stands written in Scripture
is a word of God. Nor can we evacuate this testi-
mony of its force on the plea that it represents Jesus
only in the days of His flesh, when He may be sup-

‘posed to have reflected merely the opinions of His
day and generation. The view of Scripture He
announces was, no doubt, the view of His day and
generation as well as His own view. But there is
no reason to doubt that it was held by Him, not
because it was the current view, but because, in
His Divine-human knowledge, He knew it to be
true; for, even in His humiliation, He is the faith-
ful and true witness. And in any event we should
bear in mind that this was the view of the resur-
rected as well as of the humiliated Christ. It was
after He had _ suffered and had risen again in the
power of His Divine life that He pronounced those
foolish and slow of heart who do not believe all
that stands written in all the Scriptures (Lk 24
25); and that He laid down the simple ‘Thus it is
written” as the sufficient ground of confident belief
(Lk 24 46). Nor can we explain away Jesus’
testimony to the Divine trustworthiness of Scrip-
ture by interpreting it as not His own, but that of
His followers, placed on His lips in their reports of
His words. Not only is it too constant, minute, inti-
mate and in part incidental, and therefore, as it
were, hidden, to admit of this interpretation; but
it so pervades all our channels of information con-
cerning Jesus’ teaching as to make it certain that it
comes actually from Him. It belongs not only to
the Jesus of our evangelical records but as well to
the Jesus of the earlier sources which underlie our
evangelical records, as anyone may assure himself
by observing the instances in which Jesus adduces
the Scriptures as Divinely authoritative that are
recorded in more than one of the Gospels (e.g. ‘It
is written,” Mt 4 4.7.10 [Lk 4 4.8.10]; Mt 11 10;


(Lk 7 27]; Mt 21 13 [Lk 19 46; Mk 11 17];
Mt 26 31 [Mk 14 21]; “the scripture’ or “the
scriptures,’ Mt 19 4 [Mk 10 9]; Mt 21 42 (Mk


12 10; Lk 20 17]; Mt 22 29 [Mk 12 24; Lk
20 37]; Mt 26 56([Mk 14 49; Lk 24 44]). These
passages alone would suffice to make clear to us the
testimony of Jesus to Scripture as in all its parts
and declarations Divinely authoritative.
The attempt to attribute the testimony of Jesus
to His followers has in its favor only the undeniable
fact that the testimony of the writers
6. Similar of the NT is to precisely the same
Witness of effect as His. They, too, cursorily
Apostles speak of Scripture by that pregnant
name and adduce it with the simple
“Tt is written,” with the implication that whatever
stands written in it is Divinely authoritative. As
Jesus’ official life begins with this “It is written”’
(Mt 4 4), so the evangelical proclamation begins
with au “Even as it is written” (Mk 1 2); and
as Jesus sought the justification of His work in a
solemn ‘Thus it is written, that the Christ should
suffer, and rise again from the dead the third day”


(Lk 24 46 ff), so the apostles solemnly justified the
Gospel which they preached, detail after detail, by
appeal to the Scriptures, “That Christ died for our
sins according to the scriptures” and “That he hath
been raised on the third day according to the scrip-
tures” (1 Cor 16 3.4; cf Acts 8 35; 17 3; 26 22,
and also Rom 117; 3 4.10; 4.17; 11 26; 14 11;
1 Cor 119; 29; 3 19; 16 45; Gal 3 10.18; 4
22.27). Wherever they carried the gospel it was
as a gospel resting on Scripture that they proclaimed
it (Acts 17 2; 18 24.28); and they encouraged
themselves to test its truth by the Scriptures (Acts
17 11). The holiness of life they inculcated, they
based on Scriptural requirement (1 Pet 1 16), and
they commended the royal law of love which they
taught by Scriptural sanction (Jas 2 8). Every
detail of duty was supported by them by an appeal
to Scripture (Acts 23 5; Rom 12 19). The cir-
cumstances of their lives and the events occasion-
ally occurring about them are referred to Scripture
for their significance (Rom 2 26; 8 36; 9 83; 11
8; 15 9.21; 2 Cor 4 13). As Our Lord declared
that whatever was written in Scripture must needs
be fulfilled (Mt 26 54; Lk 22 37; 24 44), so His
followers explained one of the most startling facts
which had occurred in their experience by pointing
out that “it was needful that the scripture should
be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spake before by
the mouth of David’ (Acts 1 16). Here the
ground of this constant appeal to Scripture, so that it
is enough that a thing “is contained in scripture”
(1 Pet 2 6) for it to be of indefectible authority,
is plainly enough declared: Scripture must.needs
be fulfilled, for what is contamed in it is the
declaration of the Holy Ghost through the human
author. What Scripture says, God says; and
accordingly we read such remarkable declarations as
these: ‘For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, For
this very purpose did I raise thee up” (Rom 9 17);
“And the scripture, foreseeing that God would
justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel
beforehand unto Abraham, .... In thee shall
all the nations be blessed” (Gal 3 8). These are
not instances of simple personification of Scripture,
which is itself a sufficiently remarkable usage (Mk
15 28; Jn 7 3842; 1937; Rom 43; 10 11;
11 2; Gal 4 30; 1 Tim 5 18; Jas 2 23; 4 5f),
vocal with the conviction expressed by James (4 5)
that Scripture canuot speak in vain. They indi-
cate a certain confusion in current speech between
“Seripture’”’ aud “God,” the outgrowth of a deep-
seated conviction that the word of Scripture is the
word of God. It was not “Scripture” that spoke
to Pharaoh, or gave his great promise to Abraham,
but God. But “Scripture” and “God” lay so close
together in the minds of the writers of the NT that
they could naturally speak of ‘Scripture’ doing
what Scripture records God as doing. It was,
however, even more natural to them to speak
casually of God saying what the Scriptures say; and
accordingly we meet with forms of speech such as
‘these: “Wherefore, even as the Holy Spirit saith,
To-day if ye shall hear His voice,” ete (He 3 7,
quoting Ps 95 7); “Thou art God .. . . who by
the mouth of thy servant David hast said, Why
did the heathen rage,” etc (Acts 4 25 AV, quoting
Ps 21); “He that raised him from the dead
.... hath spoken on this wise, I will give

u... . becanse he saith also in another [place]
... 2 (Acts 13 34, quoting Isa 55 3 and Ps 16
10), and the like. The words put into God’s mouth
in each case are not words of God recorded in the
Scriptures, but just Scripture words in themselves.
When we take the two classes of passages together,
in the one of which the Scriptures are spoken of as
God, while in the other God is spoken of as if He
were the Scriptures, we may perceive how close


Inspiration


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1478


the identification of the two was in the minds of
the writers of the NT. _

This identification is strikingly observable in

certain catenae of quotations, in which there are

brought together a number of passages

7. Identifi- of Scripture closely connected with


cation of one another. The first chapter of the
God and Ep. to the He supplies an example.
Scriptures We may begin with ver 5: “For unto


which of the angels said he’—the
subject being necessarily “God’—‘‘at any time,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee ?”—
the citation being from Ps 2 7 and very appro-
priate in the mouth of God—“‘and again, I will be
to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son?”’—
from 2 § 7 14, again a declaration of God’s own—
“And when he again bringeth in the firstborn into
the world he saith, And let all the angels of God
worship him’’—from Dt 32 43, LXX, or Ps 97 7,
in neither of which is God the speaker—“And of
the angels he saith, Who maketh his angels winds,
and his ministers a flame of fire’—from Ps 104 4,
where again God is not the speaker but is spoken of
in the third person—‘but of the Son he saith, Thy
throne, O God, etc’’—from Ps 45 6.7 where again
God is not the speaker, but is addressed—“ And,
Thou, Lord, in the beginning,’ etc—from Ps 102
25-27, where again God is not the speaker but
is addressed—‘‘But of which of the angels hath he
said at any time, Sit thou on my right hand?”’ ete
—from Ps 110 1, in which God is the speaker.
Here we have passages in which God is the speaker
and passages in which God is not the speaker, but
is addressed or spoken of, indiscriminately assigned
to God, because they all have it in common that
they are words of Scripture, and as words of Scrip-
ture are words of God. Similarly in Rom 15 9 ff
we have a series of citations the first of which is
introduced by ‘‘as it is written,” and the next two
by “again he saith,” and “again,” and the last by
“and again, Isaiah saith,”’ the first being from Ps 18
49; the second from Dt 32 438; the third from Ps
117 1; and the last from Isa 11 10. Only the last
(the only one here assigned to the human author)
is a word of God in the text of the OT.
This view of the Scriptures as a compact mass of
words of God occasioned the formation of a desig-
nation for them by which this their
8. “Oracles character was explicitly expressed.
of God” Thisdesignation is “the sacred oracles,”
“the oracles of God.” It occurs with
extraordinary frequency in Philo, who very com-
monly refers to Scripture as “the sacred oracles”
and cites its several passages as each an “oracle.”
Sharing, as they do, Philo’s conception of the Scrip-
tures as, in all their parts, a word of God, the NT
writers naturally also speak of them under this
designation. The classical passage is Rom 8 2
(cf He 6 12; Acts 7 38). Here Paul begins an
enumeration of the advantages which belonged to
the chosen people above other nations; and, after
declaring these advantages to have been great and
numerous, he places first among them all their
possession of the Scriptures: “What advantage
then hath the Jew? or what is the profit of circum-
cision? Much every way: first of all, that they
were intrusted with the oracles of God.” That
by “the oracles of God” here are meant just the
Holy Scriptures in their entirety, conceived as a
direct Divine revelation, and not any portions of
them, or elements in them more esp. thought of as
revelatory, is perfectly clear from the wide con-
temporary use of this designation in this sense by
Philo, and is put beyond question by the presence
in the NT of habitudes of speech which rest on and
grow out of the conception of Scripture embodied
in this term. From the point of view of this desig-


nation, Scripture is thought of as the living voice
of God speaking in all its parts directly to the
reader; and, accordingly, it is cited by some such
formula as “it is said,’ and this mode of citing
Scripture duly occurs as an alternative to “it is
written” (Lk 4 12, replacing “it is written’? in
Mt; He 3°15; ef Rom 4 18). It is due also to
this pomt of view that Scripture is cited, not as
what God or the Holy Spirit “said,” but what He
“says,” the present tense emphasizing the living
voice of God speaking in Scriptures to the indi-
vidual soul (He 3 7; Acts 13 35; He 1 7.8.10;
Rom 15 10). And esp. there is due to it the pecul-
iar usage by which Scripture is cited by the simple
“saith,” without expressed subject, the subject
being too well understood, when Scripture is ad-
duced, to require stating; for who could be the
speaker of the words of Scripture but God only
(Rom 15 10; 1 Cor 616; 2 Cor62; Gal3
16; Eph 4 8; 6 14)? The analogies of this preg-
nant subjectless “saith’’ are very widespread. It-
was with it that the ancient Pythagoreans and Pla-
tonists and the mediaeval Aristotelians adduced
each their master’s teaching; it was with it that,
in certain circles, the judgments of Hadrian’s great
jurist Salvius Julianus were cited; African stylists
were even accustomed to refer by it to Sallust, their
great model. There is a tendency, cropping out
occasionally, in the OT, to omit the name of God
as superfluous, when He, as the great logical sub-
ject always in mind, would be easily understood
(cf Job 2023; 21°17; Ps 1142; Lam 4 22).
So, too, when the NT writers quoted Scripture
there was no need to say whose word it was: that
lay beyond question in every mind. This usage,
accordingly, is a specially striking intimation of the
vivid sense which the N'T writers had of the Divine
origin of the Scriptures, and means that in citing
them they were acutely conscious that they were
citing immediate words of God. How completely
the Scriptures were to them just the word of God
may be illustrated by a passage like Gal 3 16: “He
saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one,
And to thy seed, which is Christ.” We have seen
Our Lord hanging an argument on the very words
of Scripture (Jn 10 34); elsewhere His reasoning
depends on the particular tense (Mt 22 32) or
word (Mt 22 43) used in Scripture. Here Paul’s
argument rests similarly on a grammatical form.
No doubt it is the grammatical form of the word
which God is recorded as having spoken to Abraham
that isin question. But Paul knows what grammat-
ical form God employed in speaking to Abraham
only as the Scriptures have transmitted it to him;
and, as we have seen, in citing the words of God and
the words of Scripture he was not accustomed to
make any distinction between them. It is probably
the Scriptural word as a Scriptural word, therefore,
which he has here in mind: though, of course, it is
possible that what he here witnesses to is rather the
detailed trustworthiness of the Scriptural record than
its direct divinity—if we can separate two things
which apparently were not separated in Paul’s mind.
This much we can at least say without straining,
that the designation of Scripture as “scripture” and
its citation by the formula, ‘It is written,” attest
primarily its indefectible authority; the designation
of it as “oracles’’ and the adduction of it by the for-
mula, “It says,’ attest primarily its immediate
divinity. Its authority rests on its divinity and its
divinity expresses itself in its trustworthiness; and
the NT writers in all their use of it treat it as what
they declare it_to be—a God-breathed document,
which, because God-breathed, is through and through
trustworthy in all its assertions, authoritative in all
its declarations, and down to its last particular, the
very word of God, His “oracles.”


1479


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Inspiration


That the Scriptures are throughout a Divine
book, created by the Divine energy and speaking
in their every part with Divine author-
9. Human ity directly to the heart of the readers,
Element in is the fundamental fact concerning
Scripture them which is witnessed by Christ and
the sacred writers to whom we owe
the NT. But the strength and constancy with
which they bear witness to this primary fact do not
prevent their recognizing hy the side of it that the
criptures have come into being by the agency of
men. It would be inexact to say that they recog-
nize a human element in Scripture: they do not
parcel Scripture out, assigning portions of it, or
elements in it, respectively to God and man. In
their view the whole of Scripture in all its parts
and in all its elements, down to the least minutiae,
in form of expression as well as in substance of
teaching, is from God; but the whole of it has been
given by God through the instrumentality of men.
There is, therefore, in their view, not, indeed, a
human element or ingredient in Scripture, and
much less human divisions or sections of Scripture,
but a human side or aspect to Scripture; and they
do not fail to give full recognition to this human
side or aspect. In one of the primary passages
which has already been before us, their conception
is given, if somewhat broad and very succinct, yet
clear expression. No ‘prophecy,’ Peter tells us
(2 Pet 1 21), ‘ever came by the will of man; but
as borne by the Holy Ghost, men spake from God?
Here the whole initiative is assigned to God, and
such complete contro] of the human agents that the
product is truly God’s work. The men who speak
in this “prophecy of scripture” speak not of them-
selves or ont of themselves, but from “God”: they
speak only as they are “borne by the Holy Ghost.”
But it is they, after all, who speak. Scripture
is the product of man, but only of man speaking
from God and under such a control of the Holy
Spirit as that in their speaking they are “borne’’ by
Him. The conception obviously is that the Scrip-
tures have been given by the instrumentality of
men; and this conception finds repeated incidental
expression throughout the NT.

It is this conception, for example, which is ex-
pressed when Our Lord, quoting Ps 110, declares
of its words that ‘David himself said in the Holy
Spirit” (Mk 12 36). There is a certain emphasis
here on the words being David’s own words, which
is due to the requirements of the argument Our
Lord was conducting, but which none the less sin-
cerely represents Our Lord’s conception of their
origin. They are David’s own words which we
find in Ps 110, therefore; but they are David’s
own words, spoken not of his own motion merely,
but “in the Holy Spirit,” that is to say—we could
not better paraphrase it—‘‘as borne by the Holy
Spirit.” In other words, they are ‘“God-breathed”
words and therefore authoritative in a sense above
what any words of David, not spoken in the Holy
Spirit, could possibly be. Generalizing the matter,
we may say that the words of Scripture are con-
ceived by Our Lord and the NT writers as the words
of their human authors when speaking “in the Holy
Spirit,” that is to say, by His initiative and under
His controlling direction. The conception finds
even more precise expression, perhaps, in such a
statement as we find—it is Peter who is speaking and
itis again a psalm which is cited—in Acts 1 16, “The
Holy Spirit spake by the mouth of David.” Here
the Holy Spirit is adduced, of course, as the real
author of what is said (and hence Peter’s certainty
that what is said will be fulfilled); but David’s
mouth is expressly designated as the instrument
(it is the instrumental preposition that is used) by
means of which the Holy Spirit speaks the Scripture


in question. He does not speak save through
David’s mouth. Accordingly, in Acts 4 25, ‘the
Lord that made the heaven and earth,’ acting by
His Holy Spirit, is declared to have spoken another
psalm ‘through the mouth of .... David,’ His
“Servant”; and in Mt 13 35 still another psalm
is adduced as “spoken through the prophet” (cf
Mt 2 5). In the very act of energetically assert-
ing the Divine origin of Scripture the human
instrumentality through which it is given is con-
stantly recognized. The NT writers have, there-
fore, no difficulty in assigning Scripture to its hu-
man authors, or in discovering in Scripture traits
due to its human authorship. They freely quote
it by such simple formulae as these: ‘Moses saith”
(Rom 10 19); ‘Moses said’ (Mt 22 24; Mk 7
10; Acts 3 22); ‘Moses writeth’” (Rom 10 5);
“Moses wrote’ (Mk 12 19; Lk 20 28); “Isaiah
.... saith’ (Rom 10 20); ‘Isaiah said” (Jn 12
89); “Isaiah crieth’? (Rom 9 27); “Isaiah hath
said before’ (Rom 9 29); ‘‘said Isaiah the prophet”
(Jn 1 23); ‘did Isaiah prophesy’ (Mk 7 6; Mi 15
7); “David saith’? (Lk 20 42; Acts 2 25; Rom
11 9); “David said” (Mk 12 36). It is to be noted
that when thus Scripture is adduced by the names
of its human authors, it is a matter of complete in-
difference whether the words adduced are comments
of these authors or direct words of God recorded
by them. As the plainest words of the human
authors are assigned to God as their real author, so
the most express words of God, repeated by the
Scriptural writers, are cited by the names of
these human writers (Mt 15 7; Mk 7 6; Rom 10
5 19.20; cf Mk 7 10 from the Decalogue). To say
that “Moses” or “David says,” is evidently thus
only a way of saying that “Scripture says,’’ which
is the same as to say that ‘God says.” Such modes
of citing Scripture, accordingly, carry us little be-
yond merely connecting the name, or perhaps we
may say the individuality, of the several writers
with the portions of Scripture given through each.
How it was given through them is left meanwhile,
if not without suggestion, yet without specific ex-
planation. We seem safe only in inferring this
much: that the gift of Scripture through its human
authors took place by a process much more intimate
than can be expressed by the term ‘dictation,’ and
that it took place in a process in which the control
of the Holy Spirit was too complete and pervasive
to permit the human qualities of the secondary
authors in any way to condition the purity of the
product as the word of God. The Geis in
other words, are conceived by the writers of the
NT as through and through God’s book, in every
part expressive of His mind, given through men
after a fashion which does no violence to their nature
as men, and constitutes the book also men’s book
as well as God’s, in every part expressive of the mind

of its human authors.
If we attempt to get behind this broad statement
and to obtain a more detailed conception of the
activities by which God has given the


10. Activi- Scriptures, we are thrown back upon
ties of God somewhat general representations, sup-
in Giving ported by the analogy of the modes
Scripture of God’s working in other spheres of


His operation. It is very desirable
that we should free ourselves at the outset from in-
fluences arising from the current employment of the
term “inspiration” to designate this process. This
term is not a Bib. term and its etymological impli-
cations are not perfectly accordant with the Bib.
conception of the modes of the Divine operation in
giving the Scriptures. The Bib. writers do not con-
ceive of the Scriptures as a human product breathed
into by the Divine Spirit, and thus heightened in its
qualities or endowed with new qualities; but as a


Inspiration


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1480


Divine product produced through the instrumen-
tality of men. They do not conceive of these men,
by whose instrumentality Scripture is produced,
as working upon their own initiative, though ener-
gized by God to greater effort. and higher achieve-
ment, but as moved by the Divine initiative and
borne by the irresistible power of the Spirit of God
along ways of His choosing to ends of His appoint-
ment. The difference between the two conceptions
may not appear great when the mind is fixed ex-
clusively upon the nature of the resulting product.
But they are differing conceptions, and look at the
production of Scripture from distinct points of view
—the human and the Divine; and the involved
mental attitudes toward the origin of Scripture are
very diverse. The term “inspiration” is too firmly
fixed, in both theological and popular usage, as the
technical designation of the action of God in giving
the Scriptures, to be replaced; and we may be
thankful that its native implications lie as close
as they do to the Bib. conceptions. Meanwhile,
however, it may be justly insisted that it shall
receive its definition from the representations of
Scripture, and not be permitted to impose upon our
thought ideas of the origin of Scripture derived
from an analysis of its own implications, etymo-
logical or historical. The Scriptural conception of
the relation of the Divine Spirit to the human
authors in the production of Scripture is better ex-
pressed by the figure of “bearing” than by the figure
of ‘‘inbreathing’’; and when our Bib. writers speak
of the action of the Spirit of God in this relation
as a breathing, they represent it as a “breathing
out” of the Scriptures by the Spirit, and not a
“breathing into’’ the Scriptures by Him.
So soon, however, as we seriously endeavor to
form for ourselves a clear conception of the precise
nature of the Divine action in this
11. General “breathing out” of the Scriptures—
Problem of this “bearing” of the writers of the
Origin: Scriptures to their appointed goal of
God’s Part the production of a book of Divine
trustworthiness and indefectible au-
thority—we become acutely aware of a more deeply
lying and much wider problem, apart from which
this one of inspiration, technically so called, cannot
be profitably considered. This is the general prob-
lem of the origin of the Scriptures and the part of
God in all that complex of processes by the inter-
action of which these books, which we call the
sacred Scriptures, with all their peculiarities, and
all their qualities of whatever sort, have been
brought into being. For, of course, these books were
not produced suddenly, by some miraculous act—
handed down complete out of heaven, as the phrase
goes; but, like all other products of time, are the
ultimate effect of many processes codperating
through long periods. There is to be considered,
for instance, the preparation of the material which
forms the subject-matter of these books: in a sacred
history, say, for example, to be narrated; or in a
religious experience which may serve as a norm for
record; or in a logical elaboration of the contents
of revelation which may be placed at the service of
God’s people; or in the progressive revelation of
Divine truth itself, supplying their culminating
contents. And there is the preparation of the men
to write these books to be considered, a preparation
physical, intellectual, spiritual, which must have
attended them throughout their whole lives, and,
indeed, must have had its beginning in their remote
ancestors, and the effect of which was to bring the
right men to the right places at the right times, with
the right endowments, impulses, acquirements, to
write just the books which were designed for them.
When “‘inspiration,’’ technically so called, is super-
induced on lines of preparation like these, it takes


on quite a different aspect from that which it bears
when it is thought of as an isolated action of the
Divine Spirit operating out of all relation to his-
torical processes. Representations are sometimes
made as if, when God wished to produce sacred
books which would incorporate His will—a_ series
of letters like those of Paul, for example—He was
reduced to the necessity of going down to earth and
painfully scrutinizing the men He found there,
seeking anxiously for the one who, on the whole,
promised best for His purpose; and then violently
forcing the material He wished expressed through
him, against his natural bent, and with as little loss
from his recalcitrant characteristics as possible. Of
course, nothing of the sort took place. If God
wished to give His people a series of letters like
Paul’s, He prepared a Paul to write them, and the
Paul He brought to the task was a Paul who spon-
taneously would write just such letters.
If we bear this in mind, we shall know what esti-
mate to place upon the common representation to
the effect that the human character-
12. Effect istics of the writers must, and in point
of Human of fact do, condition and qualify the
Qualities: writings produced by them, the impli-
Providential cation being that, therefore, we cannot
Preparation get from man a pure word of God. As
light that passes through the colored
glass of a cathedral window, we are told, is light
from heaven, but is stained by the tints of the glass
through which it passes; so any word of God
which is passed through the mind and soul of a man
must come out discolored by the personality through
which it is given, and just to that degree ceases to
be the pure word of God. But what if this per-
sonality has itself been formed by God into precisely
the personality it is, for the express purpose of
communicating to the word given through it just
the coloring which it gives it? What if the colors
of the stained-glass window have been designed by
the architect for the express purpose of giving to the
light that floods the cathedral precisely the tone and
uality it receives from them? What if the word of
od that comes to His people is framed by God
into the word of God it is, precisely by means of
the qualities of the men formed by Him for the pur-
pose, through which it is given? When we think
of God the Lord giving by His Spirit a body of
authoritative Scriptures to His people, we must
remember that He is the God of providence and of
grace as well as of revelation and inspiration, and
that He holds all the lines of preparation as fully
under His direction as He does the specific operation
which we call technically, in the narrow sense, by
the name of “inspiration.” The production of the
Scriptures is, in point of fact, a long process, in the
course of which numerous and very varied Divine
activities are involved, providential, gracious,
miraculous, all of which must be taken into account
in any attempt to explain the relation of God to the
production of Scripture. When they are all taken
into account we can no longer wonder that the
resultant Scriptures are constantly spoken of as
the pure word of God. We wonder, rather, that an
additional operation of God—what we call spe-
cifically “inspiration,” in its technical sense—was
thought necessary. Consider, for example, how
a piece of sacred history—say the Book of Ch, or
the great historical work, Gospel and Acts, of
Luke—is brought to the writing. There is first of
all the preparation of the history to be written:
God the Lord leads the sequence of occurrences
through the development He has designed for them
that they may convey their lessons to His people:
a “teleological” or “aetiological” character is in-
herent in the very course of events. Then He pre-
pares a man, by birth, training, experience, gifts


1481


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Inspiration


of grace, and, if need be, of revelation, capable of
appreciating this historical development and eager
to search it out, thrilling in all his being with its
‘lessons and bent upon making them clear and effect-
ive to others. When, then, by His providence, God
sets this man to work on the writing of this history,
will there not be spontaneously written by him
the history which it was Divinely intended should
be written? Or consider how a psalmist would
be prepared to put into moving verse a piece of
normative religious experience: how he would be
born with just the right quality of religioussensibility,
of parents through whom he should receive just
the right hereditary bent, and from whom he should
get precisely the right religious example and train-
ing, in circumstances of life in which his religious
tendencies should be developed precisely on right
lines; how he would be brought through just the
right experiences to quicken in him the precise emo-
tions he would be called upon to express, and finally
would be placed in precisely the exigencies which
would cali out their expression. Or consider the
providential preparation of a writer of a didactic
epistle—by means of which he should be given the
intellectual breadth and acuteness, and be trained in
habitudes of reasoning, and placed in the situations
which would call out precisely the argumentative
presentation of Christian truth which was required
of him. When we give due place in our thoughts
to the universality of the providential government of
God, to the minuteness and completeness of its
sway, and to its invariable efficacy, we may be in-
clined to ask what is needed beyond this mere provi-
dential government to secure the production of
sacred books which should be in every detail abso-
lutely accordant with the Divine will.
The answer is, Nothing is needed beyond mere
providence to secure such books—provided only
that it does not lie in the Divine pur-
13. “Inspi- pose that these books should possess


ration” qualities which rise above the powers
More than of men to produce, even under the
*Provi- most complete Divine guidance. For
dence” providence is guidance; and guidance


can bring one only so far as his own
power can carry him. If heights are to be scaled
above man’s native power to achieve, then some-
thing more than guidance, however effective, is
necessary. This is the reason for the superinduc-
tion, at the end of the long process of the production
of Scripture, of the additional Divine operation
which we call technically “inspiration.” By it,
the Spirit of God, flowing confluently in with the
providentially and graciously determined work of
men, spontaneously producing under the Divine
directions the writings appointed to them, gives
the product a. Divine quality unattainable by human
powers alone. Thus these books become not merely
the word of godly men, but the immediate word of
God Himself, speaking directly as such to the minds
and hearts of every reader. The value of “inspi-
ration’? emerges, thus, as twofold. It gives to the
books written under its ‘‘bearing” a quality which
is truly superhuman; a trustworthiness, an author-
ity, a searchingness, a profundity, a profitableness
which is altogether Divine. And it speaks this
Divine word immediately to each reader’s heart
and conscience; so that he does not require to make
his way to God, painfully, perhaps even uncertainly,
through the words of His servants, the human in-
struments in writing the Scriptures, but can listen
directly to the Divine voice itself speaking imme-
diately in the Scriptural word to him.

That the writers of the NT themselves conceive
the Scriptures to have been produced thus by Di-
vine operations extending through the increasing ages
and involving a multitude of varied activities, can


be made clear by simply attending to the occasional
references they make to this or that step in the

process. It lies, for example, on the
14, Witness face of their expositions, that they


of NT looked upon the Bib. history as teleo-
Writers logical. Not only do they tell us that
to This “whatsoever things were written afore-


time were written for our learning,

that through patience and through comfort of the
scriptures we might have hope’ (Rom 165 4; ef
Rom 4 23.24); they speak also of the course of the
historical events themselves as guided for our bene-
fit: “Now these things happened unto them by way
of example’’—in a typical fashion, in such a way
that, as they occurred, a typical character, or pre-
dictive reference impressed itself upon them; that
is to say, briefly, the history occurred as it did in
order to bear a message to us—‘‘and they were
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of
the ages are come” (1 Cor 10 11; ef ver 6). Ac
cordingly, it has become a commonplace of Bib. ex-
position that “the history of redemption itself is a
typically progressive one’ (Kiiper), and is “in a
manner impregnated with the prophetic element,”
so as to form a “part of a great plan which stretches
from the fall of man to the first consummation of all
things in glory; and, in so far as it reveals the mind
of God toward man, carries a respect to the future
not less than to the present’ (P. Fairbairn). It lies
equally on the face of the NT allusions to the sub-
ject that its writers understood that the preparation
of men to become vehicles of God’s message to man
was not of yesterday, but had its beginnings in the
very origin of their being. The call by which Paul,
for example, was made an apostle of Jesus Christ
was sudden and apparently without antecedents;
but it is precisely this Paul who reckons this call
as only one step in a long process, the beginnings of
which antedated his own existence: ‘But when it
was the good pleasure of God, who separated me,
even from my mother’s womb, and called me
through his grace, to reveal hisSon in me” (Gal 1
15.16; cf Jer 1 5; Isa 49 1.5). The recognition
by the writers of the NT of the experiences of God’s
grace, which had been vouchsafed to them as an
integral element in their fitting to be the bearers of
His gospel to others, finds such pervasive expression
that the only difficulty is to select from the mass the
most illustrative passages. Such a statement as
Paul gives in the opening verses of 2 Cor is
thoroughly typical. There he represents that he
has been afflicted and comforted to the end that
he might “be able to comfort them that are in any
affliction, through the comfort wherewith” he had
himself been “comforted of God.” For, he explains
“Whether we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and
salvation; or whether we are comforted, it is for
your comfort, which worketh in the patient endur-
ing of the same sufferings which we also suffer” (2
Cor 146). Itis beyond question, therefore, that
the NT writers, when they declare the Scriptures
to be the product of the Divine breath, and explain
this as meaning that the writers of these Scriptures
wrote them only as borne by the Holy Spirit in
such a fashion that they spoke, not out of them-
selves, but “from God,” are thinking of this opera-
tion of the Spirit only as the final act of God in the
roduction of the Scriptures, superinduced upon a
ong series of processes, providential, gracious,
miraculous, by which the matter of Scripture had
been prepared for writing, and the men for writing
it, and the writing of it had been actually brought
to pass. It is this final act in the production of
Scripture which is technically called “inspiration”;
and inspiration is thus brought before us as, in the
minds of the writers of the NT, that particular
operation of God in the production of Scripture


Inspiration
Instrument


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1482


which takes effect at the very poimt of the writing
of Scripture—understanding the term ‘writing’
here as inclusive of all the processes of the actual
composition of Scripture, the investigation of docu-
ments, the collection of facts, the excogitation of
conclusions, the adaptation of exhortations as
means to ends and the like—with the effect of giving
to the resultant Scripture a specifically supernatural
character, and constituting 1t a Divine, as well as
human, book. Obviously the mode of operation
of this Divine activity moving to this result is con-
ceived, in full accord with the analogy of the Divine
operations in other spheres of its activity, in provi-
dence and in grace alike, as confluent with the
human activities operative in the case; as, in a
word, of the nature of what has come to be known
as “immanent action.”
It will not escape observation that thus ‘‘nspira-
tion” is made a mode of ‘‘revelation.” We are
often exhorted, to besure, to distinguish
15. “Inspi- sharply between “inspiration” and
ration’? and ‘revelation’; and the exhortation is
“Revela- just when “‘revelation’’ is taken in one
tion” of its narrower senses, of, say, an ex-
ternal manifestation of God, or of an
immediate communication from God in words.
But “inspiration” does not differ from “revelation”
in these narrowed senses as genus from genus, but
as a species of one genus differs from another.
That operation of God which we call “inspiration,”
that is to say, that operation of the Spirit of God
by which He “‘bears’’ men in the process of com-
posing Scripture, so that they write, not of them-
selves, but “from God,” is one of the modes in which
God makes known to men His being, His will, His
operations, His purposes. It is as distinctly a
mode of revelation as any mode of revelation can
be, and therefore it performs the same office which
allrevelation performs, that is to say, in the express
words of Paul, it makes men wise, and makes them
wise untosalvation. All “special” or ‘“‘supernatural’’
revelation (which is redemptive in its very idea,
and occupies a place as a substantial element in
God’s redemptive processes) has precisely this for
its end; and Scripture, as a mode of the redemptive
revelation of God, finds its fundamental purpose
just in this: if the “‘imspiration”’ by which Scripture
is produced renders it trustworthy and authorita-
tive, it renders it trustworthy and authoritative
only that it may the better serve to make men wise
unto salvation. Scripture is conceived, from the
point of view of the writers of the NT, not merely
as the record of revelations, but as itself a part of
the redemptive revelation of God; not merely as
the record of the redemptive acts by which God is
saving the world, but as itself one of these redemp-
tive acts, having its own part to play in the great
work of establishing and building up the kingdom
of God. What gives it a place among the redemp-
tive acts of God is its Divine origination, taken in
its widest sense, as inclusive of all the Divine
operations, providential, gracious and expressly
supernatural, by which it has been made just
what it is—a body of writings able‘to make wise
unto salvation, and profitable for making the man
of God perfect. What gives it its place among the
modes of revelation is, however, specifically the cul-
minating one of these Divine operations, which we
call “inspiration”; that is to say, the action of the
Spirit of God in so “bearing” its human authors
in their work of producing Scripture, as that in
these Scriptures they speak, not out of themselves,
but “from God.” It is this act by virtue of which
the Scriptures may properly be called ‘God-
breathed.” ,
It has been customary among a certain school
of writers to speak of the Scriptures, because thus


“inspired,’’ as a Divine-human book, and to appeal
to the analogy of Our Lord’s Divine-human per-
sonality to explain their peculiar quali-


16. Scrip- ties as such. The expression calls
tures a attention to an important fact, and
Divine- the analogy holds good a certain dis-
Human tance. There are human and Divine
Book? sides to Scripture, and, as we cursorily


: examine it, we may perceive in it, alter-
nately, traits which suggest now the one, now the
other factor in its origin. But the analogy with
Our Lord’s Divine-human personality may easily
be pressed beyond reason. There is no hypostatie
union between the Divine and the human in Scrip-
ture; we cannot parallel the ‘‘inscripturation’’ of the
Holy Spirit and the incarnation of the Son of God.
The Scriptures are merely the product of Divine
and human forces working together to produce 4
product in the production of which the human
forces work under the initiation and prevalent di-
rection of the Divine: the person of Our Lord unites
in itself Divine and human natures, each of which
retains its distinctness while operating only in rela-
tion to the other. Between such diverse things
there can exist only a remote analogy; and, in point
of fact, the analogy in the present instance amounts
to no more than that in both cases Divine and
human factors are involved, though very _differ-
ently. Inthe one they unite to constitute a Divine-
human person, in the other they codperate to per-
form a Divine-human work. Even so distant an
analogy may enable us, however, to recognize that
as, in the case of Our Lord’s person, the human
nature remains truly human while yet it can never
fall into sin or error because it can never act out of
relation with the Divine nature into conjunction
with which it has been brought; so in the case of
the production of Scripture by the conjoint action
of human and Divine factors, the human factors
have acted as human factors and have left their
mark on the product as such, and yet cannot have
fallen into that error which we say it is human to
fall into, because they have not acted apart from
the Divine factors, by themselves, but only under
their unerring guidance.

The NT testimony is to the Divine origin and
qualities of ‘Scripture’; and “Scripture” to the
‘ writers of the NT was fundamentally,


17. Scrip- of course, the OT. In the primary
ture of NT passage, in which we are told that
Writers “every”? or “all Scripture” is “God-


Was the OT breathed,”’ the direct reference is to

the “sacred writings’ which Timothy
had had in knowledge since his infancy, and these
were, of course, just the sacred books of the Jews
(2 Tim 3 16). What is explicit here is implicit
in all the allusions to inspired Scriptures in the NT.
Accordingly, it is frequently said that our entire
testimony to the inspiration of Scripture concerns
the OT alone. In many ways, however, this is
overstated. Our present concern is not with the
extent of ‘Scripture’ but with the nature of
‘Scripture’; and we cannot present here the con-
siderations which justify extending to the NT the
inspiration which the NT writers attribute to the
OT. It will not be out of place, however, to point
out simply that the NT writers obviously them-
selves made this extension. They do not for an
instant imagine themselves, as ministers of a new
covenant, less in possession of the Spirit of God than
the ministers of the old covenant: they freely
recognize, indeed, that they have no sufficiency
of themselves, but they know that God has made
them sufficient (2 Cor 8 5.6). They prosecute
their work of proclaiming the gospel, therefore, in
full confidence that they speak “by the Holy Spirit”
(1 Pet 1 12), to whom they attribute both the


1483


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Inspiration
Instrument


matter and form of their teaching (1 Cor 2 18).
They, therefore, speak with the utmost assurance
of their teaching (Gal 1 7.8); and they issue com-
mands with the completest authority (1 Thess 4
2.14; 2 Thess 3 6.12), making it, indeed, the test
of whether one has the Spirit that he should recog-
nize what they demand as commandments of God
(1 Cor 14 37). It would be strange, indeed, if
these high claims were made for their oral teaching
and commandments exclusively. In point of fact,
they are made explicitly also for their written in-
junctions. It was “the things’ which Paul was
‘writing,’ the recognition of which as commands
of the Lord, he makes the test of a Spirit-led man
(1 Cor 14 37). It is his “word by this epistle,”
obedience to which he makes the condition of Chris-
tian communion (2 Thess 3 14). There seems in-
volved in such an attitude toward their own teach-
ing, oral and written, a claim on the part of the NT
writers to something very much like the ‘‘inspira-
tion” which they attribute to the writers of the OT.
And all doubt is dispelled when we observe the
NT writers placing the writings of one another in the
same category of ‘Scripture’ with the

18. Inclu- books of the OT. The same Paul who,
sion of NT in 2 Tim 3 16, declared that ‘every’ or
‘all scripture is God-breathed’ had
already written in 1 Tim 6 18: “For the scripture
saith, Thou shall not muzzle the ox when he treadeth
outthecorn. And, Thelaborer is worthy of his hire.”
The first clause here is derived from Dt and the sec-
ond from the Gospel of Lk, though both are cited
as together constituting, or better, forming part of
the “Scripture” which Paul adduces as so authori-
tative as by its mere citation to end all strife.
Who shall say that, in the declaration of the
later ep. that “all’’ or “every’’ Scripture is God-
breathed, Paul did not have Lk, and, along with Lk,
whatever other new books he classed with the old
under the name of Scripture, in the back of his
mind, along with those old books which Timothy
had had in his hands from infancy? And the same
Peter who declared that every “prophecy of scrip-
ture’ was the product of men who spoke “from
God,” being ‘borne’ by the Holy Ghost (2 Pet 1 21),
in this same ep. (3 16), places Paul’s Epp. in the
category of Scripture along with whatever other
books deserve that name. For Paul, says he, wrote
these epp., not out of his own wisdom, but “ac-
cording to the wisdom given to him,’ and though
there are some things in them hard to be understood,
yet it is only “the ignorant and unstedfast’’ who
wrest these difficult passages—as what else could
be expected of men who wrest ‘‘also the other
Scriptures” (obviously the OT is meant)—“unto
their own destruction’? Is it possible to say that
Peter could not have had these epp. of Paul also
lurking somewhere in the back of his mind, along
with “the other scriptures,’’ when he told his readers
that every “prophecy of scripture’ owes its origin
to the prevailing operation of the Holy Ghost?
What must be understood in estimating the testi-
mony of the NT writers to the inspiration of Scrip-
ture is that “Scripture” stood in their minds as the
title of a unitary body of books, throughout the gift
of God through His Spirit to His people; but that
this body of writings was at the same time under-
stood to be a growing aggregate, so that what is
said of it applies to the new books which were being
added to it as the Spirit gave them, as fully as to the
old books which had come down to them from their
hoary past. It is a mere matter of detail to deter-
mine precisely what new books were thus included
by them in the category “Scripture.” They tell
us some of them themselves. Those who received
them from their hands tell us of others. And when
we put the two bodies of testimony together we find


that they constitute just our NT. _ It is no pressure
of the witness of the writers of the NT to the in-
spiration of the Scripture, therefore, to look upon it
as covering the entire body of ‘‘Scriptures,”’ the new
books which they were themselves adding to this
aggregate, as well as the old books which they had
received as Scripture from the fathers. Whatever
can lay claim by just right to the appellation of
‘Scripture,’ as employed in its eminent sense by
those writers, can by the same just right lay claim
to the “inspiration’”’ which they ascribe to this
“Scripture.”

Litsraturs.—J. Gerhard, Loci Theolog., Locus 1;
F, Turretin, Instit. Theol., Locus Il; B. de Moor, Comm,
in J, Marckit Comp., cap. ii; C. Hodge, Syst. Theol., New
York, 1871, I, 151-86; eury B. Smith, The Inspiration
of the Holy Scriptures, New York, 1855, new ed, Cincin-
nati, 1891; A. ene tae Encyclopedie der heilige God-
geleerdheid, 1888-89, 11, 347 ff, ET; Ene of Sacred Theol.,
New York, 1898, 341-563; also De Schrift het woord
Gods, Tiel, 1870; H. Bavinck, Gereformeerde Dogmatiek?,
Kampen, 1906, I, 406-527; R. Haldane, The Vertal In-
spiration of the Scriptures Established, Edinburgh, 1830;
J. T. Beck, Hinleitung in das System der christlichen
Lehre, Stuttgart, 1838, 2d ed, 1870; A. G. Rudelbach,
“Die Lehre von der Inspiration der heil. Schrift,’
Zeitschrift. fir die gesammte Lutherische_Theologie und
Kirche, 1840, 1, 1841, 1, 1842, 1; 8. R. L. Gaussen,
Théopneustie ou inspiration Bee des saintes écritures?,
Paris, 1842, ET by E. N. Kirk, New York, 1842; also
Theopneustia; the Plenary Inspiration of the Holy
Scriptures, David Scott's tr, reédited and revised hy
B. W. Carr, with a preface by C. H. Spurgeon, London,
1888; William Lee, The Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures,
Donellan Lecture, 1852, New York, 1857; James Ban-
nerman, Inspiration: the Infailible Truth and Divine
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, Edinburgh, 1865; F. L.
Patton, The NE OH of the Scriptures, Philadelphia,
1869 (reviewing Lee and Bannerman); Charles Elliott,

Treatise on the Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures,
Edinburgh, 1877; A. A. Hodge and B. B. Warfield,
“Inspiration,'’ Presbyterian Review, April, 1881, also
tract, Philadelphia, 1881; R. Watts, The Rule of Faith
and the Doctrine of Inspiration, Edinburgh, 1885; A.
Oave, The Inspiration of the OT Inductively Considered,
London, 1888: B. Manly, The Bible Doctrine of Inspira-
tion, New York, 1888; W. Rohnert, Die Inspiration der
heiligen Schrift und ihre Bestreiter, Leipzig, 1889; A.W.
Dieckhof®, Die Inspiration und_Irrthumlosigkeit der
heiligen Schrift, Leipzig, 1891; J. Wichelhaus, Die Lehre
der heiligen Schrift, Stuttgart, 1892; J. Macgregor, The
Revelation and the Record, Edinburgh, 1893; J. Urquhart,
The Inspiration and Accuracy of the Holy Scriptures,
London, 1895; ©. Pesch, De Inspiratione Sacrae Scrip-
turae, Freiburg, 1906; James Orr, Revelation and Inspira-
tion, London, 1910.

; ‘ BENJAMIN B, WARFIELD

INSTANT, in’stant, INSTANTLY, in’stant-li:
Derivative from Lat insiare. Found in Eng. with
various meanings from the 15th cent. to the present
time.

_ Instant is used once in Isa 29 5 in the sense of
immediate time; elsewhere in the sense of urgent,
pressing; Lk 23 23, where ‘were instant”’ isthe AV
tr of the vb. éréxewvro, epékeinto; Rom 12 12, where
it is mvolved in the vb. tpooxaprepéw, proskarteréd;
cf Acts 6 4. In 2 Tim 4 2 it stands for the ex-
pressive vb. éricryf, epistathi, ‘stand to.”

_ Instantly (urgently, stedfastly) is the AV render-
ing of two different Gr phrases, srovdalws, spou-
datos, found in Lk 7 4; and éy éxrevelg, en ekte-
neta, in Acts 26 7. In both cases ARV renders
“earnestly.”’ Russert Bensamin Miter


INSTRUCTION, in-struk’shun.
Evucation; ScHoou.


INSTRUMENT, in’stréo-ment ("93, #3; in
Gr pl. 84Aa, hépla, Rom 6 13): The word in the OT
is used for utensils for service, chiefly in connection
with the sanctuary (cf Ex 25 9; Nu 4 12.26.32;
1K 19 21; 1Ch9 29; 2 Ch 416, AV); for
weapons of war (1S 8 12; 1 Ch 12 33.37, etc);
notably for musical imstruments. See Music.
The members of the body are described by Paul
(Rom 6 13) as ‘‘imstruments” to be used in the
service of righteousness, as before they were in
the service of unrighteousness.


See CaTEcuist;


Instruments
Intercession


INSTRUMENTS OF MUSIC (O°W"SU, shalz-
shim): Thus RV and AV (1 S 18 6), RVm “‘tri-
are or ‘‘three-stringed instruments.” See

UsIC.


INSURRECTION, in-su-rek’shun: The word in
Ps 64 2 AV is changed in RV into “tumult”; in
Ezr 4 19 (vb.) it represents the Aram. NW}, n°sa’,
to ‘lift up oneself.”” In the NT ordows, stdsis, is
rendered “insurrection” in Mk 15 7 AV (where cf
the vb. “made insurrection’’), but in Lk 23 19.25
“sedition.” RV correctly renders ‘‘insurrection’’
throughout; also in Acts 24 5 “insurrections’’ for
AV “sedition.”


INTEGRITY, in-teg’ri-ti (OF, tém, WAR, tum-
mah): The tr of tom, “simplicity,” ‘soundness,’
“completeness,’’ rendered also “upright,” ‘“‘per-
fection.” Its original sense appears in the phrase
ltom (1 K 22 34; 2 Ch 18 33), “A certain man
drew his bow at a venture,’’ m ‘Heb, in his sim-
plicity’’ (cf 2 § 16 11, “in their simplicity’). It
is tr? “integrity” (Gen 20 5.6; 1 K 9 4; Ps 7 8;
95 21; 261.11; 41 12: 78 72; Prov 191; 20
7), in all which places it seems to carry the meaning
of simplicity, or sincerity of heart and intention,
truthfulness, uprightness. In the pl. (tummi%m) it
is one of the words on the breastplate of the high


priest (Ex 28 30; Dt 33 8; Ezr 2 63; Neh 7 65), -


one of the sacred lots, indicating, perhaps, ‘‘inno-
cence” or “integrity” (LXX alétheia). See URIM AND
Tsoummim. Another word tr? “integrity’’ istummah,
from tamam, ‘‘to complete,” “‘be upright,”’ “‘perfect,”’
only in Job 2 3.9; 27 5; 31 6; Prov 11 3.

The word ‘integrity’? does not occur in the NT,
but its equivalents may be seen in ‘“‘sincerity,’’
“truth,” the ‘pure heart,’’ the “‘single eye,” etc.
In the above sense of simplicity of intention it is
equivalent to being honest, sincere, genuine, and
is fundamental to true character.

W. L. Wacker

INTELLIGENCE, in-tel’i-gens (A, bin): Oc-
curs only once in AV as the tr of bin, “to dis-
criminate’ (frequently tr? “to understand’’), in
Dnl 11 30 AV, “fhe shall] have intelligence with
them that forsake the holy covenant,’? RV renders
“have regard unto them.” ‘Intelligence’? occurs
in 2 Macc 3 9 AV, in the sense of information (so


INTEND, in-tend’, INTENT, in-tent’: Early
Eng. words derived from Lat and used in AV,
sometimes in RV, to translate a number of different
expressions of the original.

Intend is sometimes used in Eng. in the literal
sense of Lat intendere, ‘to stretch,”’ but in the Eng.
Bible it is used only of the direction of the mind
toward an object. Sometimes it is used of mere
design (uéAkw, mélld), Acts 5 85 AV; 20 13; or
of desired action (6é\#, thélo), Lk 14 28 AV;
again of a fixed purpose (fovAcua, borlomai),
Acts 5 28; 12 4; or, finally, of a declared intention
(amar), Josh 22 33 AV; 2 Ch 28 13 AV.

Intent is used only of purpose, and is the tr some-
times of a conjunction (l*bha'dbhur), 2S 17 14;
(ema‘an),2 KK 10 19; (iva, hina), Eph 3 10; some-
times of an infinitive of purpose, 1 Cor 10 6; or of
a preposition with pronoun (els rofro, eis tovito), Acts
9 21, and sometimes of a subst. (Aédvw, légd), Acts
10 29. This variety of original expressions repre-
sented in the Eng. by single terms is an interesting
illustration of the extent of interpretation embodied
in our Eng. Bible.

RussELL BENJAMIN MiLLER

INTERCESSION, in-ter-sesh’un (732, pagha',
‘“o make intercession”; originally ‘‘to strike upon,”’


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1484


or “against’; then in a good sense, “to assail any-
one with petitions,” “to urge,” and when on behalf
of another, “to intercede” [Ruth 1 16; Jer 7 16;
27.18; Job 21 15; Gen 23 8; Isa 53 12; Jer
86 25]. A similar idea is found in évrevbts, én-
teuxis, used_as ‘‘petition,’ and in the NT “inter-
cession.” The Eng. word is derived from Lat
intercedo, “to come between,’’ which strangely has
the somewhat opposed meanings of “obstruct’’ and
“to interpose on behalf of’’ a person, and finally “to
intercede.” The growth of meaning in this word
in the various languages is highly suggestive. In
the Gr NT we find the word in 1 Tim 2 1; 4 5;
évruyxdve, entugchdnd, is also found in Rom 8
26-34):

Etymology and Meaning of Term in the OT and NT

TI. Man’s Intercession ror His Fevtow-Man
. Patriarchal Examples
. Intercessions of Moses
. The Progress of Religion, Seen in Moses’ In-
tercessions :
Intercessory Prayer in Israel’s Later History
The Rise of Official Intercession i
Samuel as an Intercessor as Judge, Priest aud
Prophet
. Intercession in the Poetic Books
. The Books of Wisdom
. The Prophets’ Succession to Moses and

Samuel

10. The Priest and Intercession
11. Intercession in the Gospels
12. Intercessory Prayers of the Church
13. Intercession Found in the Epistles
II. Invercession. Perrectep 1N CuHrist’s OFFICE
AND IN THE CHURCH
III. Intercession oF THE Hoty Spirit

The meaning of the word is determined by its

use in 1 Tim 2 1, “I exhort, therefore, first of all,

that supplications, prayers, interces-
Etymology sions, thanksgivings, be made for all
and Mean- men’’; where the different kinds of
ing of Term prayers appear to be distimguished.

Considerable discussion has arisen on
the exact meaning of these words. ‘Augustine refers
them to the liturgy of the Eucharist. This seems
to be importing the significance of the various parts
of the ceremony as observed at a time much later
than the date of the passage in question. ‘‘Suppli-
cations” and “prayers” refer to general and specific
petitions; ‘‘intercessions’’ will then have the mean-
ing of a request concerning others.

Intercession is prayer on behalf of another, and
naturally arises from the instinct of the human
heart—not merely prompted by affection and inter-
est, but recognizing that God’s relation to man is
not merely individual, but social. Religion thus
involves man’s relations to his fellow-man, just as
in man’s social position intercession with one on
behalf of another is a common incident, becoming,
in the development of society, the function of ap-
pointed officials; as in legal and courtly procedure,
so in religion, the spontaneous and affectionate
prayer to God on behalf of another grows into the
regular and orderly service of a duly appointed
priesthood. Intercession is thus to be regarded:
(1) as the spontaneous act of man for his fellow-
man; (2) the official act of developed sacerdotalism;
(3) the perfecting of the natural movement of hu-
manity, and the typified function of priesthood in
the intercession of Christ and the Holy Spirit.

I. Man’s Intercession for His Fellow-Man.—
Many such prayers are recorded in Scripture. The

sacrificial act of Noah may have been


1. Patri- partly of this nature, for it is followed
archal by a promise of God on behalf of the
Examples race and the earth at large (Gen 8 20-


22). Such also is Abraham’s prayer
for Ishmael (Gen 17 18); Abraham’s prayer for
Sodom (Gen 18 23-33); Abraham for Abimelech
(Gen 20 17). Jacob’s blessing of Joseph’s sons
is of the nature of intercession (Gen 48 8-23). His


1485


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Instruments .
Intercession


dying blessing of his sons is hardly to be regarded
as intercessory; itis, rather, declarative, although in
the case of Joseph it approaches intercession. The
absence of distinct intercessory prayer from Abra-
ham to Moses is to be observed, and shows how in-
tensely personal and individual the religious con-
sciousness was still in its undeveloped quality. In
Moses, however, the social element finds a further
development, and is interesting as taking up the
spirit of the Father of the Faithful. Moses is the
ereator of the national spirit. He lifts religion from
its somewhat selfish character in the patriarchal
life to the higher and wider plane of a national and
racial fellowship.
The progressive character of the Divine leading of
man is found thus in the development of the inter-
cessory spirit, e.g. Moses’ prayer for the
2. Inter- removal of plagues (Ex 15 25f); for
cessions of water at Rephidim (17 4); for victory
Moses over Amalek (17 8-16); prayer for
the people aftcr the golden calf (Ex
32 11-14.21-34; 33 12f); after the renewal of the
tables of stone (34 9); at the sctting forth and
stopping of the Ark (Nu 10 35f); after the burning
at Taberah (Nu 11 2); for the healing of Miriam’s
leprosy (12 13); after the return of the spies (14
13-19); after the destruction by serpents (Nu 21
7); for direction in the case of the daughters of
Zelophehad (27 5); for a successor (27 15); recital
of his prayer for the people for their entrance into
Canaan (Dt 3 23f); recital of his prayer for the
people after the worship of the golden calf (9 18 ff);
recital of prayers for the rebellious people (Dt 9
25-29); a command to him who pays his third-year
tithes to offer prayer for the nation (26 15); Moses’
final blessing of the tribes (Dt 33).
This extensive series of the intercessory prayers
of Moses forms a striking illustration of the growth
of religion, represented by the founder


3. The of the national life of Israel. It is the
Progress of history of an official, but it is also the
Religion history of a leader whose heart was


Seen in the filled with the intensest patriotism and


Interces- regard for his fellows. None of these
sions of prayers are perfunctory. They are
Moses the vivid and passionate utterances of


aman full of Divine enthusiasm and
human affection. They are real prayers wrung from
a great and devout soul on occasions of deep and
criticalimportance. Apart from their importance in
the history of Israel, they are a noble record of a
great leader of men and servant of God.


in the history of Joshua we find only the prayer for the
people after the sin of Achan (Josh 7 6-9), although the
communicators fom agoe to J opus are

. numerous. aint intercessory note may

4. Interces he heard in Dehorah's song (Jgs 5 31),
sory Prayer though itis almost silenced hy the stern and


in Later warlike tone of the poem. Gideon's prayer
History of seems to reécho something of the words of

Moses (Jgs 6 13), and accords with the na-
Israel tional and religious spirit of the great leader


who helped in the formation of the religious

life of his people (see Jgs 6 24), notwithstanding the

evident lower plane on which he stood (Jgs 8 27), which

may account partially for the apostasy after his death

(Jgs 8 331). Manoah's prayers (Jgs 13)

5. The Rise may he noted. (‘The satisfaction of Micah

of Official at securing a priest for his house, and the

* _ subsequent story, belong rather to the his-

Intercession tory of official intercession [Jgs 18; see

below], as also the inquiry of the people

through Phinehas at Shiloh qn 20 27f], and the peo-
ple’s mourning and prayer [Jes 21 2 f).)


Samuel is the real successor of Moses, and in
connection with his life intercession again appears
more distinct and effective. Hannah’s song, though
chiefly of thankfulness, is not without the inter-
cessory spirit (1 S 2 1-11). So also of Samuel’s
prayer at Mizpeh (1 S 7 5), and the recognition by
the people of Samuel’s place (1 5 7 8f; see also


8 6.21; 10 17-25; 12 19) (for the custom of in-
quiring of the Lord through a secr see 1 5 9 6-10);

Samuel’s prayer for Saul (1 8 15 11);
6. Samuel Saul’s failure to secure inquiry of God,
as an Inter- even through intercession (1 8 28 6);


cessor in Saul’s final appeal through the witch
His Func- of Endor (1 5S 28 7-20); David’s
tions as prayer to God (28 7 18); David’s
Judge, prayer for deliverance of the people
Priest and from pestilence (2 8 2417); Solo-
Prophet mon’s prayer for wisdom to govern the


people (1 K 3 5-15); Solomon’s prayer
at the dedication of the temple (1 K 8 12-61);
Jeroboam’s appeal to the man of God to pray for
the healing of his hand (1 K 13 6); Elijah’s prayer
for the widow’s son (1 K 17 20); Elijah’s prayer
for rain (1 K 18 42); HElisha’s praycr for the
widow’s son (2 K 4 33); Elisha’s prayer for the
opening of the young man’s eyes (2 K 6 17);
Hezekiah’s appeal to Isaiah (2 K 19 4); Hezc-
kiah’s prayer (2 K 19 14-19); Josiah’s command
for prayer concerning the “book that is found” (2 K
22 13). In Ch we find David’s prayer for his
house (1 Ch 17 16-27); David’s prayer for de-
liverance from the plague (21 17); Dada prayer
for the people and for Solomon at the offering of
gifts for the temple (29 10-19); Solomon’s prayer
at the consecration of the temple (2 Ch 6 1-42);
Asa’s prayer (14 11); Jehoshaphat’s prayer (2 Ch
20 5-13); Hezekiah’s prayer for the people who
had not prepared to eat the Passover (2 Ch 30 18);
Josiah’s command for prayer concerning the book
(34 21). In the Prophets we note Ezra’s prayer
(Ezr 9 5-15); Nehemiah’s prayer (Neh 1 5-11);
aa prayer of the Levites for the nation (Neh 9 4-
38).


The poetic books furnish a few examples of inter-
cessory prayer: Joh's intercession for his children (Joh
5); Job's regret at the absence of inter-

7. Inter- cession (Job 16 21); the Lord’s command


aS that Joh should pray for his friends (Joh 42
cession in 8). Itisremarkable that the references to
the Poetic intercession in the Pss are few; butit must
Books not he forgotten that the psaln is generally


a lyrical expression of an intense suhjective
c condition. This does not seem in the con-
sciousness of Israel to have reached an altruistic devel-
opment. The Pss express very powerfully the sense of
obligation to God, consciousness of sin, indignation
against the sin of others. Occasionally the patriotic
spirit leads to prayer for Israel; but only rarely does
any deep sense of interest in the welfare of others appear
to possess the hearts of Israel's singers. In Ps 12
there is a hint of the intercessory office of the Son, which
reflects, pernepe the growth of the Messianic spirit in
the mind of Isracl; Ps 20 is intercessional; it is the
prayer of a people for their king. In Ps 25 22 we find
a prayer for the redemption of Israel, as in Ps 28 9.
In Ps 35 13 the Psalmist refers to his intercession for
others. Butthe “ prayerreturned into mine own hosom,’’
and the final issue of the prayer hecomes rather denun-
ciatory than intercessional. The penitence of Ps 51
rises into a uote of prayer for the city (ver 18). Some-
times (Ps 60, and perhaps Ps 67), the prayer is not indi-
vidual hut for the community, though even there it is
hardly intercession. A common necessity makes a
common prayer. In Ps 69 there is the recognition of
the injury that folly and sin may do to others, and a kind
of compensatory note of intercession is heard. Ps 72
is regarded by some as the royal father's prayer for his
son and successor, but the reading of the title adopted
by RV takes even this psalm from the category of inter-
cession. In Asaph’s aschil (Ps 74), intercession is
more distinct; it is a prayer for the sanctuary and the
people in their desolation and calamity. Asaph appears
to have caught something of the spirit of Moses, as in
Ps 79 he again praysfor the deliverance of Jerus; while
a faint echo of the intercessory plea for the nation is
beard in Ethan's psalm (Ps 89). It sounds faintly in
Ps 106. In Ps 12 we seem to hreathe a larger and more
liberal spirit. It contains the appeal to pray for the peace
of Jerus (ver 6), as if the later thought of Israel had
begun to expand heyond the mere limits of personal
penitence, or desire for deliverance, or denunciation of
the enemy. In one of the Songs of Degrees (Ps 125),
there is the somewhat severely ethical prayer: ‘‘Do
good, O Jch, unto these that are good.” ‘The yearning
for the salvation of man as man has not yet heen born.
The Christ must come before the fulness of Divine love
is shed abroad in the hearts even of the pious. This


.Intercession
Inter. of Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1486


comparative ahsence of intercessory prayer from the
service-book of Israel, and its collected expressions of
spiritual experience, is instructive.
references to those who needed prayer; hut for the most
part these references are descriptive of their wickedness,
or denunciatory of their hostility to the Psalmist. The
Book of Pss is thus a striking commentary on the growth
of Israel's spiritual life. Intense as it is in its perception
of God and His claim on human righteousness, it is only
when the supreme revelation of Divine love and the
regard for universal man has appeared in the person of
Our Lord that the large and loving spirit which inter-
cession signifies is found in the experience and expressions
of the pious.

In the Wisdom hooks there is little, if any, reference to


intercession. But they deal rather with ethical char-
acter, and often on a merely providential
8 The and utilitarian hasis. Itis noticeable that
Wisdom the only reference to Pleading a cause is said
to he hy the Lord Himself as against the
Books injustice of man (Prov 22 23): “Jeh will


plead their (the poor’s] cause."” Action on
behalf of others does not appear to have heen very
highly regarded hy the current ethics of the Israelite.
A kind of negative heipfulness is indicated in Prov 24


28: ‘‘Be not a witness against thy neighhor without’


cause”; and it is significant that the office of advocate
was not known among the Jews until they had come
under the authority of Rome, when, not knowing the
forms of Rom law, they were ohliged to secure the aid
of a Rom lawyer hefore the courts. Such practitioners
were found in the provinces (Cic. pre Coelie c. 30);
Tertullus (Acts 24 1) was such an advocate,


In the prophetical books the note of intercession


reappears. The prophet, though primarily a mes-

senger from God to man, has also
9. The something of the character of the inter-
Prophets’ cessor (see Isaiah’s call, Isa 6). Isa
Succession 25,26 exhibit the intercessory char-
to Moses __ acteristics. The request of Heac-


and Samuel kiah for the prayers of Isaiah (Isa

37 4), and the answer of the Lord
implied in ver 6, recall the constantly recurring
service of Moses to the people. Hezekiah himself
becomes an intercessor (vs 14-21). In Jer 4 10
intercession is mingled with the words of the messen-
ger. The sin of the people hinders such prayers as
were offered on their behalf (Jer 7 16; cf 11 14;
14 11). Intercessory prayers are found in Jer 10
23 ff; 14 7 ff.19-22. The message of Zedekiah re-
questing Jeremiah’s help is perhaps an instance of
seer-inquiry as much as intercession (Jer 21 1f;
ef 18 919). In Jer 42 4, the prophet consents
to the request of Johanan to seek the Lord on behalf
of the people. The Book of Lam is naturally con-
ceived in a more constantly recurring spirit of inter-
cession. In the prophecies Jeremiah has been the
messenger of God to the people. But, after the ca-
tastrophe, in his sorrow he appeals to God for mercy
upon them (Lam 2 20; 6 1.19). Ezekiel in the
same way is rather the seer of visions and the pro-
phetic representative of God. Yet at times he
appeals to God for the people (Ezk 9 8; 11 13).
In Dnl we find the intercession of his three friends
sought for in order to secure the revelation of the
king’s dream (Dnl 2 17); and Daniel’s prayer for
Jerus and her people (Dnl 9 16-19).

In the Minor Prophets intercession rarely appears;
even in the graphic pictures of Jonah, though the
work itself shows the enlarging of the conception
of God’s relation to humanity outside of Israel, the
prophet himself exhibits no tenderness and utters
no pleas for the city against which he had been sent
to prophesy, and receives the implied rebuke from
the Lord for his want of sympathy, caring more for
the perished gourd than for the vast population of
Nineveh, whom the Lord, however, pitied and
spared (Jon 4). Even the sublime prayer of Hab
8 has only a suggestion of intercession. Zec 6 13
relieves the general severity of the prophetic mes-
sage, consisting of the threatenings of judgment,
by the gleam of the promise of a royal priest whose
office was partially that of an intercessor, though
the picture is darkened by the character of the


We find continued ~


priesthood and the people, whose services had heen
selfish, without mercy and compassion (Zec 7 4.7).
Now the spirit of tenderness, the larger nature, the
loving heart, are to be restored to Israel (Zec 8 16-
23). Other nations than Israel will share in the
mercy of God. In Mal 2 7 we find the priest
rebuked for the loss of his intercessory character.

How far intercession was regarded as a special
duty of the priesthood it is not very easy to

determine. The priestly office_itself
10. The was undoubtedly intercessory. In the
Priest and offering of the sacrifice even for the
Intercession individual, and certainly in the nation-

al functions, both of the regular and
the occasional ceremonies, the priest represented the
individual or the community. In Joel 2 17 the
priests are distinctly hidden to “weep between the
porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy
people, O Jeh.’ Mal 19 appeals to them for
intercession to God, and the graphic scene in 1 Mace
7 33-38 shows the priests interceding on behalf of
the people against Nicaner.

In the NT, all prayer necessarily takes a new form
from its relation to Our Lord, and in this inter-

cessory prayer shares. At the outset,
11. Inter- Christ teaches prayer on behalf of
cession in those “which despitefully use you”
the Gospels (Mt 5 44 AV). How completely does

this change the entire spirit of prayer!
We breathe a new atmosphere of the higher revela-
tion of love. The Lord’s Prayer (Mt 6 9-13) is
of this character. Its initial word is social, do-
mestic; prayer is the address of children to the
Father. Even though some of the petitions are not
original, yet their place in the prayer, and the general
tone of the Master’s teaching, exhibit the social and
altruistic spirit, not so pervasive of the older dis-
pensation. ‘Thy kingdom come’ leads the order
of petitions, with its essentially intercessory char-
acter. The forgiveness of others, which is the
measure and plea of our own forgiveness, brings even
those who have wronged us upon the same plane
as ourselves, and if the plea be genuine, how can
we refuse to pray for them? And if for our enemies,
then surely for our friends. In Mt 7 11f, the
good things sought of the Father are to be inter-
preted as among those that if we desire from others
we should do to them. And from this spirit the
intercessory prayer cannot be absent. We find the
spirit of intercession in the pleas of those who sought
Christ’s help for their friends, which He was always
so quick to recognize: the centurion for his servant
(Mt 8 13); the friends of the paralytic (Mt 9 2-6),
where the miracle was wrought on the ground of the
friends’ faith. Of a similar character are the re-
quests of the woman for her child and the Lord’s
response (Mt 15 28); of the man for his lunatic
son (17 14-21). There is the suggestion of the
intercessory spirit in the law of trespass, specifically
followed by the promise of the answer to the prayer
of the two or three, agreed and in fellowship (Mt
18 15-20), with the immediately attached precepts
of forgiveness (vs 21-35). A remarkable instance
of intercession is recorded in Mt 20 20-23, where
the mother of Zebedee’s sons makes a request on
behalf of her children; the added expression, ‘‘wor-
shipping him,” raises the occasion into one of inter-
cessory prayer. Our Lord’s rebuke is not to the
prayer, but to its unwisdom.

It is needless to review the cases‘ in the other
Gospels. But the statement of Mk 6 5f, that
Christ could not perform mighty works because of
unbelief, sheds a flood of light upon one of the im-
portant conditions of successful intercession, when
contrasted with the healing conditioned by the
faith of others than the healed. One of the most
distinct. examples of intercessory prayer is that of


1487


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Intercession
Inter. of Christ


the Lord’s intercession for Peter (Lk 22 31 f), and
for those who crucified Him (Lk 23 34). The place
of intercession in the work of Christ is seen clearly
in Our Lord’s intercessory prayer (see INTERCESSION
oF Curist), where it is commanded by definite
precept and promise of acceptance. The promise
of the answer to prayer in the name of Christ is very
definite (Jn 16 24). Christ’s high-priestly prayer
is the sublimest height of prayer to God and is inter-
cessory throughout (Jn 17); Jn 16 26 does not,
as some have held, deny His intercession for His
disciples; it only throws open the approach to God

Himself. ‘
Acts introduces us to the working of the fresh ele-
ments which Christ gave to life. Hence the prayers
of the church becomeChristian prayers,


12. Inter- involving the wider outlook on others
cessory and on the world at large which Chris-
Prayers tianity has bestowed on men. The
of the prayer of the assembled believers upon
Church the liberation of the apostles breathes


this spirit (Acts 4 24-80). The con-
secrating prayer for the seven was probably inter-
cessory (Acts 6 6; cf Acts 1 24). How pathetic
is the plea of Stephen for his murderers (Acts 7 60)!
How natural is intercession (Acts 8 24)! Peter at
Joppa (Acts 9 40); the church making prayer with-
out ceasing for Peter (Acts 12 5.12); the prayer for
Barnabas and Saul at Antioch (Acts 13 3); Paul
and Barnabas praying for the churches (Acts 14 23);
the church at Antioch commending Paul and Silas
to the grace of God (Acts 15 40); Paul and the
elders of Ephesus (Acts 20 36), are all examples,
more or less defined, of intercessory prayer.


In the Epp. ‘we may expect to find intercession more
distinctly ed with the relation of prayer through


ae Sela satey us many Sarita ne
is Epp.: for the Romans (Rom ; the
13. Inter- Spirit's interceding (8 27); Paul's prayer
cession for his race (10 1); hisrequest for prayers
Found in (15 30); the help that he found from the


: rayer of his friends (2 Cor 1 11); prayer

the Epistles nes the Corinthian church (2 Cor 13 7);

for the Ephesians (Eph 1_16—23; 3 14-

21; see also Eph 6 18; Phil 1 3-11.19; Col 1 3.9; 4 3;

1 Thess 1 2; 5 23.25; 2 Thess 1 2); a definite com-

mand that intercession be made for all men and for kings

and those in authority (1 Tim 2 1.2); his prayer for

Timothy (2 Tim 1 3); for Philemon (ver 4); and prayer

to be offered for the sick by the elders of the church
(Jas § 14-18: see also He 18 18-21; 1 Jn § 14 ff).


I. Intercession Perfected in Christ’s Office and
in the Charch.—This review of the intercession of
the Scriptures prepares us for the development of
a specific office of intercession, perfectly realized
in Christ. We have seen Moses complying with
the people’s request to represent them before God.
In a large and generous spirit the leader of Israel
intercedes with God for his nation. It was natural
that this striking example of intercessory prayer
should be followed by other leaders, and that the
gradually developed system of religious worship
should furnish the conception of the priest, and esp.
the high priest, as the intercessor for those who came
to the sacrifice. This was particularly the signifi-
cance of the great Day of Atonement, when after
offering for himself, the high priest offered the sac-
rificeforthe whole people. Thisofficial act, however,
does not do away with the intercessory character
of prayer as offered by men. We have seen how it
runs through the whole history of Israel. But
it is found much more distinctly in the Christian
life and apparently in the practice of the Chris-
tian assembly itself. Paul continually refers to his
own intercessory prayers, and seeks for a similar
service on his own behalf from those to whom he
writes. Intercession is thus based upon the natural
tendency of the heart filled by love and a deep sym-
pathetic sense of relation to others. Christ’s inter-
-cessory prayer is the highest example and pattern


of this form of prayer. His intercessions for His
disciples, for His crucifiers, are recorded, and the
sacred record rises to the supreme height in the
prayer of Jn 17. In this prayer the following char-
acteristics are to be found: (1) It is based upon the
intimate relation of Jesus to the Father. This
gives to such prayer its justification; may it be said,
its right. (2) It follows the completest fulfilment
of duty. It is not the mere expression of desire,
even for others. It is the crown of effort on their
behalf. He has revealed God to His disciples. He
has given to them God’s words; therefore He prays
for them (Jn 17 6.7-9). (8) It recognizes the Di-
vine, unbroken relation to the object of the prayer:
“T am no more in the world, and these are in the
world, and I come to Thee. Holy Father, keep,”
etc (ver 11). (4) The supreme end of the prayer
is salvation from the evil of the world (ver 15).
(5) The wide sweep of the prayer and its chief ob-
jects—unity with God, and the presence with Christ,
and the indwelling of the Divine love. The prayer
is a model for all intercessory prayer. See, further,
InrERcEsSION oF CuRistT; PRAYERS OF CHRIST;
OFFrices oF CHRIST.

IH, Intercession of the Holy Spirit.—In connec-
tion with the subject of intercession, there arises a
most interesting question as to whether the Holy
Spirit is not presented in Scriptures as an inter-
cessor. The text in which the doctrine seems to be
taught is that of Rom 8 26f: “In like manner the
Spirit also helpeth our infirmity: for we know not
how to pray as we ought; but the Spirit himself
maketh intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered; and he that searcheth the hearts
knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he
maketh intercession for the saints according, to the
will of God.” By far the larger number of exposi-
tors have understood by the Spirit, the Holy Spirit.
The older commentators, in general, refer to the
Holy Spirit. Tholuck, Ewald, Philippi, Meyer,
most of the Amer. theologians and Eng. commenta-
tors, as Shedd, Alford, Jowett, Wordsworth, inter-
pret it in the same way. Lange and Olshausen
refer it to the human spirit. Undoubtedly the
“groanings” have led_to the denial of the reference
to the Holy Spirit. But the very form of the word
tr? “helpeth’’ indicates coédperation, and this must
be of something other than the spirit of man him-
self. The undoubted difficulties of the passage,
which are strongly urged by Lange (see Lange’s
Comm. on Rom 8 26), must be acknowledged. At
the same time the statement seems to he very clear
and definite. An explanation has been given that
the Holy Spirit is here referred to as dwelling in us,
and thus making intercession. The Divine Spirit
is said to be a Spirit of supplication (Zec 12 10).
The distinction which is made between the inter-
cession of Christ in heaven in His priestly office
and that of the Holy Spirit interceding within the
souls of believers, referred to by Shedd (see Comm.
on Rom), woust be carefully used, for if pressed to its
extreme it would lead to the materialization and
localization of the Divine nature. Moreover, may
not the intercession of Our Lord be regarded as
being partially exemplified in that of the Spirit
whom He has declared to be His agent and repre-
sentative? If Christ dwells in believers by His
Spirit, His intercession, esp. if subjective in and with
their spirits, may properly be descrihed as the inter-
cession of the Holy Ghost. Lu. D. Bevan


INTERCESSION OF CHRIST: The general con-
ception of Our Lord’s mediatorial office is specially
suramed up in His intercession in which He appears
in His high-priestly office, and also as interceding
with the Father on behalf of that humanity whose
cause He had espoused.


Inter. of Christ
Interpretation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1488


The function of priesthood as developed under
Judaism involved the position of mediation be-
tween man and God. The priest
1. Christ’s represented man, and on man’s behalf
Intercession approached God; thus he offered sacri-
Viewed in fice, interceded and gave to the offerer
Its Priestly whom he represented the benediction
Aspect and expression of the Divine accept-
ance. (For the various forms of these
offerings, see special articles.) As in sacrifice, so
in the work of Christ, we find the proprietary rights
of the offerer in the sacrifice. For man, Christ as
one with man, and yet in His own personal right,
offers Himself (see Rom 5; and cf Gal 4 5 with
He 2 11). There was also the transfer of guilt
and its conditions, typically by laying the hand on
the head of the animal, which then bore the sins of
the offerer and was presented to God by the priest.
The acknowledgment of sin and the surrender to
God is completely fulfilled in Christ’s offering of
Himself, and His death (cf Lev 3 2.8.18; 16 21;
with Isa 538 6; 2 Cor 5 21). Our Lord’s inter-
cessory quality in the sacrifice of Himself is not only
indicated by the imputation of guilt to Him as
representing the sinner, but also in the victory of
His life over death, which is then given to man in
God’s acceptance of His representative and sub-
stitute.

In the Ep. to the He, the intercessory character
of Our Lord’s high-priestly office is transferred to
the heavenly condition and work of Christ, where
the relation of Christ’s work to man’s condition is
regarded as being still continued in the heavenly
place (see He 9 11-28). This entrance into heaven
is once for all, and in the person of the high priest
the way is open to the very presence of God. From
one point of view (He 10 12) the priestly service
of the Lord was concluded and gathered up into
His kingly office (vs 13.14-18). But from another
point of view, we ourselves are bidden to enter into
the Holiest Place; as if in union with Christ we too
become a kingly priesthood (He 10 19-22; and
cf 1 Pet 2 9).

It must not be forgotten, however, that this right
of entrance into the most Holy Place is one that
depends entirely upon our vital union with Christ,
He appears in heaven for us and we with Him, and
in this sense He fulfils the second duty of His high-
priestly office as intercessor, with the added con-
ception drawn from the legal advocacy of the Rom
court. The term tr? “Advocate” in 1 Jn 2 2 is
mapdkrnros, pardklétos, which in Jn 14 16 is tr4
“Comforter.” The word is of familiar use in Gr
for the legal advocate or patronus who appeared
ou behalf of his client. Thus, in the double sense
of priestly and legal representative, Our Lord is our
intercessor in Heaven.

Of the modes in which Christ carries ont His inter-
cessory office, we can have no knowledge except so
far as we may fairly deduce them from the phrase-
ology and suggested ideas of Scripture. As high
priest, it may surely be right for us to aid our weak
faith by assuring ourselves that Our Lord pleads
for us, while at the same time we must be careful
not to deprave our thought concerning the glorified
Lord by the metaphors and analogies of earthly
relationship.

The intercessory work of Christ may thus_be
represented: He represents man before God in His
perfect nature, His exalted office and His completed
work. The Scripture word for this is (He 9 24)
“to appear before the face of God for us.” There
is also an active intercession. This is the office of
Our Lord as advocate or paraklétos. That this
conveys some relation to the aid which one who has
broken the law receives from an advocate cannot
be overlooked, and we find Christ’s intercession in


this aspect brought into connection with the texts
which refer to justification and its allied ideas (see
Rom 8 34; 1 Jn 2 1). i
In Prayers or Curist (q.v.), the intercessory
character of many of Our Lord’s prayers, and esp.
that of Jn 17, is considered. And it
2. Christ's has been impossible for Christian
Intercessory thought to divest itself of the idea
Work from that the heavenly intercession of Christ
the Stand- is of the order of prayer. It is im-
point of possible for us to know; and even if
Prayer Christ now prays to the Father, it can
be in no way analogous to earthly
prayers. The thought of some portion of Christen-
dom distinctly combined prayer in the heavenly work
of the Lord. There is danger in extreme views.
Scriptural expressions must not be driven too far,
and, on the other hand, they must not be emptied
of all their contents. Modern Protestant teaching
has, in its protest against a merely physical concep-
tion of Our Lord’s state and occupation in heaven,
almost sublimed reality from His intercessory work.
In Lutheran teaching the intercession of Our Lord
was said to be “‘vocal,”’ “‘verbal” and “oral.” It has
been well remarked that such forms of prayer re-
quire flesh and blood, and naturally the teachers of
the Reformed churches, for the most part, have con-
tented themselves (as for example Hodge, Syst.
Theol., II, 593) with the declaration that ‘‘the
intercession of Christ includes: (1) His appearing
before God in our behalf, as the sacrifice for our
sins, as our high priest, on the ground of whose
work we receive the remission of our sins, the gift
of the Holy Spirit, and all needed good; (2) de-
fence against the sentence of the law and the charges
of Satan, who is the great accuser; (3) His offering
Himself as onr surety, not only that the demands of
justice shall be shown to be satisfied, but that His
people shall be obedient and faithful; (4) the obla-
tion of the persons of the redeemed, sanctifying
their prayers, and all their services, rendering them
acceptable to God, through the savor of his own
merits.” :

Even this expression of the elements which con-
stitute the intercession of the Lord, cautions and
spiritual as it is in its application to Christian
thought and worship, must be carefully guarded
from a too complete and materialistic use. With-
out this care, worship and devont thought may
become degraded and fall into the mechanical forms
by which Onr Lord’s position of intercessor has
been reduced to very little more than an imaginative
and spectacular process which goes on in some
heavenly place. It must not be forgotten that the
metaphorical and symbolic origin of the ideas which
constitute Christ’s intercession is always in danger
of dominating and materializmg the spiritual real-
ity of His intercessional office. Lu. D. BEvAN


INTEREST, in’tér-est (JWJ, neshekh, NWO,
mashsha’; téKos, t6kos): The Heb word neshekh is
from a root which means ‘‘to bite’; thus interest is
“something bitten off.” The other word, mashsha’,
means “lending on interest.”’ The Gr term is from
the root tikté, ‘to produce” or “beget,”’ hence in-
terest is something begotten or produced by moncy.
The Heb words are usually tr¢ “usury,” but this
meant the same as interest, all interest being reck-
oned as usury.

Long before Abraham’s time money had been
loaned at a fixed rate of interest in Babylonia and
almost certainly in Egypt. The CH gives regula-
tions regarding the lending and borrowing of money,
the usual interest being 20 per cent. Sometimes
it was only 112 and 134, as shown by contract tab-
lets. In one case, if the loan was not paid in two
months, 18 per cent interest would be charged.


1489


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Inter. of Christ
Interpretation


Corn, dates, onions, etc, were loaned at interest.
Thus Moses and Israel would be familiar with com-
mercial loans and interest. In Israel there was no
system of credit or commercial loans in Moses’ time
and after. A poor man borrowed because he was
poor. The law of Moses (Ex 22 25) forbade loan-
ing at interest. There was to be no creditor and no
taker of interest among them (Lev 25 36.37). Dt
permits them to lend on interest to a foreigner
(Dt 23 19.20), but not to a brother Israelite. That
this was considered the proper thing in Israel for
centuries is seen in Ps 15 5, while Prov 28 8 im-
plies that it was an unusual thing, interest being
generally exacted and profit made. Ezekiel con-
demns it as a heinous sin (Ezk 18 8.13.17) and holds
up the ideal of righteousness as not taking interest
(22 12). Isa 24 2 implies that it was a business
in that age, the lender and borrower being social
types. Jeremiah implies that there was not always
the best feeling between lenders and borrowers
(16 10). According to Neh 6 7.10, rich Jews were
lending to others and exacting heavy interest. Ne-
hemiah condemns such conduct and forbids its con-
tinuance, citing himself as an example of lending
without interest. The lenders restored 1 per cent
of that exacted.
In the NT, references to interest occur in the
parable of the Pounds (Lk 19 23) and of the Talents
(Mt 25 27). Here the men were expected to put


their master’s money out at interest, and condem-


nation followed the failure to do so. Thus the
principle of receiving interest is not condemned in
the OT, only it was not to be taken from a brother
Israelite. In the NT it is distinctly encouraged.
See also Usury. J. J. REEvE


INTERMEDDLE, in-tér-med”l (A9Y, ‘arabh,
“to mix up [self] with something,” “mingle in,”
“share,” ‘take interest in”): The word occurs only
once (Prov 14 10) in a passage descriptive of “‘the
ultimate solitude of each man’s soul at all times.”
“The heart knoweth its own bitterness.”


‘‘Nor even the tenderest heart, and next our own,
Knows half the reasons why we smile and sigh.”


(Cf1 K 8 38.) Something thereis in every sorrow
which no one else can share. “And a stranger doth
not intermeddle with its joy,” not necessarily in an
interfering or any offensive way, but simply does
not share or take any interest in the other’s joy.

For “intermeddleth with’ (Prov 18 1 AV), RV
gives ‘“rageth against” (m ‘‘quarrelleth with”).

M. O. Evans

INTERMEDIATE, in-tér-mé’di-at, STATE. See

EscuatoLoey or THE NT.


INTERPRETATION, in-tir-pré-ta’shun: Is a
generic term and may refer to any work of litera-
ture. Referred specifically to the sacred

1. General Scriptures, the science of interpretation
Principles is generally known as hermencutics,
while the practical application of the

principles of this science is exegesis. In nearly all
cases, interpretation has in mind the thoughts of
another, and then, further, these thoughts expressed
in another language than that of the interpreter. In
this sense it is used in Bib. research. A person has
interpreted the thoughts of another when he has
in his own mind a correct reproduction or photo-
graph of the thought as it was conceived in the mind
of the original writer or speaker. It is accordingly
a purely reproductive process, involving no origi-
nality of thought on the part of the interpreter. If
the latter adds anything of his own it is etsegesis
and not exegesis. The moment the Bible student
has in his own mind what was in the mind of the
author or authors of the Bib. books when these


were written, he has interpreted the thought of the
Scriptures.

The interpretation of any specimen of literature
will depend on the character of the work under
consideration. A piece of poetry and a chapter of
history will not be interpreted according to the same
principles or rules. Particular rules that.are legiti-
mate in the explanation of a work of fiction would
be entirely out of place in dealing with a record of
facts. Accordingly, the rules of the correct inter-
pretation of the Scriptures will depend upon the
character of these writings themselves, and the
principles which an interpreter will employ in his
interpretation of the Scriptures will be in harmony
with his ideas of what the Scriptures arc as to origin,
character, history, etc. In the nature of the case
the dogmatical stand of the interpreter will mate-
rially influence his hermeneutics and exegesis. In
the legitimate sense of the term, every interpreter
of the Bible is “prejudiced,” i.e. is guided by certain
principles which he holds antecedently to his work
of interpretation. If the modern advanced. critic
is right in maintaining that the Bib. books do not
differ in kind or character from the religious books
of other ancient peoples, such as the Indians or the
Persians, then the same principles that he applies
in the case of the Rig Veda or the Zend Avesta he
will employ also in his exposition of the Scriptures.
If, on the other hand, the Bible is for him a unique
collection of writings, Divinely inspired and a reve-
lation from the source of all truth, the Bible student
will hesitate long before accepting contradictions,
errors, mistakes, etc, in the Scriptures.

The Scriptures are a Divine and human product
combined. That the holy men of God wrote as
they were moved by the Spirit is the
claim of the Scriptures themselves.
Just where the line of demarkation is
to be drawn between the human and
the Divine factors in the production of the sacred
Scriptures materially affects the principles of inter-
preting these writings (see NsPiration). That the
human factor was sufliciently potent to shape the
form of thought in the Scriptures is evident on all
hands. Paul does not write as Peter does, nor John
as James; the individuality of the writer of the
different books appears not only in the style, choice
of words, etc, but in the whole form of thought also.
There are such things as a Pauline, a Johannine
and a Petrine type of Christian thought, although
there is only one body of Christian truth under-
lying all types. In so far as the Bible is exactly
like other books, it must be interpreted as we do
other works of literature. The Scriptures are
written in Heb and in Gr, and the principles of
forms and of syntax that would apply to the ex-
planation of other works written in these lan-
guages and under these circumstances must be
applied to the OT and NT also. Again, the Bible
is written for men, and its thoughts are those of
mankind and not of angels or creatures of a differ-
ent or higher spiritual or intellectual character;
and accordingly there is no specifically Bib. logic,
or rhetoric, or grammar. The laws of thought and
of the interpretation of thought in these matters
pertain to the Bible as they do to other writings.

But in regard to the material contents of the
Scriptures, matters are different and the principles
of interpretation must be different. God is the
author of the Scriptures which He has given through
human agencies. Hence the contents of the
Scriptures, to a great extent, must be far above the
ordinary concepts of the human mind. When
John declares that God so loved the world that He
gave His only begotten Son to redeem it, the inter-
preter does not do justice to the writer if he finds
in the word “God” only the general philosophical


2. Special
Principles


Interpretation
Ir-ha-heres


4 é
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1490


conception of the Deity and not that God who is
our Father through Christ; for it was the latter
thought that was in the mind of the writer when he
penned these words. Thus, too, it is a false inter-
pretation to find in “Our Father’ anything but
this specifically Bib. conception of God, nor is it
possible for anybody but a believing Christian to
utter this prayer (Mt 6 9) in the sense which Christ,
who taught it to His disciples, intended.

Again, the example of Christ and His disciples
in their treatment of the OT teaches the principle
that the tpse dizit of a Scriptural passage is to be
interpreted as decisive as to its meaning. In the
about 400 citations from the OT found in the NT,
there is not one in which the mere “It is written”
is not regarded as settling its meaning. Whatever
may be a Bible student’s theory of inspiration, the
teachings and the examples of interpretation found
in the Scriptures are in perfect harmony in this
matter.

These latter facts, too, show that in the inter-
pretation of the Scriptures principles must be ap-
plied that are not applicable in the explanation of
other books. As God is the author of the Scrip-
tures He may have had, and, as a matter of fact, m
certain cases did have in mind more than the human
agents through whom He spoke did themselves
understand. The fact that, in the NT, persons
like Aaron and David, institutions like the law,
the sacrificial system, the priesthood and the like,
are interpreted as typical of persons and things
under the New Covenant shows that the true
significance, e.g. of the Levitical system, can he
found only when studied in the light of the NT
fulfilment.

Again, the principle of parallelism, not for illus-
trative but for argumentative purposes, is a rule
that can, in the nature of the case, be applied to the
interpretation of the Scriptures alone and not else-
where. As the Scriptures represent one body of
truth, though in a kaleidoscopic variety of forms,
a statement on a particular -subject in one place
can be accepted as in harmony with a statement on
the same subject elsewhere. In short, in all of
those characteristics in which the Scriptures are
unlike other literary productions, the principles
of interpretation of the Scriptures must also be
unlike those employed in other cases.

Owing chiefly to the dogmatical basis of her-
meneutics as a science, there has been a great di-
vergence of views in the history of the
church as to the proper methods of
interpretation. It is one of the char-
acteristic and instructive features of
the NT writers that they absolutely refrain from the
allegorical method of interpretation current in those
times, particularly in the writings of Philo. Not
even Gal 4 22, correctly understood, is an excep-
tion, since this, if an allegorical interpretation at
all, is an argumentum ad hominem. The sober and
grammatical method of interpretation in the NT
writers stands out, too,in bold and creditable con-
trast to that of the early Christian exegetes, even
of Origen. Only the Syrian fathers seemed to be
an exception to the fantasies of the allegorical
methods. The Middle Ages produced nothing
new in this sphere; but the Reformation, with its
formal principle that the Bible and the Bible alone
is the rule of faith and life, made the correct gram-
matical interpretation of the Scriptures practically
a matter of necessity. In modern times, not at all
prolific in scientific discussions of hermeneutical
principles and practices, the exegetical methods of
different interpreters are chiefly controlled by their
views as to the origin and character of the Scrip-
tural books, particularly in regard to their inspi-
ration.


8. Histori-
cal Data


Lrrsraturs.—Terry, Bib. Hermeneutics, New York,
1884. Here the literature is fully given, as also in Weid-
ner’s Theol. Enc, I, 266 ff.

G. H. ScuonpE


INTERPRETATION OF TONGUES. See
Tonauzs, INTERPRETATION OF.


INTERROGATION, in-tér-d-ga’shun (éepdrypa,
eperéteéma): This word is not found at all in
AV, and once only in ARV (1 Pet 3 21), where
it replaces the word “answer” of AV. This change
according to Alford and Bengel is correct. ‘The
interrogation of a good conscience’ may refer to
the question asked of a convert before baptism (cf
Acts 8 37), or the appeal of the convert to God (ef
1 Jn 8 20-21). The opportunity to do this was
given in baptism.


INTER-TESTAMENTAL, _in-tér-tes-ta-men’tal,
HISTORY AND LITERATURE. See Between
THE TESTAMENTS.


INTREAT, in-trét’, INTREATY, in-trét’i (EN-
TREAT): The two forms are derived from the same
vb. In 1611 the spelling was indifferently ‘in-
treat” or ‘“entreat.”’ In editions of AV since 1760
‘“Gntreat’’ is used in the sense of “to beg’; ‘‘en-
treat’’ in the sense of ‘deal with.” As examples of
‘“Gntreat’’? see Ex 8 8, “Intreat the Lord” (¢é‘ak);
Ruth 1 16, “Intreat me not to leave thee” (pagha‘) ;
2 Cor 8 4, ‘praying us with much intreaty” (wapd-
Kdynows, pardklésis). In Gen 25 21 “intreat’’ is
used to indicate the success of a petition. For
entreat see Gen 12 16, “He entreated Abraham
well’; Acts 27 3, “And Julius courteously en-
treated Paul’ (¢:AavOpadrws xpyodueros, philanthré-
pis chrésémenos, lit. “to use in a philanthropic
way’’); cf also Jas 3 17, where edredys, eupeithés,
lit. “easily persuaded,” is tr4 ‘‘easy to be entreated.”’

RV changes all passages of AV where “intreat’’ is
found to “entreat,’’ with the exception of those
mentioned helow. The meaning of “entreat’’ is
“to ask,’’ “to beseech,” “to supplicate”’: Job 19 17
reads ‘“‘and my supplication to the children” (han-
néthi, AV “though I intreated for the children,”
RVm “I make supplication”). Jer 15 11 reads, “I
will cause the enemy to make supplication” (Azph-
ga‘tt), instead, AV “I will cause the enemy to en-
treat”? (RVm “TI will intercede for thee with the
enemy’). 1 Tim 51 changes AV “intreat”’ to
“exhort.” Phil 4 3 renders AV “entreat’’ by “be-
seech.”’ Russett BensamMin Mitier


INWARD, in’wérd, MAN: A Pauline term,
nearly identical with the “hidden man of the heart”’
(1 Pet 34). The Gr original, 6 Zow (also Zow6er)
dvopwros, ho és6 (ésdthen) dnthrapos (Rom 7 22) is
lexigraphically defined “the internal man,” i.e.
“soul,” “conscience.” It is the immaterial part
of man—mind, spirit—in distinction from the “out-
ward man” which “perishes’ (2 Cor 4 16 AV).
As the seat of spiritual influences it is the sphere in
which the Holy Spirit does His renewing and saving
work (Eph 3 16). The term “inward man’ can-
not be used interchangeably with “the new man,”
for it may still be ‘corrupt,’ and subject to “vanity”
and “alienated from the life of God.” Briefly
stated, it is mind, soul, spirit—God’s image in man—
man’s higher nature, intellectual, moral, and spirit-
ual. Dwicet M. Prarr


INWARD PART: A symbolic expression in the
OT represented by three Heb words: VI , hedher,
“chamber,”’ hence inmost bowels or breast; ming,
tuhath, “the reins”; 2, kerebh, “midst,” “middle,”
hence heart. Once in the NT (Zowfev, ésathen,
‘from within,” Lk 11 39). The viscera (heart,


1491


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Interpretation
Ir-ha-heres


liver, kidneys) were supposed by the ancients to be
the seat of the mind, feelings, affections: the high-
est organs of the psyche, ‘the soul.’ The term in-
cludes the intellect (“wisdom in the inward parts,”
Job 38 36); the moral nature (“inward part is very
wickedness,” Ps 5 9); the spiritual (“my law in
their inward parts,’ Jer 31 33). Its adverbial
equivalent in Bib. use is “inwardly.” INwarp
Man (q.v.) is identical in meaning.
: Dwicat M. Prarr

IOB, yob (AN, yobh; AV Job): Third son of
Issachar (Gen 46 13). In || passages (Nu 26 24;
1 Ch 7 1) the name is Jashub (270), yashabh),
wale the VSS in Gen also support as the correct
orm.


IPHDEIAH, if-dé’ya (A1D", yiphdeyah, “Jeh
redeems’’; AV Iphedeiah): A descendant of Benja-
min (1 Ch 8 25).


IPHTAH, if’ta (TMD", yiphtah; AV Jiphtah):
An unidentified town in the Shephelah of Judah,
named with Libnah, Ether and Ashan (Josh 16 43).


IPHTAH-EL, if’ta-el (NMED, yiphiah-él;
AV Jiphtah-el): The valley of Iphtah-el lay on
the N. border of Zebulun (Josh 19 14.27). N.W.
of the plain of el-Battauf stands a steep hill, con-
nected only by a low saddle with the hills on the
N. Thename Tell Jéfat suggests the Jotapata of
Jos (BJ, III, vi, i; vii, i, etc), and the place answers
well to his description. It probably corresponds to
the ancient Iphtah-el. In that case the valley is
most probably that which begins at Tell Jéadt,
passes round the 8. of Jebel Kaukab, and, as Wady
.’Abelltn, opens on the plain of Acre. W. Ewinea


IR, ir (WY, ‘ir): A descendant of Benjamin
(1 Ch 7 12), called Iri in ver 7.


IRA, i’'ra (NVWY, ‘ara’; Etpas, Hiras):

(1) A person referred to in 2 § 20 26 as “‘priest”’
(so RV correctly; AV “a chief ruler,” ARV “chief
minister”) unto David. The tr of RV is the only
possible one; but, according to the text, Ira was
‘a Jairite,” and thus of the tribe of Manasseh (Nu
32 41) and not eligible to the priesthood. On the
basis of the Pesh some would correct “Jairite” of
2S 20 26 into “Jattirite,” referring to Jattir, a
priestly city within the territory of Judah (Josh
21 14). Others point to 25 8 18 m, “David's
sons were priests,’ as an indication that in David’s
time some non-Levites were permitted to serve—
in some sense—as priests. id

(2) An “Ithrite,” or (with a different pointing of
the text) a “Jattirite,”’ one of David’s “thirty”
(28 23 38||1 Ch 11 40); possibly identical with (1).

(3) Another of David’s “thirty,” son of Ikkesh
of Tekoa (2 S 28 26; 1 Ch 11 28) and a captain
of the temple guard (1 Ch 27 9). F. K. Farr


TRAD, frad (W499, ‘tradh; LXX Ta848, Gai-
déd): Grandson of Cain and son of Enoch (Gen
4 18).


IRAM, ‘ram (OY°9, ‘ir@m; LXX variously in
Gen): A “chief” of Edom (Gen 36 43]|1 Ch 1 54).


IR-HA-HERES, ir-ha-hé’rez (O° VY, Sr ha-
heres, according to the MT, Aq, Theodotion, LXX,
AV and RV; according to some Heb MSS, Sym-
machus, and the Vulg, OUT "YF, ‘ir ha-heres): : A
city of Egypt referred to in Isa 19 18. Jewish
quarrels concerning the temple which Onias built in
Egypt have most probably been responsible for the
altering of the texts of some of the early MSS, and


“that day.”


it is not now possible to determine absolutely which
have been altered and which accord with the original.
This difference in MSS gives rise to different opinions
among authorities here to be noted. Most of the
discussion of this name arises from this uncertainty
and is hence rather profitless.

The starting-point of any proper discussion of Ir-
ha-h is that the words are by Isaiah and that they
are prophecy, predictive prophecy. They belong
to that portion of the prophecies of Isa which by
nearly all critics is allowed to the great prophet.
Nothing but unfounded speculation or an unwill-
ingness to admit that there is any predictive proph-
écy can call in question Isaiah’s authorship of these
words. Then the sense of the passage in which these
words occur imperatively demands that they be
accounted predictive prophecy. Isaiah plainly refers
to the future, “‘shall be called’; and makes a definite
statement concerning what shall take place in the
future (19 18-24). The reality of predictive
prophecy may be discussed by those so inclined,
but that the intention of the author here was to
utter predictive prophecy does not seem to be open
to question. For the verification of this prediction
by its fulfilment in history we shall inquire con-
cerning: (1) the times intended: “that day”; (2)
the “five cities’; (3) ‘Ir-ha-heres.”’

The prophet gives a fairly specific description of
It was at least to begin when “there
shall be five cities in the land of Egypt


1. The that speak the language of Canaan,
Times In- and swear to Jeh of hosts” (ver 18),
tended: and ‘In that day shall there be an


“That Day” altar to Jeh in the midst of the land of
Egypt, and a pillar at the border there-
of to Jeh” (ver 19). There was to be also some
inroad made upon the heathenism of Egypt by
the message of the Lord (vs 21f), and about that
time a deliverer should arise in Egypt (ver 20), and
all this should take place before the power of the
land of Assyria should pass away (vs 23 f).
The first historical fulfilment of these words is


‘found at the period when Onias built his imitation of


the Temple of Jerusalem at the place


2. The called by the Greeks Leontopolis (Tell
“Five el-Yehudiyeh), and the worship of
Cities” Jeh was set up at Elephantine, and the


Jews were a great power at Alexandria
and at Tahpanhes. While any of these latter three
might have contained the “pillar,” the “altar” would
thus be either at Leontopolis or the other one of the
‘five cities’ which cannot be named with much
probability. The great deliverer would seem to be
Alexander. Some think that the conversion of the
Egyptians indicated in vs 21.22 is furthered, though
sti not completed, in the Christian invasion of the
ist cent., and again in the success of modern Chris-
tian missions in Egypt.

It will be seen that it does not follow from what
has been said that Leontopolis was Ir-ha-h as some
seem to think. It is not said by the


3. “Ir-ha- prophet that the place where was the
heres” “altar”? was called Ir-ha-h, even if it

were certain that the altar was at
Leontopolis. Nevertheless, Leontopolis may be


Ir-ha-h. The problem is not in the first place the
identification of the name, but the determination of
Which one of the “five cities’? was destroyed. The
expression “shall be called the city of destruction”
seems clearly to indicate that Ir-ha-h is not a name
at all, but merely a descriptive appellation of that
city which should ‘‘be destroyed.’”’ It still remains
4o inquire whether or not this was an independent
appellation, or whether, more probably, it bore
some reldtion to the name of that city at the time
at which the prophet wrote, a play upon the sound,
or the significance of the name or both of these,


Isaac


i THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1492


either through resemblance or contrast. If Gesen-
ius is right, as he seems to be, in the opinion that
“in the idiom of Isa Ir-ha-h means simply ‘the city
that shall be destroyed,’ ” then the original problem
of finding which one of the cities was destroyed
seems to be the whole problem. Still, in the highly-
wrought language of Isaiah and according to the gen-
jus of the Heb tongue, there is probably a play upon
words. It is here that the consideration of the
name itself properly comes in and probably guides
usrightly. Speculation, by Gesenius, Duhm, Cheyne
and others, has proposed various different readings
of this name, some of them requiring two or three
changes in the text to bring it to its present state.
Speculation can always propose readings. On was
sometimes called ‘“Heres” and meant “‘house of the
sun,” which would be both tr‘ and transliterated
into Heb ha-heres and might have ‘ir (“city”) pre-
fixed. Naville, through his study of the great Har-
ris papyrus, believed that the old Egyp city which
later was called Leontopolis (Tell el-Yehudiyeh)
was immediately connected with On and called
“House of Ra,” also ‘House of theSun.” Thus this
name might be both transliterated and tr4 into the
Heb ha-heres and have ‘ir prefixed. The difference
between this expression and “‘Ir-ha-h” which Isaiah
used is only the difference between h and h.
So that Ir-ha-h is most probably a predictive
prophecy concerning the disaster that was to over-
take one of the ‘‘five cities,” with a play upon the
name of the city, and that city is either On, the
later Heliopolis, or the ancient sacred city about 4
miles to the N. of On, where Onias was to build his
temple and which later became Leontopolis (Tell-
el-Yehudiyeh). No more positive identification of
Ir-ha-h is yet possible. M. G. Kyte


IRI, ri (UY, *r2).


IRIJAH, i-ri’ja (IMRT, yir'tydyh, “Jeh sees’):
A captain at the gate of Benjamin in Jerus, who
arrested Jeremiah the prophet on suspicion of in-
tending to desert to the Chaldaeans (Jer 37 13.14).


IR-NAHASH, tr-na’hash, ir-na’hash (WT WP,
“ir nahash): A town of Judah of which Tehinnah
is called the “father,”’ probably meaning “founder”
(1 Ch 4 12). EVm suggests the tr “city of Na-
hash.”


IRON, urn (2793, barzel; ol8npos, sidéros):
It is generally believed that the art of separating
iron from its ores and making it into useful forms
was not known much earlier than 1000 BC, and
that the making of brass (bronze) antedates it by
many centuries, in spite of the frequent Bib. ref-
erences where brass and iron occur together. This
conjecture is based upon the fact that no specimen
of worked iron has been found whose antiquity can
be vouched for. The want of such instruments,
however, can be attributed to the ease with which
iron corrodes. Evidence that iron was used is
found, for example, in the hieroglyphics of the tomb
of Rameses III, where the blades of some of the
weapons are painted blue while others are painted
red, a distinction believed to be due to the fact that
some were made of iron or steel and some of brass.
No satisfactory proof has yet been presented that
the marvelous sculpturing on the hard Egyp granite
was done with tempered bronze. It seems more
likely that steel tools were used. After the dis-
covery of iron, it was evidently a long time in re-
placing bronze. This was probably due to the
difficulties in smelting it. An old mountaineer once
described to the writer the process of iron smelting
as it was carried on in Mt. Lebanon in past centu-
ries. As a boy he had watched his father, who was


See In; Unitas.


a smelter, operate one of the last furnaces to be
fired. For each firing, many cords of wood, esp.
green oak branches, were used, and several days of
strenuous pumping at the eight bellows was neces-
sary to supply the air blast. As a result a small
lump of wrought iron was removed from the bottom
of the furnace after cooling. The iron thus won
was carried to Damascus where it was made into
steel by workers who kept their methods secret.
This process, which has not been worked now for
years, was undoubtedly the same as was used by the
ancients. It is not at all unlikely that the Lebanon
iron, transformed into steel, was what was referred
to as “northern iron” in Jer 16 12 (AV). In many
districts the piles of slag from the ancient furnaces
are still evident. : ;
Aside from the limited supply of iron ore in Mt.
Lebanon (cf Dt 8 9), probably no iron was found
in Syria and Pal. It was brought from Tarshish
(Ezk 27 12) and Vedan and Javan (Ezk 27 19),
and probably Egypt (Dt 4 20). _ Mite Oe
The first mention of iron made in the Bible is in
Gen 4 22, where Tubal-Cain is mentioned as ‘“‘the
forger of every cutting instrument of brass and
iron.” It is likely that the Jews learned the art of
metallurgy from the Phoenicians (2 Ch 2 14)
(see Crarts). Iron was used in Bib. times much
asitistoday. For a description of a smith at work
see Ecclus 88 28. Huge city gates, overlaid with
strips of iron (Ps 107 16; Isa 45 2), held in place
by crude square-headed nails (1 Ch 22 3), are still
a familiar sight in the larger cities of Pal and Syria
(Acts 12 10). Threshing instruments were made
of iron (Am 1 3); so also harrows (28 12 31),
axes (ib; 2 K 6 6; see Ax), branding irons (1 Tim
4 2), and other tools (1 K 6 7). There were iron
weapons (Nu 35 16; Job 20 24), armor (2 S 23
7), horns (1 K 22 11), fetters (Ps 105 18), char-
iots (Josh 17 16), yokes (Jer 28 14), breastplates
(Rev 9 9), pens (chisels) (Job 19 24; Jer 17 1),
sheets or plates (Ezk 4 3), gods (Dnl 5 4), weights
(1 8 17 7), bedsteads (Dt 3 11). Iron was used
extensively in building the temple. See Merats.
Figurative: ‘‘The iron furnace’ is used meta-
phorically for affliction, chastisement (Dt 4 20;
Ezk 22 18-22). Iron is also employed fig. to repre-
sent barrenness (Dt 28 23), slavery (‘yoke of
iron,” Dt 28 48), strength (‘‘bars of iron,” Job 40
18), severity (“rod of iron,” Ps 2 9), captivity
(Ps 107 10), obstinacy (‘ron sinew,” Isa 48 4),
fortitude (“iron pillar,’ Jer 1 18), moral deteriora-
tion (Jer 6 28), political strength (Dnl 2 38),
destructive power (“iron teeth,” Dnl 7 7); the cer-
tainty with which a real enemy will ever show his
hatred is as the rust returning upon iron (Ecclus
12 10 AV, RV “brass’”’); great obstacles (“walls of
iron,” 2 Mace 11 9). James A. Parca


IRON, i’ron (JN, yir’dn): One of the fenced
cities in the territory of Naphtali, named with
Migdal-el and En-hazor (Josh 19 38). It is repre-
sented by the modern Yaran, a village with the
Tuins of a synagogue, at one time used as a monas-
tery, fully 6 miles W. of Kedes.


IRPEEL, dr’pé-el, ir/p&el ONE, yirp’ el): An
unidentified city in Benjamin (Josh 18 27). It


may possibly be represented by Rafat, a ruin to the
N. of el-J%, the ancient Gibeon. a


IRREVERENCE, i-rev’ér-ens. Sce Crime,
CriMEs,

IRRIGATION, ir-i-ga’shun: No equivalent for
this word is found in Bib. writings, although the use
of wrigation for maintaining vegetable life is fre-
quently implied (Eccl 2 5.6; Isa 58 11). To one


1493


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA In


Isaac


ee


familiar with the methods of irrigation practised in
Pal, Syria and Egypt, the passage, “where thou
sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as
a garden of herbs” (Dt 11 10), is easily explained.
The water is brought in channels to the gardens,
where it is distributed in turn to the different square
plots bounded by banks of earth, or along the rows
of growing vegetables planted on the sides of the
trenches. In stony soil the breach in the canal
leading to a particular plot is opened and closed
with a hoe. Any obstruction in the trench is
similarly removed, while in the soft, loamy soil of
the coastal plain or in the Nile valley these opera-
tions can be done with the foot, a practice still
commonly seen.


Egyptian Water Wheel.


The remains of the great irrigation works of the
ancient Egyptians and Babylonians leave no doubt
as to the extent to which they used water to redeem
the deserts. In Pal and Syria there was less need
(Dt 10 7; 11 11) for irrigation. Here there is an
annual fall of from 30 to 40 in., coming principally
during the winter. This is sufficient for the main
crops. The summer supply of vegetables, as well
as the fruit and mulberry trees, requires irrigation.
Hardly a drop of many mountain streams is allowed
to reach the sea, but is used to water the gardens of
the mountain terraces and plains. This supply
is now being supplemented by the introduction of
thousands of pumps and oil engines for raising the
water of the wells sufficiently to run it through the
irrigation canals. Where a spring is small, its
supply is gathered into a birket, or cistern, and then
drawn off through a large outlet into the trenches,
sometimes several days being required to fill the
cistern. In Eccl 2 6, Solomon is made to say, ‘‘I
made me pools of water, to water therefrom the
forest.” This passage helps to explain the uses of
the so-called Pools of Solomon, 8S. of Jerus. In
this same district are traces of the ancient terraces
which were probably watered from these pools.
See AGRICULTURE; GAaRnEN. JAMES A. PATCH


_IR-SHEMESH, ir-shé’mesh, ir-shé’mesh ("°F
WW, ‘ir shemesh, “city of the sun”). See Beru-
SHEMESH ; HERES.


IRU, 7i’roo (VY , ‘ird): Eldest son of Caleb (1 Ch
4 15); probably to be read Ir, the syllable -u being
the conjunction “and” belonging to the following
word.


ISAAC, i’zak:


I. Name
1. Root, Forms, Analogues
2. Implication

II. Famity ann KinpRED %
1. Birth and Place in the Family
2. Relation to the Religious Birthright
3. Significance of Marriage

Ill. Story or Lire 4

1. Previous to Marriage
2. Subsequent to Marriage


IV. Brisiicat REFERENCES
. In the OT
2. In the NT
V. Views OrHer THAN THE HistToRIcaL


I. Name.—This name has the double spelling,
PRE, yichak, and PTW, yishak (Toad, Isadk),
corresponding to the two forms in
1. Root, which appears the root meaning “to
Forms and laugh’”—aroot that runs through nearly
Analogues all the Sem languages. In Heb both
¢Ghak and sdhak have their cognate
nouns, and signify, in the simple stem, “to laugh,”
in the intensive stem, ‘to jest, play, dance, fondle,”
and the like. The noun yichdr, meaning “fresh
oil,” from a root ¢ahar (‘‘to be bright, conspicuous”),
proves that nouns can be built on precisely the model
of yighdk, which would in that case signify “the
laughing one,’’ or something similar. Yet Barth
(Die Nominalbildung in den semitischen Sprachen,
§ 154, 6 and c) maintains that all proper names be-
ginning with yddh prefixed to the root are really
pure imperfects, i.e. verbal forms with some subject
to be understood if not actually present. Hence
Isaac would mean “laughs”: either indefinite, ‘‘one
laughs,” or “he laughs,” viz. the one understood as
the subject. There are some 50 Heb names that
have a similar form with no accompanying subject.
Of these sometimes the meaning of the root is quite
obscure, sometimes it is appropriate to any sup-
posable subject. Each is a problem by itself; for
the interpretation of any one of them there is
little help to be gained from a comparison with
the others.

What subject, then, is to be understood with this
imperfect vb. yighak? Or is no definite subject to
be supplied? (1) ’Zl, God, may be
supplied: ‘God laughs.” Such an
expression might be understood of the
Divine benevolence, or of the fearful
laughter of scorn for His enemies (Ps 2 4), or,
euphemistically, of the Divine wrath, the ‘terrible
glance,” as of Moloch, etc (so Meyer, Israeliten und
thre Nachbarstimme, 255). (2) Some human per-
son: “‘he laughs.” So, for example, he himself, viz.
the child who receives the name; or, the father; or,
the brother (not the mother, which would require
tichak). In the light now of these possibilities we
turn to the narratives of Isaac’s birth and career and
find the following subjects suggested: (a) father,
Gen 17 17; (0) indefinite, ‘one laughs” (not “she
laughs,” see above), Gen 18 12-15; 216; (c)
brother, Gen 21 9; (d) himself, Gen 26 8. Of
these passages the last two show the vb. in the in-
tensive stem in the signification of (c) “‘mock” (?),
and (d) “dally.” We find this same vb. in these
senses in Gen 19 14 and 39 14.17, in the stories of
Lot and of Joseph, and it is possible that here also
in the story of Isaac it has no more connection with
the name Isaac than it has there with the names Lot
and Joseph. However this may be, there is ob-
viously one interpretation of the name Isaac, which,
required in two of the passages, is equally appro-
priate in them all, viz. that with the indefinite sub-
ject, “one laughs.” Consideration of the sources
to which these passages are respectively assigned
by the documentary hypothesis tends only to con-
firm this result.

I, Family and Kindred.—The two things in
Isaac’s life that are deemed worthy of extensive
treatment in the sacred narrative are his birth and
his marriage. His significance, in fact, centers in
his transmission of what went before him to what
came after him. Hence, his position in his father’s
family, his relation to its greatest treasure, the reli-
gious birthright, and his marriage with Rebekah
are the subjects that require special notice in this
connection.


2. Impli-
cation


Isaac
Isaiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1494


The birth of Isaac is represented as peculiar in
these respects: the age of his parents, the purity of
his lineage, the special Divine promises


1. Birth accompanying. What in Abraham’s
and Place life is signalized by the Divine “call”
in the from his father’s house, and what in
Family Jacob’s life is brought about by a


: series of providential interpositions,
seems in Isaac’s case to become his by his birth.
His mother, who is not merely of the same stock as
Abraham but actually his half-sister, is the legal
wife. As her issue Isaac is qualified by the laws of
inheritance recognized in their native land to be-
come his father’s heir. But Ishmael, according to
those laws, has a similarly valid claim (see ApRra-
HAM, IV, 2), and it is only i express command that
Abraham is led to abandon what was apparently
both custom and personal preference, to “cast out the
bondwoman and her son,” and to acquiesce in the
arrangement that ‘‘in Isaac shall thy seed be called.”

But the birthright of Isaac was of infinitely more
importance than the birthright in the family of any
other wealthy man of that day. All

2. Relation that limitless blessing with which


to the Re- Abraham set forth under God’s leader-
ligious ship was promised not only +o him but
Birthright to his “seed”; it was limitless in time


as well as in scope. To inherit it was
of more consequence to Isaac than to inherit any
number of servants, flocks or wells of his father’s
acquisition. A sense of these relative values seems
to have been a part of Isaac’s spiritual endowment,
and this, more than anything else related of him,
makes him an attractive figure on the pages of Gen.
The raising up of a “seed” to be the bearers of
these promises was the prime concern of Isaac’s
life. Not by intermarriage with the
3. Signifi- Canaanites among whom he lived, but
cance of by marriage with one of his own peo-
Marriage ple, in whom as much as in himself
should be visibly embodied the separ-
ateness of the chosen family of God—thus primarily
was Isaac to pass on to @ generation as pure as his
own the heritage of the Divine blessing. Rebekah
enters the tent of Isaac as truly the chosen of God
as was Abraham himself.
dif, Story of Life.—Previous to bis marriage
Isaac’s life is a part of the story of Abraham; after
his marriage it merges into that of his children. It
is convenient, therefore, to make his marriage the
dividing-line in the narrative of his career.
A child whose coming was heralded by such signal
marks of Divine favor as was Isaac’s would be, even
apart from other special considera-
1. Previous tions, a welcome and honored member
to Marriage of the patriarchal household. The
covenant-sign of circumcision (which
Isaac was the first to receive at the prescribed age
of 8 days), the great feast at his weaning, and the
disinheritance of Ishmael in his favor, are all of
them indications of the unique position that this
child held, and prepare the reader to appreciate
the depth of feeling involved in the sacrifice of Isaac,
the story of which follows thereupon. The age of
Isaac at the time of this event is not stated, but the
fact that he is able to carry the wood of the offering
shows that he had probably attained his full growth.
The single question he asks his father and his other-
wise unbroken silence combine to exhibit him in a
favorable light, as thoughtful, docile and trustful.
The Divine interposition to save the lad thus de-
voted to God constitutes him afresh the bearer of
the covenant-promise and justifies its explicit
renewal on this occasion. From this point onward
the biographer of Isaac evidently has his marriage
in view, for the two items that preceded the long
24th ch, in which Rebekah’s choice and coming are


rehearsed, are, first, the brief genealogical para-
graph that informs the reader of the development
of Nahor’s family just as far as to Rebekah, and
second, the ch that tells of Sarah’s death and burial
—an event clearly associated in the minds of all
with the marriage of Isaac (see 24 3.36.67). Di-
vine interest in the choice of her who should be the
mother of the promised seed is evident in every line
of the ch that dramatizes the betrothal of Isaac and
Rebekah. Their first meeting is described at its
close with the tender interest in such a scene nat-
ural to every descendant of the pair, and Isaac is
sketched as a man of a meditative turn (ver 63)

and an affectionate heart (ver 67).
The dismissal of the sons of Abraham’s concu-
bines to the “East-country” is associated with the
statement that Isaac inherited all that


2. Subse- Abraham had; yet it has been re-
quent to marked that, besides supplying them
Marriage with gifts, Abraham was doing them


a further kindness in thus emancipating
them from continned subjection to Isaac, the future
head of the clan. After Abraham’s death we are ex-
pressly informed that God “blessed Isaac his son” in
fulfilment of previous promise. The section entitled
“the téldhath [generations] of Isaac’ extends from
25 19+0 35 29. At the opening of it Isaac is dwell-
ing at Beer-lahai-roi (25 11), then at Gerar (26 1.6)
and “the valley of Gerar’ (26 17), then at Beer-
sheba (26 23; 28 10), all localities in the Negeb or
“South-country.”’ But after the long narrative of
the fortunes of Jacob and his family, occupying
many years, we find Isaac at its close living where
his father Abraham had lived, at Hebron. |

For 20 years Isaac and Rebekah remained child-
less; it was only upon the entreaty of Isaac that
God granted them their twin sons. A famine was
the usual signal for emigration to Egypt (cf Gen
12 10; 42 2); and Isaac also appears to have been
on his way thither for the same cause, when, at
Gerar, he is forbidden by God to proceed, and occa-
sion is found therein to renew to him the covenant-
promise of his inheritance: land, posterity, honor
and the Divine presence (26 1-4).

But Isaac had also received from his father tradi- .
tions of another sort; he too did not hesitate to say
to the men of Gerar that his wife was his sister, with
the same intent to save his own life, but without
the same justification in fact, as in the case of
Abraham’s earlier stratagem. Yet even the dis-
covery by the king of Gerar of this duplicity, and
repeated quarrels about water in that dry country,
did not suffice to endanger Isaac’s status with the
settled inhabitants, for his large household and great
resources made him a valuable friend and a danger-
ous enemy.

The favoritism which Isaac showed for one son
and Rebekah for the other culminated in the painful
scene when the paternal blessing was by guile ob-
tained for Jacob, and in the subsequent enforced
absence of Jacob from his parental home. Esau,
too, afforded no comfort to his father and mother,
and ere long he also withdrew from his father’s clan.
The subsequent reconciliation of the brothers per-
mitted them to unite at length in paying the last
honors to Isaac on his decease. Isaac was buried
at Hebron where his parents had been buried (Gen
49 31), and where his place of sepulture is still
honored.

IV. Biblical References.—There is a great con-
trast between Abraham and Jacob on the one hand,
and Isaac on the other, with respect to their promi-
nence in the lit. of the nation that traced to them its
descent. Tobe sure, when the patriarchs as a group
are to be named, Isaac takes his place in the stereo-
typed formula of “Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,’’ or
“Israel” (so 23 t in the OT, 7 t in the NT).


1495


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


“Isaac
Isaiah


But apart from this formula Isaac is referred to | wise be understood as echoes of original myths. Even


in the OT only as follows. During the lifetime of
Jacob the names of Abraham and Isaac


1. Inthe are repeatedly linked in the same way
OT as are all three subsequently: they

form for that age the dynasty of the
covenant. But several times Jacob calls Jeh the


‘God (or, the Fear; see infra) of Isaac, because Isaac
is his own immediate predecessor in this chain of
the faithful. Isaac is called the “gift”? of God to
Abraham, in the farewell address of Joshua, just as
Jacob and Esau are called God’s “gifts” to Isaac
(Josh 24 3f; cf Koran, Sura 6 84). The “house
of Isaac” is used by Amos as a || expression for
‘Tsrael,” and ‘the high places of Isaac” for “the
sanctuaries of Israel” (Am 7 16.9), in the same way
as ‘‘Jacob” is often used elsewhere (LXX in ver 16
reads “Jacob”). Other references to Isaac are
simply as to his father’s son or his children’s father.
He fares betterinthe NT. For, besides the gene-
alogical references, Isaac’s significance as the first to
receive circumcision on the 8th day
2. In is remembered (Acts 7 8); his posi-
the NT tion as first of the elect seed is set. forth
Rom 9 7); his begetting of two sons
so unlike in their relation to the promise as were
Esau and Jacob is remarked (Rom 9 10); the facts
of his being heir to the promise, a child of old age,
and, though but one, the father of an innumerable
progeny, are emphasized in He 11 (vs 9-12), which
also discovers the deeper significance of his sacrifice
and restoration to his father (vs 17-19; cf Jas 2 21);
and in the same context is noticed the faith in God
implied in Isaac’s blessing of his sons. But Isaac
receives more attention than anywhere else in that
famous passage in Gal (4 21-31), in which Paul
uses Isaac and his mother as allegorical representa-
tions of Christians who are justified by faith in the
promise of God, and are the free-born heirs of all
the spiritual inheritance implied in that promise.
Even Isaac’s persecution by Ishmael has its counter-
part in the attitude of the enemies of Paul’s gospel
toward him and his doctrines and converts.


V. Views Other than the Historical.—Philo, the chiet
allegorizer of Scriptural narratives, has little to say of
Isaac, whom he calls ‘‘the self-instructed nature.” But
modern critics have dissolved his personality by repre-
senting him as the personification of au ethnic group.
“ All Israel,”’ writes Wellhausen (Prol., 6th ed, 316), ‘is
qoubed with the people of Edom under the old name
saac (Am 7 9.16)... . the material here is not
mythical (as in Gen 1-11] but national.” And just as
Israel plus Edom had little or no significance in national
customs or spontical events, when compared on the one
hand with Israel alone (=Jacob), and with Israel plus
Edom plus Moab and Ammon (=Abraham) on the other
hand; so likewise the figure of Isaac is colorless and his
story brief, as compared with the striking figures of
Jacob on the one hand and of Abraham on the other
hand, and the circumstantial stories of their lives.

Other scholars will have none of this natlonal view,
because they believe Isaac to be the name of an ancient
deity, the local numen of Beersheba. Stark, whom
others have followed, proposes to interpret the phrase
tra “the Fear of Isaac” in Gen 31 42.53 as the name of
this god used by his worshippers, the Terror Isaac, Isaac
the terrible god. For the sense of Isaac in that case see
above under I, 2, (1). Meyer (loc. cit.) defends the
transfer of the name from a god to the hero of a myth,
by comparing the sacrifice of Isaac (‘‘the only story in
which Isaac plays an independent réle”!) with the Gr
myth of Iphigenia’s sacrifice (Hesiod, Euripides, etc), in
which the by-name of a goddess (Iphigenia) identified
with Artemis has passed to the intended victim rescued
by Artemis from death. | :

The most recent critical utterances reject both the
foregoing views of Isaac as in conflict with the data of
Gen. Thus Gunkel (Schriften des AT, 5te Lieferung,
1910, 41) writes: ‘Quite clearly the names of Abraham,
Isaac, and all the patriarchal women are not tribal
names..... The interpretation of the figures of Gen
as nations furnishes by no means a general key.”” And
again: ‘‘ Against the entire assumption that the principal
patriarchal figures are originally gods, is above all to be
noted that the names Jacob and Abraham are proved
by the Bab to be personal names in current use, and at
the same time that the sagas about them can in no


Winckler’s more than bold attempt to explain these
sagas as original calendar-myths must be pronounced a
complete failure.’’ Yet Gunkel and those who share
his position are careful to distinguish their own view
from that of the “ apologetes,'' and to concede no more
than the bare fact that there doubtless were once upon a
time persons named Abraham, Isaac, ete. For these
critics Isaac Is slnoly a name about which have crystal-
lized cycles of folk-stories, that have their parallels in
other lands and languages, but have received with a Heb
name also a local coloring and significance on the ilps of
successlve Heb story-tellers, saga-builders and finally
collectors and editors; ‘‘ Everyone who knows the history
of sagas ls sure that the saga is not able to preserve
through the course of so many centuries, a true picture’
of the patrlarchs. See also Anranam, end.


J. Oscar Born
ISAAC, TESTAMENT OF. See Aprocatyrtic
LITERATURE,


ISAIAH, i-za’ya, i-zi’a:
Name
Personal History
Call
Literary Genius and Style
Traditions concerning His Martyrdom
Period
Anely sis and Contents
Isaiah’s ao el Chronologically Arranged
The Critical Problem
1) The History of Criticism
3) The Disintegration of ‘‘ Deutero-Isaiah’”’
3) Recent Views
4) The Present State of the Question
5) Reasons for Dissecting the Book
6) Arguments for One Isaiah
a) The Circle of Ideas
b} The Literary Style
c) Historical Refereuces
(d) The Predictive Element
{e) Cyrus a Subject of Prediction
LivBRaTURE
Of all Israel’s celebrated prophets, Isaiah is the
king. The writings which bear his name are among
the profoundest in all literature. One great theme
—salvation by faith—stamps them all. Isaiah is
the St. Paul of the OT. ;
In Heb WWW, yshatyaha, and MD,
ysha'yah; Gr “Hoatas, Hsaias; Lat Hsaias and
Isaias. His name was symbolic of
his message. Like “Joshua,’’ it means
“Jeh saves,” or “Jeh is salvation,” or
“salvation of Jeb.”
Isaiah was the son of Amoz (not Amos). He
seems to have belonged to a family of some rank,
as may be inferred from his easy access
2. Personal to the king (Isa 7 3), and his close
History intimacy with the priest (8 2). Tradi-
tion says he was the cousin of King
Uzziah. He lived in Jerus and became court
preacher. He was married and had two sons:
Shear-jashub, his name signifying ‘a remnant
shal] return” (7 3), and Maher-shalal-hash-baz,
“hasting to the spoil, hurrying to the prey,” sym-
bolic of Assyria’s mad lust of conquest (8 3). Jew-
ish tradition, based upon a false interpretation of
7 14, declares he was twice married.
In the year that King Uzziah died, Isaiah, ap-
parently while worshipping in the temple, received
a call to the prophetic office (ch 6).
3. Call He responded with noteworthy alac-
rity, and accepted his commission,
though he knew from the outset that his task was to
be one of fruitless warning and exhortation (6 9-13).
Having been reared in Jerus, he was well fitted to
become the political and religious counselor of the
nation, but the experience which prepared him most
for his important work was the vision of the majestic
and. thrice-holy God which he saw in the temple in
the death-year of King Uzziah. There is.no good
reason for doubting that this was his inaugural
vision, though some regard it as a vision which came
to him after years of experience in preaching and as
intended to deepen his spirituality. While this is


SON Grup COBO


1. Name


Isaiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1496


the only explicit “vision” Isaiah saw, yet his entire
book, from first to last, is, as the title (1 1) suggests,
a “vision.” His horizon, both political and spiritual,
was practically unbounded. Jn a very true sense,
as Delitzsch says, he was “the universal prophet of
Israel.”
_ For versatility of expression and brilliancy of
imagery Isaiah bad no superior, not even a rival.
His style marks the climax of Hebrew
4, Literary literary art. Both his periods and
Genius and descriptions are most finished and
Style sublime. He is a perfect artist in
words. Beauty and strength are
characteristic of his entire book. Epigrams and
metaphors, particularly of flood, storm and sound
(1 18; 5 18.22; 8 8; 10 22; 28 17.20; 30 28.30),
interrogation and dialogue (6 8; 10 8.9), antithe-
sis and alliteration (1 18; 3 24; 17 10.12), hyper-
bole and parable (2 7; 5 1-7; 28 23-29), even
paranomasia, or play upon words (5 7; 7 9), char-
acterize Isaiah’s book as the great masterpiece of
Hebrew literature. He is also famous for his rich-
ness of vocabulary and synonyms. For example,
Ezekiel uses 1,535 words; Jeremiah, 1,653; the
Psalmists 2,170; while Isaiah uses2,186. Isaiah was
also an orator: Jerome likened him to Demosthenes;
and a poet: he frequently elaborates his messages
in rhythmic or poetic style (12 1-6; 25 1-5; 26
1-12; 38 10-20; 42 1-4; 49 1-9; 5049; 52
13—53 12; 60-62; 66 5-24); and in several in-
stances slips into elegiac rhythm, e.g. in 37 22-29
there is a fine taunting poem on Sennacherib, and
in 14 4-23 another on the king of Babylon. As
Driver observes, ‘‘Isaiah’s poetical genius is superb.”


Nothing definite or historical is known concerning the
prophet's end. Toward the close of the 2d cent. AD,


however, there was a tradition to the
B. Tradi- effect that he suffered martyrdom in the
és heathen, reaction which occurred under
tions con- King Manasseh, because of certain


cerning His speeches concerning God and the Holy
M dom ity which his contemporaries alleged
arty: were contrary to the law. Indeed the
Jewish Mishna explicitly states that
Manasseh slew him, Justin Martyr also (150 AD), in
his controversial dialogue with the Jew Trypho, re-
proaches the Jews with this accusation, ‘‘ whom ye sawed
asunder with a wooden saw''; this tradition is further
confirmed by a Jewish Apocalypse of the 2d cent. AD,
entitled, The Ascension of Isaiah, and by Epiphanius in
his so-called Lives of the Prophets. It is harely possible
that there is an allusion to his martyrdom in He 11 37,
which reads, ‘They were stoned, they were sawn asunder,”’
but this is by no means certain. In any case Isaiah
robably survived the great catastrophe of the siege of
Waris by Sennacherib in 701 BC, and possibly also the
death of Hezekiah in 699 BC; for in 2 Ch 32 32 it is
stated that Isaiah wrote a hiography of King Hezekiah.
If so, his prophetic activity extended over a period of
more than 40 years. Dr. G._A. Smith extends it to
‘more than 50" (Jerusalem, II, 180; cf Whitehouse,
'Tsaiah,'' New Cent. Bible, 1, 72).


According to the title of his book (1 I), Isaiah
prophesied during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

6. Period He dates his inaugural vision (6 1)
in Uzziah’s death-year, which was
approximately 740 BC. This marks, therefore, the
beginning of his prophetic ministry. And we know
that he was still active as late as the siege of Jerus
by Sennacherib in 701 BC. Hence the minimum
period of his activity as a prophet was from 740 to
701 BC. Asa young man Isaiah witnessed the rapid
development of Judah into a strong commercial
and military state; for under Uzaiah Judah at-
tained a degree of prosperity and strength never
before enjoyed since the days of Solomon. Walls,
towers, fortifications, a large standing army, a port
for commerce on the Red Sea, increased inland
trade, tribute from the Ammonites, success 1n war
with the Philis and the Arabians—all these became
Judah’s during Uzziah’s long and prosperous reign
of 52 years. But along witb power and wealth


came also avarice, oppression, religious formality
and corruption. The temple revenues indeed were
greatly increased, but religion and life were too
frequently dissociated; the nation’s progress was
altogether material. During the reign of Jotham
(740-736 BC), who for several years was probably
associated with his father as co-regent, a new power
began to appear over the eastern horizon. The
Assyrians, with whom Ahab had come in contact
at the battle of Karkar in 854 BC, and to whom
Jehu had paid tribute in 842 BC, began to manifest
anew their characteristic lust of conquest. _Tiglath-
pileser III, who is called ‘“‘Pul” in 2 K 15 19 and
reigned over Assyria from 745 to 727 BC, turned
his attention westward, and in 738 BC reduced
Arpad, Calno, Carchemish, Hamath and Damascus,
causing them to pay tribute. His presence in the
West led Pekah, king of North Israel, and Rezin,
king of Damascus, to form an alliance in order to
resist further encroachment on the part of Assyria.
When Ahaz refused to join their confederacy they
resolved to dethrone him and set in his stead the
son of Tabeel upon the throne of David (2 K 16 5;
Isa 7 6). The struggle which ensued is commonly
known as the Syro-Ephraimitic war (734 BC)—
one of the great events in Jsaiah’s period. Ahaz
in panic sent to Tiglath-pileser for help (2 K 16 7),
who of course responded with alacrity. The result
was that the great Assyrian warrior sacked Gaza
and carried all of Galilee and Gilead into captivity
(734) and finally took Damascus (732 BC). Ahaz
was forced to pay dearly for his protection and
Judah was brought very low (2 K 15 29; 16
7-9; 2 Ch 2819; Isa 71). The religious as
well as the political effect of Ahaz’ policy was de-
cidedly baneful. To please Tiglath-pileser, Ahaz
went to Damascus to join in the celebration of his
victories, and while there saw a Syrian altar, a
pattern of which he sent to Jerus and had a copy
set up in the temple in place of the brazen altar of
Solomon. Thus Ahaz, with all the influence of a
king, introduced idolatry into Jerus, even causing
his sons to pass through the fire (2 K 16 10-16;
2 Ch 28 3).

Hezekiah succeeded Ahaz, beginning to rule at
the age of 25 and reigning 29 years (727-699 BC).
Isaiah was at least 15 years his senior. The young
king inherited from his father a heavy burden.
The splendor of Uzziah’s and Jotham’s reigns was
rapidly fading before the ever-menacing and avari-
cious Assyrians. Hezekiah began his reign with
reformation. ‘He removed the high places, and
brake the pillars, and cut down the Asherah” (2 K
18 4.22). He even invited the surviving remnant
of North Israel to join in celebrating the Passover
(2 Ch 301). But Israel’s end was drawing near.
Hoshea, the vacillating puppet-king of North Israel
(730-722 BC), encouraged by Egypt, refused longer
to pay Assyria his annual tribute (2 K 17 4);
whereupon Shalmaneser IV, who had succeeded
Tiglath-pileser, promptly appeared before the gates
of Samaria in 724 BC, and for 3 weary years be-
sieged the city (2 K_17 5). Finally, the city was
captured by Sargon II, who succeeded Shalmaneser
IV in 722 BC, and 27,292 of Israel’s choicest people
(according to Sargon’s own description) were de-
ported to Assyria, and colonists were brought from
Babylon and other adjacent districts and placed in
the cities of Samaria (2 K 17 6.24). Thus the
kingdom of North Israel passed into oblivion, and
Judah was left ever after quite exposed to the direct
ravages, political and religious, of her Assyrio-Bab
neighbors. In fact Judah herself barely escaped
destruction by promising heavy tribute. This was
the second great, political crisis during Isaiah’s min-
istry. Other crises were soon to follow. One was
the desperate illness of King Hezekiah, who faced


1497


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Isaiah


sss


assured death in 714 BC. Being childless, he was
seriously concerned for the future of the Davidic
dynasty. He resorted to prayer, however, and God
graciously extended his life 15 years (2 K 20; Isa
38). His illness occurred during the period of Baby-
lon’s independence under Merodach-baladan, the
ever-ambitious, irresistible and uncompromising
enemy of Assyria, who for 12 years (721-709 BC)
maintained independent supremacy over Babylon.
Taking advantage of Hezekiah’s wonderful cure,
Merodach seized the opportunity of sending an
embassy to Jerus to congratulate him on his recovery
(712 BC), and at the same time probably sought
to form an alliance with Judah to resist Assyr su-
premacy (2 K 20 12ff; Isa 39). Nothing, how-
ever, came of the alliance, for the following year
Sargon’s army reappeared in Philistia in order to
discipline Ashdod for conspiraey with the king of
Egypt (711 BC). The greatest crisis was yet to
come. Its story is as follows: Judah and her
neighbors groaned more and more under the heavy
exactions of Assyria. Accordingly, when Sargon
was assassinated and Sennacherib came to the
throne in 705 BC, rebellion broke out on all sides.
Merodach-baladan, who had been expelled by Sar-
gon in 709 BC, again took Babylon and held it for
at least six months in 703 BC. Hezekiah, who was
encouraged by Egypt and all Philistia, except Padi
of Ekron, the puppet-king of Sargon, refused longer
to pay Assyria tribute (2 K 18 7). Meanwhile a
strong pro-Egyp party had sprung up in Jerus. In
view of all these circumstances, Sennacherib in
701 BC marched westward with a vast army,
sweeping everything before him. Tyre was in-
vested though not taken; on the other hand, Joppa,
Eltekeh, Ekron, Ashkelon, Ammon, Moab, and
Edom all promptly yielded to his demands. Heze-
kiah was panic stricken and hastened to bring rich
tribute, stripping even the temple and the palace
of their treasures to do so (2 K 18 13-16). But
Sennacherib was not satisfied. He overran Judah,
capturing, as he tells us in his inscription, 46 walled
towns and smaller villages without number, earry-
ing 200,150 of Judah’s population into captivity to
Assyria, and demanding as tribute 800 talents of
silver and 80 talents of gold, in all over $1,500,000;
he took also, he claims, Hezekiah’s daughters and
palace women, seized his male and female singers,
and carried away enormous spoil. But the end
was not yet. Sennacherib himself, with the bulk
of the army, halted in Philistia to reduce Lachish;
thence he sent a strong detachment under his com-
mander-in-chief, the Rabshakeh, to besiege Jerus
(2 K 18 17—19 8; Isa 36 2—37 8). As he de-
scribes this blockade in his own inscription: “I
shut up Hezekiah in Jerus like a bird in a cage.”
The Rabshakeb, however, failed to capture the city
and returned to Sennacherib, who meanwhile had
completely conquered Lachish, and was now warring
against Libnah. A second expedition against
Jerus was planned, but hearing that Tirhakah (at
that time the commander-in-chief of Egypt’s forces
and only afterward “king of Ethiopia”) was ap-
proaching, Sennacherib was forced to content him-
self with sending messengers with a letter to Heze-
kiah, demanding immediate surrender of the city
(2K 19 Off; Isa 37 9ff). Hezekiah, however,
through Isaiah’s influence held out; and in due
time, though Sennacherib disposed of Tirhakah’s
army without difficulty, his immense host in some
mysterious way—by plague or otherwise—was
suddenly smitten, and the great Assyr conqueror
was forced to return to Nineveh; possibly because
Merodach-baladan had again appeared in Baby-
lonia. Sennacherib never again returned to Pal,
so far as we know, during the subsequent 20 years
of his reign, though he did make an independent


expedition into North Arabia (691-689 BC). This.
invasion of Judah by Sennacherib in 701 BC was
the great political event in Isaiah’s ministry. Had
it not been for the prophet’s statesmanship, Jcrus
might have capitulated. As it was, only a small,
insignificantly small, remnant of Judah’s popula-
tion escaped. Isaiah had at this time been preach-
ing 40 years. How much longer he labored is not
known.

There are six general divisions of the book: (1)
chs 1-12, propheeies concerning Judah and Jerus,

closing with promises of restoration
7. Analysis and a psalm of thanksgiving; (2) chs
and 13-23, oracles of judgment and salva-
Contents tion, for the most part concerning

those foreign nations whose fortunes
affected Judah and Jerus; (3) chs 24-27, Jeh’s world-
judgment in the redemption of Israel; (4) chs 28-
36, a cycle of prophetic warnings against alliance
with Egypt, closing with a prophecy concerning
Edom and a promise of Israel’s ransom; (5) chs
36-39, history, prophecy and song intermingled;
serving both as an appendix to chs 1-35, and as an
introduction to chs 40-66; (6) chs 40-66, prophecies
of comfort and salvation, and also of the future
glory awaiting Israel.

By examining in detail these several divisions
we can trace better the prophet’s thought. Thus,
chs 1-12 unfold Judah’s social sins (chs 1-6), and
her political entanglements (chs 7-12); ch 1 is an
introduction, in which the prophet strikes the chief
notes of his entire book: viz. thoughtlessness (vs
2-9), formalism in worship (vs 10-17), pardon (vs
18~28) and judgment (vs 24-31). Chs 2-4 contain
three distinct pictures of Zion: (@) her exaltation
(2 2-4), (6) her present idolatry (2 5—4 1), and
(c) her eventual purification (4 2-6). Ch 6 con-
tains an arraignment of Judah and Jerus, composed
of three parts: (a) a parable of Jeh’s vineyard (vs
1-7); (6) a series of six woes pronounced against
insatiable greed (vs 8-10), dissipation (vs 11-17),
daring defiance against Jeh (vs 18.19), confusion
of moral distinctions (ver 20), political self-conceit
(ver 21), and misdirected heroism (vs 22.23); and
(c) an announcement of imminent judgment. The
Assyrian is on the way and there will be no escape
(vs 24-30). Ch 6 recounts the prophet’s inaugural
vision and commission. It is really an apologetic,
standing as it does after the prophet’s denunciations
of his contemporaries. When they tacitly object
to his message of threatening and disaster, he is
able to reply that, having prononnced “woe” upon
himself in the year that Kmg Uzziah died, he had
the authority to pena woe upon them (6 5).
Plainly Isaiah tells them that Judah’s sins are well-
nigh hopeless. They are becoming spiritually in-
sensible. They have eyes but they cannot see.
Only judgment can avail: “the righteous judgment
of a forgotten God” awaits them. A “holy seed,”
however, still existed in Israel’s stock (6 18).

Coming to chs 7-12, Isaiah appears in the réle of
a practical statesman. He warns Ahaz against
political entanglements with Assyria. The section
7 1—9 7 is a prophecy of Immanuel, history and
prediction being intermingled.

They describe the Syro-Ephraimitic uprising in 736
BO, when Pekah of North [Israel and Rezin of Damascus,
in attempting to defend themselves against the Assyr-
jans, demanded that Ahaz of Jerus should become their
ally. But Ahaz preferred the friendship of Assyria,
and refused to enter into alliance with them. And in
order to defend himself, he applied to Assyria for assist-
ance, sending ambassadors with many precious treasures,
both royal and sacred, to bribe Tiglath-pileser. It was
at this juncture that Isaiah, at Jeh's bidding, expostulates
with Ahaz concerning the fatal step he is about to take,
and as @ practical statesman warns Ahaz, ‘the king
of No-Faith,"’ that the only path of safety lies in loyalty


to Jeh and keeping clear of foreign alliances; that ‘‘ God is
with us" for salvation; and that no ‘‘conspiracy" can


Isaiah


ossibly be successful unless God too is against us.

hen, however, the prophet’s message of promise and
salvation finds no welcome, he commits it to his disciples,
bound up and sealed for future use; assuring his hearers
that unto them a child is horn and unto them a son is
iven, in whose day the empire of David will be estah-
shed upon a basis of justice and righteousness. The
Messianic scion is the ground of the prophet’s hope;
which hope, though unprecedented, he thus early in his
ministry commits, written and sealed, to his inner circle
of ‘‘disciples."" See, further, ImmaNnvuEL.


The section 9 8—10 4 contains an announcement
to North Israel of accumulated wrath and impend-
ing ruin, with a refrain (9 12.17.21; 10 4). Here,
in an artistic poem composed of four strophes, the
prophet describes the great calamities which Jeh
has sent down upon North Israel but which have


gone unheeded: foreign invasion (9 8-12), defeat


in battle (9 13-17), anarchy (9 18-21), andimpend-
ing captivity (10 1-4). Yet Jeh’s judgments have
gone unheeded: ‘‘For all this his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still.’ Divine
discipline has failed; only judgment remains.

In 10 5-34, Assyria is declared to be an instru-
ment of Jeh, the rod of Jeh’s anger. Chs 11-12
predict Israel’s return from exile, including a vision
of the Messiah’s reign of ideal peace. For Isaiah’s
vision of the nation’s future reached far beyond
mere exile. To him the downfall of Assyria was the
signal for the comméncement of a new era in Israel’s
history. Assyria has no future, her downfall is
fatal; Judah has a future, her calamities are only
disciplinary. An Ideal Prince will be raised up in
whose advent all Nature will rejoice, even dumb
animals (11 1-10). A second great exodus will
take place, for the Lord will set His hand again ‘‘the
second time’ to recover the remnant of His people
‘from the four corners of the earth” (11 11.12).
In that day, ‘Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and
Judah shall not vex Ephraim” (11 13). On the
contrary, the reunited nation, redeemed and occu-
pying their rightful territory (11 14-16), shall sing
a hymn of thanksgiving, proclaiming the salvation
of Jeh to all the earth (ch 12).

Chs 13-23 contain oracles of judgment and sal-
vation, for the most part concerning those foreign
nations whose fortunes affected Judah and Jerus.
They are grouped together by the editor, as similar
foreign oracles are in Jer 46-51 and Ezk 25-32.
Isaiah’s horizon was world-wide. First among the
foreign prophecies stands the oracle concerning
Babylon (18 1—14 23), in which he predicts the
utter destruction of the city (13 2-22), and sings
a dirge or taunt-song over her fallen king (14 4-23).
The king alluded to is almost beyond doubt an
Assyr (not a Bab) monarch of the 8th cent.; the
brief prophecy immediately following in 14 24-27
concerning Assyria tacitly confirms this interpre-
tation. Another brief oracle concerning Babylon
(21 1-10) describes the city’s fall as imminent.
Both oracles stand or fall together as genuine
prophecies of Isaiah. Both seem to have been
written in Jerus (13 2; 21 9.10). It cannot be
said that either is absolutely unrelated in thought
and language to ‘Isaiah’s age (14 13; 21 2); each
foretells the doom t® fall on Babylon (13 19; 21 9)
at the hands of the Medes (18 17; 21 2); and each
describes the Israclite§ as already in exile—but not
necessarily ail Israel. :

The section 14 24-27 tells of the certain de-
struction of the Assyrian. ;

The passage 14 28-32 is an oracle concerning
Philistia.

Chs 15-16 are ancient oracles against Moab,
whose dirgelike meter resembles that of chs 13-14.
It is composed of two separate prophecies belong-
ing to two different periods in Isaiah’s ministry
(16 13.14). The three points of particular interest
in the oracle are: (1) the prophet’s tender sym-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1498


pathy for Moab in her affliction (15 5; 16 11).
Isaiah mingles his own tears with those of the Moab-
ites. As Delitzsch says, “There is no prophecy in
the Book of Isa in which the heart of the prophet
is so painfully moved by what his spirit beholds
and his mouth must prophecy.” (2) Moab’s pa-
thetic appeal for shelter from her foes; particularly
the ground on which she urges it, namely, the Mes-
sianic hope that the Davidic dynasty shall always
stand and be able to repulse its foes (16 5). The
prophecy is an echo of 9 5-7. (3) The promise that
a remnant of Moab, though small, shall be saved
(16 14). Wearied of prayer to Chemosh in his
high places, the prophet predicts that Moab will
seek the living God (16 12). :

The passage 17 1-11 is an oracle concerning
Damascus and North Israel, in which Isaiah predicts
the fate of the two allies—Syria and Ephraim—in
the Syro-Ephraimitic war of 734 BC, with a promise
that only a scanty remnant will survive (17 6).
In 17 12-14, the prophet boldly announces the com-
plete annihilation of Judah’s unnamed foes—the
Assyrians. ;

Ch 18 describes Ethiopia as in great excitement,
sending ambassadors hither and thither—possibly
all the way to Jerus—ostensibly seeking aid in
making preparations for war. Assyria had already
taken Demeecns (732 BC) and Samaria (722 BC),
and consequently Egypt and Ethiopia were in fear
of invasion. Isaiah bids the ambassadors to return
home and quietly watch Jeh thwart Assyria’s self-
confident attempt to subjugate Judah; and he adds
that when the Ethiopians have seen God's hand in
the coming deliverance of Judah and Jerus (701
BOC), they will bring a present to Jeh to His abode
in Mount Zion.

Ch 19, which is an oracle concerning Egypt, con-
tains both a threat (vs 1-17) and a promise (vs 18-
25), and is one of Isaiah’s most remarkable foreign
messages. Egypt is smitten and thereby led to
abandon her idols for the worship of Jeh (vs 19-22).
Still more remarkable, it is prophesied that in that
day Egypt and Assyria will join with Judah in a
triple alliance of common worship to Jeh and of
blessing to others (vs 23-25). Isaiah’s missionary
outlook here is wonderful!

Ch 20 describes Sargon’s march against Egypt
and Ethiopia, containing a brief symbolic prediction
of Assyria’s victory over Egypt and Ethiopia. By
donning a captive’s garb for three years, Isaiah
attempts to teach the citizens of Jerus that the
siege of Ashdod was but a means to an end in Sar-
gon’s plan of campaign, and that it was sheer folly
for the Egyp party in Jerus, who were ever urging
reliance upon Egypt, to look in that direction for
help. 21 11.12 is a brief oracle concerning Seir or
Edom, ‘the only gentle utterance in the OT upon
Israel’s hereditary foe.” Edom is in great anxiety.
The prophet’s answer is disappointing, though its
tone is sympathetic. 21 13 ff is a brief oracle con-
cerning Arabia. It contains a sympathetic appeal
to the Temanites to give bread and water to the
caravans of Dedan, who have been driven by war
from their usual route of travel.

Ch 22 is concerning the foreign temper within
the theocracy. It is composed of two parts: (1)
an oracle “of the valley of vision,” i.e. Jerus (vs
1-14); and (2) a philippic against Shebna, the
comptroller of the palace. Isaiah pauses, as it
were, in his series of warnings to foreign nations +o
rebuke the foreign temper of the frivolous inhabit-
ants of Jerus, and in particular Shebna, a high
official in the government. The reckless and God-
ignoring citizens of the capital are pictured as in-
dulging themselves in hilarious eating and drinking,
when the enemy is at that very moment standing
before the gates of the city. Shebna, on the other


1499


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Isaiah


‘hand, seems to have been an ostentatious foreigner,

perhaps a Syrian by birth, quite possibly one of
the Egyp party, whose policy was antagonistic to
that of Isaiah and the king. Isaiah’s prediction of
Shebna’s fall was evidently fulfilled (36 3; 37 2).

Ch 23 is concerning Tyre. In this oracle Isaiah
predicts that Tyre shall be laid waste (ver 1), her
commercial glory humbled (ver 9), her colonies
become independent of her (ver 10), and she herself
forgotten for “seventy years” (ver 15); but “after
the end of seventy years,” her trade will revive, her
business prosperity will return, and she will dedi-
cate her gains in merchandise as holy to Jeh (ver 18).

The third great section of the Book of Isa em-
braces chs 24-27, which tell of Jeh’s world-judgment,
issuing in the redemption of Israel. These prophe-
cies stand closely related to chs 18-23. They ex-
press the same tender emotion as that already
observed in 15 5; 16 11, and sum up as in one
grand finale the prophet’s oracles to Israel’s neigh-
bors. For religious importance they stand second
to none in the Book of Isa, teaching the necessity
ef Divine discipline and the glorious redemption
awaiting the faithful in Israel. They are a spiritual
commentary on the great Assyr crisis of the 8th
cent.; they are messages of salvation intended, not
for declamation, but for meditation, and were prob-
ably addressed more particularly to the prophet’s
inner circle of ‘disciples’ (8 16). These chapters
partake of the nature of apocalypse. Strictly
speaking, however, they are prophecy, not_apoca-
lypse. No one ascends into heaven or talks with
an angel, as in Dn!l 7 and Rev 4. They are
apocalypse only in the sense that certain things
are predicted as sure to come to pass. Isaiah was
fond of this kind of prophecy. He frequently lifts
his reader out of the sphere of mere history to
paint pictures of the far-off, distant future (2 2-4;
42-6; 11 6-16; 30 27-33).

In ch 24 the prophet announces a general judg-
ment of the earth (i.e. the land of Judah), and of
“the city” (collective, for Judah’s towns), after
which will dawn a better day (vs 1-15). The
prophet fancies he hears songs of deliverance, but
alas! they are premature; more judgment must
follow. In ch 25 the prophet transports himself
to the period after the Assyr catastrophe and,
identifying himself with the redeemed, puts into
their mouths songs of praise and thanksgiving for
their deliverance. Ws 6-8 describe Jeh’s bountiful
banquet on Mount Zion to all nations, who, in
keeping with 2 2-4, come up to Jerus, to celebrate
“a, feast of fat things,’ rich and marrowy. While
the people are present at the banquet, Jeh gra-
ciously removes their spiritual blindness so that
they behold Him as the true dispenser of life and
grace. He also abolishes violent death, that is to
say, war (cf 2 4), and its sad accompaniment,
“tears,”’ so that “the earth” (i.e. the land of Judah)
is no longer the battlefield of the nations, but the
blessed abode of the redeemed, living in peace and
happiness. The prophet’s aim is not political but
religious.

In 26 1-19 Judah sings a song over Jerus, the
impregnable city of God. The prophet, taking
again his stand with the redeemed remnant of the
nation, vividly portrays their thankful trust in Jeh,
who has been unto them a veritable “Rock of
Ages” (ver 4m). With hope he joyfully exclaims,
Let Jeh’s dead ones live! Let Israel’s dead bodies
arise! Jeh will bring life from the dead! (ver 19).
This is the first clear statement of the resurrection
in the OT. But it is national and restricted to
Israel (cf ver 14), and is merely Isaiah’s method of
expressing a hope of the return of Israel’s faithful
ones from captivity (cf Hos 6 2; Ezk 37 1-14;
Dnl 12 2).


In 26 20—27 13 the prophet shows that Israel’s
chastisements are salutary. He begins by exhort-
ing his own people, his disciples, to continue a little
longer in the solitude of prayer, till God’s wrath
has shattered the world-powers (26 20—27 1).
He next predicts that the true vineyard of Jeh will
henceforth be safely guarded against the briars and
thorns of foreign invasion (27 2-6). And then,
after showing that Jeh’s chastisements of Israel
were light compared with His judgments upon
other nations (27 7~11), he promises that if Israel
will only repent, Jeh will spare no pains to gather
“one by one” the remnant of His people from
Assyria and Egypt (cf 11 11); and together they
shall once more worship Jeh in the holy mountain
at Jerus (27 12.13).

The prophet’s fundamental standpoint in chs
24-27 is the same as that of 2 2-4 and chs 13-238.
Yet the prophet not infrequently throws himself
forward into the remote future, oscillating back-
ward and forward between his own times and those
of Israel’s restoration. It is esp. noteworthy how
he sustains himself in a long and continued trans-
portation of himself to the period of Israel’s redemp-
tion. He even studies to Jdentify himself with the
new Israel which will emerge out of the present
chaos of political events. His visions of Israel’s
redemption carry him in ecstasy far away into the
remote future, to a time when the nation’s suffer-
ings are all over; so that when he writes down what
he saw in vision he describes it as a discipline that is
past. For example, in 25 1-8 the prophet, trans-
ported to the end of time, celebrates in song what
he saw, and describes how the fall of the world-
empire is followed by the conversion of the heathen.
In 26 8.9he looks back into the past from the stand-
point of the redeemed in the last days, and tells how
Israel longingly waited for the manifestation of
God’s righteousness which has now taken place,
while in 27 7~9 he places himself in the midst of
the nation’s sufferings, in full view of their glorious
future, and portrays how Jeh’s dealings with Israel
have not been the punishment of wrath, but the
discipline of love. This kind of apocalypse, or
popes, indeed, was to be expected from the very

eginning of the group of prophecies, which are
introduced with the word “Behold!” Such a man-
ner of introduction is peculiar to Isaiah, and of itself
leads us to expect a message which is unique.

The practical religious value of these prophecies
to Isaiah’s own age would be very great. In a

eriod of war and repeated foreign mvasion, when
Bu few men were left in the land (24 6.13; 26 18),
and Judah’s cities were laid waste and desolate
(24 10.12; 25 2; 26 5; 27 10), and music and
gladness were wanting (24 8), when the nation still
clung to their idols (27 9) and the Assyrians’ work
of destruction was still incomplete, other calami-
ties being sure to follow (24 16), it would certainly
be comforting to know that forgiveness was still
possible (27 9), that Jeh was still the keeper of His
vineyard (27 3.4), that His judgments were to last
but for a little moment (26 20), and that though
His people should be scattered, He would soon care-
fully gather them “‘one by one” (27 12.13), and
that in company with other nations they would
feast together on Mt. Zion as Jeh’s guests (26 6.
7.10), and that Jerus should henceforth become
the center of life and religion to all nations (24 23;
25 6; 27 13). Such faith in Jeh, such exhortations
and such songs and confessions of the redeemed,
seen in vision, would be a source of rich spiritual
comfort to the few suffering saints in Judah and
Jerus, and a guiding star to the faithful disciples
of the prophet’s most inner circle.

Chs 28-35 contain a cycle of prophetic warnings
against alliance with Egypt, closing with a prophecy


Isaiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1500


concerning Edom and a promise of Israel’s ransom.
As in 5 8-23, the prophet indulges in a series of six
woes:

(1) Woe to drunken, scoffing politicians (ch 28).
This is one of the great chapters of Isaiah’s book.
In the opening section (vs 1-6) the prophet points
in warning to the proud drunkards of Ephraim
whose crown (Samaria) is rapidly fading. He next
turns to the scoffing politicians of Jerus, rebuking
esp. the bibulous priests who stumble in judgment,
and the staggering prophets who err in vision (vs
7-22); closing with a most instructive parable from
agriculture, teaching that God’s judgments are not
arbitrary; that as the husbandman does not plow
and harrow his fields the whole year round, so God
will not punish His people forever; and as the
husbandman does not thresh all kinds of grain with
equal severity, no more will God discipline His
people beyond their deserts (vs 23-29).

(2) Woe ‘to formalists in religion (29 1-14).
Isaiah’s second woe is pronounced upon Ariel, the
altar-hearth of God, i.e. Jerus, the sacrificial center
of Israel’s worship. David had first inaugurated


the true worship of Jeh in Zion. But now Zion’s.


worship has become wholly conventional, formal,
and therefore insincere; it is learned by rote (ver
13; cf 110-15; Mic 6 6-8). Therefore, says
Isaiah, Jeh is forced to do an extraordinary work
among them, in order to bring them back to a true
knowledge of Himself (ver 14).

(8) Woe to those who hide their plans from God
(29 15-24). What their plans are, which they are
devising in secret, the prophet does not yet disclose;
but he doubtless alludes to their intrigues with the
Egyptians and their purpose to break faith with the
Assyrians, to whom they were bound hy treaty to
pay annual tribute. Isaiah bravely remonstrates
with them for supposing that any policy will suc-
ceed which excludes the counsel and wisdom of the
Holy One. They are but clay; He is the potter.
At this point, though somewhat abruptly, Isaiah
turns his face toward the Messianic future. In a
very little while, he says, Lebanon, which is now
overrun by Assyria’s army, shall become a fruitful
field, and the blind and deaf and spiritually weak
shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

(4) Woe to the pro-Egyp party (ch 30). Isaiah’s
fourth woe is directed against the rebellious poli-
ticians who stubhornly, and now openly, advocate
making a league with Egypt. They have at length
succeeded apparently iu winning over the king to
their side, and an embassy is already on its way to
Egypt, bearing across the desert of the exodus rich
treasures with which to purchase the friendship of
their formeroppressors. Isaiah now condemns what
he can no longer prevent. Egypt is a Rahab “sit-
still,” i.e. a mythological sea-monster, menacing in
mien but laggard in action. When the crisis comes,
she will sit still, causing Israel only shame and
confusion.

(5) Woe to those who trust in horses and chariots
(chs 31-32). Isaiah’s fifth woe is a still more
vehement denunciation of thase who trust in Egypt’s
horses and chariots, and disregard the Holy One of
Israel. Those who do so forget that the Egyp-
tians are but men and their horses flesh, and that
mere flesh cannot avail in a conflict with spirit.
Eventually Jeh means to deliver Jerus, if the chil-
dren of Israel will but turn from their idolatries to
Him; and in that day, Assyria will be vanquished.
A new era will dawn upon Judah. Society will
be regenerated. The renovation will begin at the
top. Conscience also will be sharpened, and moral
distinctions will no longer be confused (32 1-8).
As Delitzsch puts it, ‘“The aristocracy of birth and
wealth will be replaced by an aristocracy of char-
acter.”’ The careless and indifferent women, too,


in that day will no longer menace the social welfare
of the state (32 9-14); with the outpouring of Jeh’s
spirit an ideal commonwealth will emerge, in which
social righteousness, peace, plenty and security will
abound (32 15-20). }

(6) Woe to the Assyr destroyer (ch 33). Isaiah’s
last woe is directed against the treacherous spoiler
himself, who has already laid waste the cities of
Judah, and is now beginning to lay siege to Jerus
(701 BC). The prophet prays, and while he prays,
behold! the mighty hosts of the Assyrians are routed
aud the long-besieged but now triumphant inhabit-
ants of Jerus rush out like locusts upon the spoil
which the vanishing adversary has been forced to
leave behind. The destroyer’s plan to reduce
Jerus has come to naught. The whole earth beholds
the spectacle of Assyria’s defeat and. is filled with
awe and amazement at the mighty work of Jeh.
Only the righteous may henceforth dwell in Jerus.
Their eyes shall behold the Messiah-king in his
beauty, reigning no longer like Hezekiah over a
limited and restricted territory, but over a land
unbounded, whose inhabitants enjoy Jeh’s peace
and protection, and are free from all sin, and there-
fore from all sickness (vs 17-24). With this beau-
tiful picture of the Messianic future, the prophet’s
woes find an appropriate conclusion. Isaiah never
pronounced a woe without adding a corresponding
promise.

In chs 34-36, the prophet utters a fierce cry for
justice against “all the nations,” but against Edom
in particular. Histone is that of judgment. Edom
is guilty of high crimes against Zion (84 8 f), there-
fore she is doomed to destruction. On the other
hand, the scattered ones of Israel shall return from
exile and “obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and
sighing shall flee away” (ch 35).

Chs 36-39 contain history, prophecy and song
intermingled. These chapters serve both as an
appendix to chs 1-35 and as an introduction to chs
40-66. In them three important historical events
are narrated, in which Isaiah was a prominent
factor: (1) thedouble attempt of Sennacherib to ob-
tain possession of Jerus (chs 36-37); (2) Hezekiah’s
sickness and recovery (ch 38); (8) the embassy of
Merodach-baladan (ch 89). With certain im-
portant omissions and insertions these chapters
are duplicated almost verbatim in 2 K 18 18—
20 19. They are introduced with the chronological
note, “Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year
of king Hezekiah.” Various attempts have been
made to solve the mystery of this date; for, if the
author is alluding to the siege of 701 BC, difficulty
arises, because that event occurred not in Heze-
kiah’s “14th” but 26th year, according to the Bib.
chronology of his life; or, if with some we date


‘Hezekiah’s accession to the throne of Judah as 720


BC, then the siege of 701 BC occurred, as is evi-
dent, in Hezekiah’s 19th year. It is barely possible
of course that “the 14th year of king Hezekiah’’
was the 14th of the “15 years” which were added
to his life, but more probably it alludes to the 14th
of his reign. On the whole it is better to take the
phrase as a general chronological caption for the
entire section, with special reference to ch 38, which
tells of Hezekiah’s sickness, which actually fell in
his 14th year (714 BC), and which, coupled with
Sargon’s expected presence at Ashdod, was the
great personal crisis of the king’s life.

Sennacherib made two attempts in 701 BC to
reduce Jerus: one from Lachish with an army
headed by the Rabshakeh (836 2—37 8), and an-
other from Libnah with a threat conveyed by mes-
sengers (37 9ff). The brief section contained in
2 K 18 14-16 is omitted from between vs 1 and 2
of Isa 36, because it was not the prophet’s aim at
this time to recount the nation’s humiliation.


1501


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Isaiah


Isaiah’s last “word” concerning Assyria (87 21-35)
is one of the prophet’s grandest predictions. It is
composed of three parts: (1) a taunt-song, in ele-
giac rhythm, on the inevitable humiliation of Sen-
nacherib (vs 22-29); (2) a short poem in different
rhythm, directed to Hezekiah, in order to encourage
his faith (vs 30-32); (3) a definite prediction, in less
elevated style, of the sure deliverance of Jerus (vs
33-35). Isaiah’s prediction was literally fulfilled.

The section 38 9-20 contains Hezekiah’s Song
of Thanksgiving, in which he celebrates his re-
covery from some mortal sickness. It is a beautiful
plaintive “writing”; omitted altogether by the
author of the Book of K (cf 2 K 20). Hezekiah
was sick in 714 BC. Two years later Merodach-
baladan, the veteran arch-enemy of Assyria, having
heard of his wonderful recovery, sent letters and a
present to congratulate him. Doubtless, also,

olitical motives prompted the recalcitrant Baby-
onian. But be that asit may, Hezekiah was greatly
flattered by the visit of Merodach-baladan’s en-
voys, and, in a moment of weakness, showed them
all his royal treasures. This was an inexcusable
blunder, as the sight of his many precious posses-
sions would naturally excite Bab cupidity to possess
Jerus. Isaiah not only solemnly condemned the
king’s conduct, but he announced with more than
ordinary insight that the days were coming when
all the accumulated resources of Jerus would be
carried away to Babylon (89 3-6; cf Mic 4 10).
This final prediction of judgment is the most mar-
velous of all Isaiah’s minatory utterances, because
he distinctly asserts that, not the Assyrians, who
were then at the height of their power, but the
Babylonians, shall be the instruments of the Divine
vengeance in consummating the destruction of
Jerus. There is absolutely no reason for doubting
the genuineness of this prediction. In it, indeed, we
have a prophetic basis for chs 40-66, which follow.

Coming now to chs 40-66, we have prophecies
of comfort, salvation, and of the future glory await-
ing Israel. These chapters naturally fall into three
sections: (1) chs 40-48, announcimg deliverance
from captivity through Cyrus; (2) chs 49-57, de-
scribing the sufferings of the “Servant” of Jeh, this
section ending like the former with the retrain,
“There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked”
(57 21; cf 48 22); (3) chs 58-66, announcing the
final abolition of all national distinctions and the
future glory of the people of God. Ch 60 is the
characteristic chapter of this section, as ch 53 is
of the second, and ch 40 of the first.

Entering into greater detail, the first section
(chs 40-48) demonstrates the deity of Jeh through
His unique power to predict. The basis of the
comfort which the prophet announces is Israel’s
incomparable God (ch 40). Israel’s all-powerful
Jeh in comparison with other gods is incomparable.
In the prologue (40 1-11) he hears the four voices:
(1) of grace (vs 1.2); (2) of prophecy (vs 3-5);
(3) of faith (vs 6-8), and (4) of evangelism (vs 9-11).
Then, after exalting the unique character of Israel’s
all-but-forgotten God (vs 12-26), he exhorts them
not to suppose that Jeh is ignorant of, or indiffer-
ent to, Israel’s misery. Israel must wait for sal-
vation. They are clamoring for deliverance pre-
maturely. Only wait, he repeats; for with such a
God, Israel has no reason to despond (vs 27-31).

In ch 41 he declares that the supreme proof of
Jeh’s sole deity is His power to predict. He in-
quires, “Who hath raised up one from the east?”
Though the hero is left unnamed, Cyrus is doubt-
less in the prophet’s mind (cf 44 28; 45 1). He
isnot, however, already appearing upon the horizon
of history as some fancy, but rather predicted as
sure to come. The verb tenses which express com-
pleted action are perfects of certainty, and are used


in precisely the same manner as those in 3 8; 6 13;
21 9. The answer to the inquiry is, “I, Jeh, the
first, and with the last, I am he” (41 4). Israel is
Jeh’s servant. The dialogue continues; but it is
no longer between Jeh and the nations, as in vs 1-7,
but between Jeh and the idols (vs 21-29). Ad-
dressing the dumb idols, Jeh is represented as saying,
Predict something, if you are real deities. As for
myself, I am going to raise up a hero from the north
who will subdue all who oppose him. And I an-
nounce my purpose now in advance “from the be-
ginning,” “beforetime,” before there is the slightest
ground for thinking that such a hero exists or ever
will exist. (ver 26), in order that the future may
verify my prediction, and prove my sole deity. I,
Jeh, alone know the future. In vs 25-29, the
prophet even projects himself into the future and
speaks from the standpoint of the fulfilment of his
prediction. This, as we saw above, was a char-
acteristic of Isaiah in chs 24-27.

In 42 1—43 13 the prophet announces also a
spiritual agent of redemption, namely, Jeh’s ‘Serv-
ant.” Not only a temporal agent (Cyrus) shall
be raised up to mediate Israel’s redemption, which
is the first step in the process of the universal sal-
vation contemplated, but a spiritual factor. Jeh’s
“Servant” shall be employed in bringing the good
tidings of salvation to the exiles and to the Gentiles
also. In 42 1-9 the prophet describes this ideal
figure and the work he will execute. The glorious
future evokes a brief hymn of thanksgiving for the
redemption which the prophet beholds in prospect
(42 10-17). Israel has long been blind and deaf
to Jeh’s instructions (42 18.19), but now Jeh is
determined to redeem them even at the cost of the
most opulent nations of the world, that they may
publish His law to all peoples (42 18—43 13).

In 18 1444 23 forgiveness is made the pledge
of deliverance. Jeh’s determination to redeem
Israel is all of grace. Salvation is a gift. Jeh has
blotted out their transgressions for His own sake
(43 25). “This passage,’ Dillmann observes,
‘marks the highest point of grace in the OT.”
Gods of wood and stone are nonentities. Those
who manufacture idols are blind and dull of heart,
and are “feeding on ashes.” The section 44 9-20is
a most remorseless exposure of the folly of idolatry.

In 44 24—45 25 the prophet at length names the
hero of Israel’s salvation and describes his mission.
He is Cyrus. He shall build Jerus and lay the
foundations of the temple (44 28); he shall also
subdue nations aud let the exiles go free (45 1.13).
He speaks of Cyrus in the most extraordinary,
almost extravagant terms. He is Jeh’s “shepherd’
(44 28), he is also Jeh’s “‘anointed,”’ ie. Messiah
(45 1), “the man of my counsel” (46 11), whom
Jeh has called by name, and surnamed without his
ever knowing Him (45 3.4); the one “whom Jeh
loveth” (48 14), whose right hand Jeh upholdeth
(45 1), and who will perform all Jeh’s pleasure
(44 28); though but “a ravenous bird from the
east”? (46 11). The vividness with which the
prophet speaks of Cyrus leads some to suppose that
the latter is already upon the horizon. This, how-
ever, isa mistake. Scarcely would a contemporary
have spoken iu such terms of the real Cyrus of 538
BC. The prophet regards him (i.e. the Cyrus of
his own prediction, not the Cyrus of history) as
the fulfilment of predictions spoken long before.
That is to say, in one and the same context, Cyrus
is both predicted and treated as a proof that pre-
diction is being fulfilled (44 24-28; 45 21). Such
a phenomenon in prophecy can best be explained
by supposing that the prophet projected himself
into the future from an earlier age. Most ex-
traordinary of all, in 45 14-17, the prophet soars
in imagination until he sees, as a result of Cyrus’


Isaiah


victories, the conquered nations renouncing their

idols, and attracted to Jeh as the Saviour of all man-

kind (45 22). On any theory of origin, the predictive
element in these prophecies is written large.

Chs 46-47 describe further the distinctive work of
Cyrus, though Cyrus himself is but once referred
to. Particular emphasis is laid on the complete
collapse of the Bab religion; the prophet heing
apparently more concerned with the humiliation of
Babylon’s idols than with the fall of the city itself.
Of course the destruction of the city would imply
the defeat of her gods, as also the emancipation of
Israel. But here again all is in the future; in fact
Jeh’s incomparable superiority and unique deity
are proven by His power to predict “the end from
the beginning” and bring His prediction to pass
(46 10.11).

Ch 47 is a dirge over the downfall of the imperial
city, strongly resembling the taunt-song over the
king of Babylon in 14 4-21.

Ch 48 is a hortatory summary and recapitulation
of the argument contained in chs 40-47, the prophet
again emphasizing the following points: (1) Jeh’s
unique power to predict; (2) that salvation is of
grace; (3) that Cyrus’ advent will be the crowning
proof of Jeh’s abiding presence among His people;
(4) that God’s chastisements were only disciplinary;
and (5) that even now there is hope, if they will but
accept of Jeh’s proffered salvation. Alas! that
there is no peace or salvation for the godless (48
20-22). Thus ends the first division of Isaiah’s
remarkable ‘‘vision” of Israel’s deliverance from
captivity through Cyrus.

The second section (chs 49-67) deals with the
spiritual agent of salvation, Jeh’s suffering ‘‘Serv-
ant.” With ch 49 the prophet leaves off attempt-
ing further to prove the sole deity of Jeh by
means of prediction, and drops entirely his descrip-
tion of Cyrus’ victories and the overthrow of Baby-
lon, in order to set forth in greater detail the charac-
ter and mission of the suffering “Servant” of Jeh.
Already, in chs 40-48, he had alluded several times
to this unique and somewhat enigmatical personage,
speaking of him both collectively and as an indi-
vidual (41 8-10; 42 1-9.18-22; 43 10; 44 1-5.
21-28; 45 4; 48 20-22); but now he defines with
greater precision both his prophetic and priestly
functions, his equipment for his task, his sufferings
and humiliation, and also his final exaltation. Alto-
gether in these prophecies he mentions the “Serv-
ant” some 20 t. But there are four distinctively

“so-called ‘“Servant-Songs” in which the prophet
seems to rise above the collective masses of all
Israel to at least a personification of the pious within
Israel, or better, to a unique Person embodying
within himself all that is best in the Israel within
Isracl. They are the following: (1) 42 1-9, a poem
descriptive of the Servant’s gentle manner and
world-wide mission; (2) 49 1-13, describing the
Servant’s mission and spiritual success; (3) 50 4-11,
the Servant’s soliloquy concerning His perfection
through suffering; and (4) 52 183—53 12, the Serv-
ant’s vicarious suffering and ultimate exaltation.
In this last of the four ‘Servant-Songs’’ we reach
the climax of the prophet’s inspired symphony, the
acme of Heb Messianic hope. The profoundest
thoughts in the OT revelation are to be found in
thissection. Itis a vindication of the “Servant,” so
clear and so true, and wrought out with such pathos
and potency, that it holds first place among Mes-
sianic predictions. Polycarp called it “the golden
passional of the OT.” It has been realized in Jesus
Christ.

Chs 58-66 describe the future glory of the people
of God. Having described in chs 40-48 the tem-
poral agent of Israel’s salvation, Cyrus, and in chs
49-67 the spiritual agent of their salvation, the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1502


“Servant” of Jeh, the prophet proceeds in this last

section to define the conditions on which salvation

may be enjoyed. He begins, as before, with a

gels imperative, “Cry aloud, spare not’’ (cf 40 1;
9 1).

In ch 58 he discusses true fasting and faithful
Sabbath observance. aes

In ch 59 he beseeches Israel to forsake their sins.
It is their sins, he urges, which have hidden Jeh’s
face and retarded the nation’s salvation. In vs
9ff the prophet identifies himself with the people
and leads them in their devotions. Jeh is grieved
over Israel’s forlorn condition, and, seeing their
helplessness, He arms himself like a warrior to
interfere judicially (vs 15-19). Israel shall be
redeemed. With them as the nucleus of a new na-~
tion, Jeh will enter anew into covenant relation, and
put His Spirit upon them, which will abide with
them henceforth and forever (vs 20-21). ;

Chs 60-61 describe the future blessedness of Zion.
The long-looked-for “light”? (cf 59 9) begins to
dawn: ‘Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the
glory of Jeh is risen upon thee’ (60 1). The
prophet pauses at this point to paint a picture of
the redeemed community. Asin 2 3.4, the Gentiles
are seen flocking to Zion, which becomes the mis-
tress of the nations. Foreigners build her walls,
and her gates are kept open continually without
fear of siege. The Gentiles acknowledge that Zion
is the spiritual center of the world. Even Israel’s
oppressors regard her as “‘the city of Jeh,” as “an
eternal excellency,”’ in which Jeh sits as its ever-
lasting light (60 10-22).

In ch 61, which Drummond has called “the pro-
gram of Christianity,” the “Servant” of Jeh is again
introduced, though anonymously, as the herald of
salvation (vs 1-3). The gospel monologue of the
“Servant” is followed by a promise of the restora-
tion and blessedness of Jerus (vs 4-11). Thus the
prophecy moves steadily forward toward its goal


_in Jesus Christ (cf Lk 4 18-21).


In 62 1—63 6 Zion’s salvation is described as
drawing near. The nations will be spectators of
the great event. A new name which will better
symbolize her true character shall be given to Zion,
namely, Hephzi-bah, ‘“My delight is in her’; for
Jerus shall no more be called desolate. On the
other hand, Zion’s enemies will all be vanquished.
In a brief poem of peculiar dramatic beauty (63
1-6), the prophet portrays Jeh’s vengeance, as a
victorious warrior, upon all those who retard Israel’s
deliverance. Edom in particular was Israel’s in-
satiate foe. Hence the prophet represents Jeh’s
judgment of the nations as taking place on Edom’s
unhallowed soil. Jeh, whose mighty arm has
wrought salvation, returns as victor, having slain
all of Israel’s foes.

In 63 7—64 12, Jeh’s “‘servants” resort to prayer.
They appeal to Jeh as the Begetter and Father of the
nations (63 16; 64 8). With this thought of the
fatherhood of God imbedded in his language, Isaiah
had opened his very first oracle to Judah and
Jerus (cf 1 2). As the prayer proceeds, the lan-
guage becomes increasingly tumultuous. The
people are thrown into despair because Jeh seems
to have abandoned them altogether (63 19). They
recognize that the condition of Jerus is desperate.
“Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers
praised thee, is burned with fire; and all our pleasant
places are laid waste’ (64 11). Such language,
however, is the language of fervent prayer and must
not be taken with rigid literalness, as 63 18 and 3 8
plainly show.

Finally, in chs 65-66, Jeh answers His people’s
supplications, distinguishing sharply between His
own “servants” and Israel’s apostates. Only His
chosen “seed” shall be delivered (65 9). Those


1503


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Isaiah


who have obdurately provoked Jeh by sacrificing
in gardens (65 3; 66 17), offering libations to
Fortune and Destiny (65 11), sitting among the
graves to obtain oracles from the dead, and, like
the Egyptians, eating swine’s flesh and broth of
abominable things which were supposed to possess
magical properties, lodging in vaults or crypts in
which hesthen mysteries were celebrated (65 4),
and at the same time fancying that by celebrating
such heathen mysteries they are holier than others
and thereby disqualified to discharge the ordinary
duties of life (65 5)—such Jeh designs to punish,
measuring their work into their bosom and destroy-
ing them utterly with the sword (65 7.12). Onthe
other hand, the “servants’’ of Jeh shall inherit His
holy mountains. They shall rejoice and sing for
joy of heart, and bless themselves in the God of
Amen, ie.in the God of Truth (65 9.14.16). Jeh
will create new heavens and a new earth, men will
live and grow old like the patriarchs; they will
possess houses and vineyards and enjoy them; for
an era of idyllic peace will be ushered in with the
coming of the Messianic age, in which even the
natures of wild animals will be changed and the
most rapacious of wild animals will live together in
harmony (65 17-25). Religion will become spirit-
ual and decentralized, mystic cults will disappear,
incredulous scoffers will be silenced. Zion’s popu-
lation will be marvelously multiplied, and the people
will be comforted and rejoice (66 1-14). Further-
more, al] nations will flock to Zion to behold Jeh’s
glory, and from one new moon to another, and from
one Sabbath to another, all flesh will come up to
worship in Jerus (66 15-23).

It is evident that the Book of Isa closes, prac-
tically as it begins, with a polemic against false
worship, and the alternate reward of the righteous
and punishment of the wicked. The only essential
difference between the prophet’s earlier and later
oracles is this: Isaiah, in his riper years, on the basis
of nearly half a century’s experience as a preacher,
paints a much brighter eschatological picture than
was possible in his early ministry. His picture of
the Messianic age not only transcends those of his
contemporaries in the 8th cent. BC, but he pene-
trates regions beyond the spiritual horizon of any
and all OT seers. Such language as that contained
in 66 1.2, in particular, anticipates the great prin-
ciple enunciated by Jesus in Jn 4 24, namely, that
“God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must
worship in spirit and truth.” To attempt to date
such oracles as these on the basis of internal evi-
dence is an absolute impossibility. Humanly speak-
ing, one age could have produced such revelations
quite as easily as another. Butno age could have
produced them apart from the Divine spirit. |

The editorial arrangement of Isaiah’s prophecies
is very suggestive. In the main they stand in

chronological order. That is to say,
8. Isaiah’s all the dates mentioned are in strict
Prophecies historical sequence; e.g. 6 1, “In the
Chronologi- year that king Uzziah died” (740 BC);
cally Ar- 7 1, “In the days of Ahaz” (736 ff
ranged § BC); 14 28, “In the year that king

Ahaz died” (727 BC); 20 1, ‘In the
year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, when Sargon
the king of Assyria sent him” (711 BC); 36 1, “In
the 14th year of king Hezekiah” (701 BC). These
points are all in strict chronological order. Taken
in groups, also, Isaiah’s great individual messages
are likewise arranged in true historical sequence;
thus, chs 1-6 for the most part belong to the last
years of Jotham’s reign (740-736 BC); chs 7-12,
to the period of the Syro-Ephraimitic war (734 BC);
ch 20, to the year of Sargon’s siege of Ashdod (711
BC); chs 28-32, to the invasion of Judah by Sen-
nacherib (701 BC); while the distinctively promis-


sory portions (chs 40-66), as is natural, conclude
the collection. In several minor instances, how-
ever, there are notable departures from a rigid
chronological order. For example, ch 6, which
describes the prophet’s initial call to preach, follows
the rebukes and denunciations of chs 1-6; but this
is probably due to its being used by the prophet
asan apologetic. Again, the oracles against foreign
nations in chs 13-23 belong to various dates, being
grouped together, in part, at least, because of their
subject-matter. Likewise, chs 38-39, which give
an account of Hezekiah’s sickness and Merodach-
baladan’s embassy to him upon his recovery (714—
712 BC), chronologically precede chs 36-37, which
describe Sennacherib’s investment of Jerus (701
BC). This chiastic order, however, in the last
instance, is due probably to the desire to make chs
36-37 (about Sennacherib, king of Assyria) an
appropriate conclusion to chs 1-35 (which say
much about Assyria), and, on the other hand, to
make chs 38-39 (about Merodach-baladan of Baby-
lon) a suitable introduction to chs 40-66 (which
speak of Babylon).

The attempt to date Isaiah’s individual messages
on the basis of internal criteria alone, is a well-nigh
impossible task; and yet no other kind of evidence
is available. Often passages stand side by side
which point in opposite directions; in fact, certain
sections seem to be composed of various fragments
dating from different periods, as though prophecies
widely separated from each other in time had been
fused together. In such cases much weight should
be given to those features which point to an early
origin, because of the predominatingly predictive
character of Isatiah’s writings.

Isaiah always had an eye upon the future. His
semi-historical and biographical prophecies are nat-
urally the casiest to date; on the other hand, the
form of his Messianic and eschatological discourses
is largely due to his own personal temper and psy-
chology, rather than to the historical circumstances


of the time. The following is a table of Isaiah’s
prophecies chronologically arranged:

Chs

1-6 written probably c 740-736
4-19 a a ce 734-732
15 1—16 12; 17 ie a c 734

13 1—14 23 ve Ey between 732-722
14 24-27 . ee 732-722
14 28-32 5 oe c 727

23 ee “ shortly before 722
54-27 a 7 a * 723

58 1-6 “ ; 7 439

19 “ : ce 720

38 ; ce 714

39 . a c 712

21 11.12.13-17 oe e711

22 15-25 - a e 7il

21 1-10 : ¢ 709

22 1-10 s - c 709

28 7—83 24 ss ‘* shortly before 701

18 Be pe ce 701
34-35 es ~ e 701
36-37 tf ** soon after 701
40-66 iF ‘ noire: “01


The prophet’s standpoint in chs 40-66 is that of
Isaiah himself. For if Isaiah, before 734 BC, in
passages confessedly his own, could describe Judah’s
cities as already “burned with fire,” Zion as de-
serted as “a booth in a vineyard” (1 7.8), Jerus as
‘cuined,’”’ Judah as ‘‘fallen” (3 8), and Jeh’s people
as already “gone into captivity’ (6 13), surely
after all the destruction and devastation wrought
on Judah by Assyria in the years 722, 720, 711, and
701 BC, the same prophet with the same poetic
license could declare that the temple had been
“trodden down’ (63 18) and “burned with fire,”
and all Judah’s pleasant places “laid waste” (64
11); and, in perfect keeping with his former prom-
ises, could add that “they shall repair the waste
cities, the desolations of many generations” (61 4;
cf 44 26; 58 12).


Isaiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1504


Or again, if Isaiah the sou of Amoz could comfort
Jerus with promises of protection when the Assyrian
(734 BC) should come like an overflowing river
(8 9.10; 10 24.25); and conceivea beautiful parable
of comfort like that contained in 28 23-29; and
insert among his warnings and exhortations of the
gloomy year 702 BC ‘so many precious promises of
a brighter future which was sure to follow Sen-
nacherib’s invasion (29 17-24; 30 29-33; 31 8.9);
and, in the very midst of the siege of 701 BC, con-
ceive of such marvelous Messianic visions as those
in 33 17-24 with which to dispel the dismay of his
compatriots, surely the same prophet might be con-
ceived of as seizing the opportunity to comfort those
in Zion who survived the great catastrophe of 701
BC. The prophet who bad done the one was pre-
pared to do the other.

There was one circumstance of the prophet’s
position after 701 BC which was new, and which
is too often overlooked, a circumstance which he
eould not have employed to anything like the same
degree as an argument in enforcing his message
prior to the Assyrian’s overthrow and the deliver-
ance of Jerus. It was this: the fulfilment of former
predictions as proof of Jeh’s deity. From such pas-
sages we obtain an idea of the prophet’s true his-
torical position (42 9; 44 8; 46 21; 46 10; 48 3).
Old predictions have already been fulfilled (6 11-13;
29 8; 30 31; 31 8; 37 7.30), on the basis of which
the prophet ventures to predict new and even more
astounding things concerning the overthrow of
Babylon by Cyrus, and Israel’s deliverance through
him from their captors (48 6). Isaiah’s book is
signally full of predictions (7 8.10ff; 8 4.8; 9 11.12;
10 26 ff; 14 24-27; 16 14; 17 9.12-14; 20 4-6;
21:16; 22 19ff; 23 15; 38 5), some of which,
written down and sealed, were evidently committed
by the prophet to his inner circle of disciples to be
used and verified by them in subsequent crises (8
16). Failure to recognize this element in Isaiah’s
book is fatal to a true interpretation of the prophet’s
real message.

“For about twenty-five centuries,” as A. B.
Davidson observes (OT Prophecy, 1908, 244), “no

one dreamt of doubting that Isaiah the


9. The son of Amoz was the author of every
Critical part of the book that goes under his
Problem name; and those who still maintain


the unity of authorship are accus-

tomed to point, with satisfaction, to the unanimity
of the Christian church on the matter, till a few
German scholars arose, about a century ago, and
called in question the unity of this book.” Tradi-
tion is unanimous in favor of the unity of the book.
(1) The history of criticism.—The critical dis-
integration of the book began with Koppe, who in
1780 first doubted the genuineness of ch 60. Nine
years later Doederlein suspected the whole of chs
40-66. He was followed by Rosenmueller, who
was the first to deny to Isaiah the prophecy against
Babylon in 13 1—14 23. Eichhorn, at the begin-
ning of the last century, further eliminated the
oracle against Tyre in ch 23, and he, with Gesenius
and Ewald, also denied the Isaianic origin of chs
24-27. Gesenius also ascribed to some unknown
prophet chs 15 and 16. Rosenmueller then went
farther, and pronounced against chs 34 aud 36, and
not long afterward (1840) Ewald questioned chs
12 and 33. Thus by the middle of the 19th cent.
some 37 or 38 chapters were rejected as no part of
Isaiah’s actual writings. In 1879-80, the cele-
brated Leipzig professor, Franz Delitzsch, who for
years previous had defended the genuineness of the
entire book, finally yielded to the modern critical
position, and in the new edition of his commentary
published in 1889, interpreted chs 40-66, though
with considerable hesitation, as coming from the


close of the period of Bab exile. About the same
time (1888-90), Drs. Driver and G. A. Smith gave
opular impetus to similar views in Great Britain.
Gas 1890, the criticism of Isa has been even more
trenchant and microscopic than before. Duhm,
Stade, Guthe, Hackmann, Cornill and Marti ou the
Continent, and Cheyne, Whitehouse, Box, Glaze-
brook, Kennett, Gray, Peake, and others in Great
Britain and America have questioned portions
which hitherto were supposed to be genuine.

(2) The disintegration of ‘‘Deutero-Isaiah.”—
Even the unity of chs 40-66, which were supposed
to he the work of the “Second” or ‘““Deutero-Isaiah,”
is now given up. What prior to 1890 was supposed
to be the unique product of some celebrated but
anonymous seer who lived in Babylonia about 550
BC is today commonly divided and subdivided and
in large part distributed among various writers from
Cyrus to Simon (538-164 BC). At first it was
thought sufficient to separate chs 63-66 as a later
addition to “Deutero-Isaiah’s” prophecies; but
more recently it has become the fashion to dis-
tinguish between chs 40-55, which are claimed to
have been written by “‘Deutero—Isaiah”’ in Babylonia
about 549-538 BC, and chs 56-66, which are now
alleged to have been composed by a ‘‘Trito-Isaiah”
about 460-445 BC.

(3) Recent views—Among the latest to investi-
gate the problem is Professor R. H. Kennett of
Cambridge, Eng., who, in his Schweich Lectures
(The Composition of the Book of Isa in the Light
of Hist and Archaeology, 1910, $4 ff), sums up the
results of investigations as follows: (a) all of chs
3, 5, 6, 7, 20 and 31, and large portions of chs 1, 2,4,
8, 9, 10, 14, 17, 22 and 23, may be assigned to Isaiah
the son of Amoz; (b) all of chs 13, 40 and 47, and
large portions of chs 14, 21, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46 and
48, may be assigned to the time of Cyrus; (c) all
of chs 15, 36, 37 and 39, and portions of chs 16 and
38, may be assigned to the period between Nebu-
chadnezzar and Alexander the Great, but cannot
be dated precisely; (d) the passage 23 1-14 may
be assigned to the time of Alexander the Great;
(e) all of chs 11, 12, 19, 24-27, 29, 30, 32-36, 42,
49-66, and portions of chs 1, 2, 4, 8, 9, 10, 16, 17, 18,
23, 41, 44, 45, 48 may be assigned to the 2d cent.
BC (167-140 BC).


Professor C. F. Kent, also (Sermons, Epistles, and
Apocalypses of Israel's Prophets, 1910, 27 ff), makes the


foliowing critical observations on chs 40-66. e@ says:
‘“‘The prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah ... . afford
by far the best approach for the study of the difficult
problems presented by Isa 40-66..... 6-6'

are generally recognized as post-exilic. .... In Isa


not confined to the latter part of the book. .... The
fact, on the one hand, that there are few, if any, allu-
sions to contemporary events in these chapters, and on
the other hand, that little or nothing is known of the
condition and hopes of the Jews euting. this period (the
closing years of the Bab exile) makes the dating of these
prophecies possible, although far from certain. ....
Also, the assumption that the author of these chapters
lived in the Bab exile is not supported by a close exam-
ination of the prophecies themselves. “Possibly their
author was one of the few who, like Zerubbabel, had
been born in Babylon aud later returned to Pal. He was
also dealing with such broad and universal problems that
he gives few indications of his date and place of abode;
but all the evidence that is found points to Jerns as the
place where he lived and wrote..... The prophet’'s
interest and point of view center throughout in Jerus,
and he shows himself far more familiar with conditions
in Pal than in distant Babylon. Most of his Niustra-
tions are drawn from the agricultural life of Pal. His
vocabulary is also that of a. man dwelling in Pal, and in
this respect is in marked contrast with the synonyms
employed by Ezekiel, the prophet of the Bab exile."


That is to say, two of the most recent investi-
gators of the Book of Isa reach conclusions quite
at variance with the opinions advocated in 1890,
when Delitzsch so reluctantly allowed that chs 40-


a


1505


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Isaiah


ESE


66 may have sprung from the period of Bab exile.
Now, it is found that these last 27 chs were written
after the exile, most probably in Pal, rather than
in Babylonia as originally claimed, and are no
longer considered addressed primarily to the suffer-
ing exiles in captivity as was formerly urged.

(4) The present state of the question —The present
state of the Isa-question is, to say the least, con-
fusing. Those who deny the integrity of the book
may be divided into two groups, which we may call
moderates and radicals. Among the moderates
may be included Drs. Driver, G. A. Smith, Skinner
Kirkpatrick, Koenig, A. B. Davidson, Barnes and
Whitehouse. These all practically agree that the
following chs and vs are not Isaiah’s: 11 10-16;
12; 13 1—14 23; 16 1—16 12; 21 1-10; 24-27;
34-35; 36-39; 40-66. That is to say, some 44
chs out of the whole number, 66, were not written by
Isaiah; or, approximately 800 out of 1,292 vs are
not genuine. Among the radicals are Drs. Cheyne,
Duhm, Hackmann, Guthe, Marti, Kennett and
Gray. These all reject approximately 1,030 vs
out of the total 1,292, retaining the following only
as the genuine product of Isaiah and his age: 1 2-26.
29-31; 2 6-19; 3 1.5.8.9.12-17; 4 1; 5 1-14.17-29;
6; 7 1-8.22; 9 8—10 9; 10 13.14.27-32; 17 1-14;
18; 20; 22 1-22; 28 1-4.7-22; 29 1-6.9.10.13-15:
30 1-17; 31 1-4. That is, only about 262 vs out of
the total 1,292 are allowed to be gennine. ‘This is,
we believe, a fair statement of the Isa~question as
it exists in the hands of divisive critics today.

On the other hand there have been those who
have defended and who still defend the essential
unity of Isaiah’s entire book, e.g. Strachey (1874),
Nagelsbach (1877), Bredenkamp (1887), Donglas
(1895), W. H. Cobb (1883-1908), W. H. Green
(1892), Vos (1898-99), Thirtle (1907), Margoliouth
(1910) and O. T. Allis (1912).

(5) Reasons for dissecting the book.—The funda~-
mental axiom of criticism is the dictum that a
prophet always spoke out of a definite historical
situation to the present needs of the people among
whom he lived, and that a definite historical sit-
uation shall be pointed out for each prophecy. This
fundamental postulate, which on the whole isreason-
able and perfectly legitimate if not overworked,
underlies all modern criticism of OT prophecy. It
is not possible, however, always to trace a mere
snatch of sermonic discourse to a definite historical
situation apart from its context. Moreover, the
prophets often spoke consciously, not only to their
own generation, but also tothe generations to come.
Isaiah in particular commanded, “Bind thou up
the testimony, seal the law among my disciples”
(8 16); that is, preserve my teachings for the future.
Again in 80 8, he says, ‘‘Now go, . . . . inscribe it
in a book, that tf may be for the time to come for ever
and ever.” Andalsoin 42 23, “Who is there among
you that will give ear to this? that will hearken and
hear for the time to come?”

Certain false presuppositions often govern critics
in their disintegration of the book. Only a few
examples need be given by way of illustration:
(a) According to some, ‘the conversion of the
heathen” lay quite beyond the horizon of any 8th-
cent. prophet; consequently, Isa 2 2-4 and all
similar passages which foretell the conversion of
those outside the chosen people are to be relegated
to an age subsequent to Isaiah. . (6) To others,
“the picture of universal peace”’ in Isa 11 1-9 is a
symptom of late date, and therefore this section
and all kindred ones must bedeleted. (c) To others,
the thought of “universal judgment”? upon “the
whole earth” in 14 26 and elsewhere quite tran-
scends Isaiah’s range of thought. (d) To others
still, the apocalyptic character of chs 24-27 repre-
sents a phase of Heb thought which prevailed in


Israel only after Ezekiel. (e) Even to those who
are considered moderates ‘the poetic character’ of
a passage like ch 12, and the references to a “return”
from captivity, as in 11 11-16, and the promises
and consolations such as are found in ch 33 are
cited as grounds for assigning these and similar
passages to a much later age. Radicals deny in
toto the existence of all Messianic passages among
Isaiah’s own predictions, relegating all Messianic
hope to a much later age.

But to deny to the Isaiah of the 8th cent. all
catholicity of grace, all universalism of salvation or
judgment, every highly developed Messianic ideal,
every rich note of promise and comfort, all sublime
faith in the sacrosanct character of Zion, as some
do, is unwarrantably to create a new Isaiah of
greatly reduced proportions, a mere preacher of
righteousness, a statesman of not very optimistic
vein, and the exponent of a cold ethical religion
without the warmth and glow of the messages
which are actually ascribed to the prophet of the
8th cent.

As a last resort, certain critics have appealed to
2 Ch 86 22.23 as external evidence that chs 40-66
existed as a separate collection in the Chronicler’s
age. But the evidence obtained from this source
is so doubtful that it is well-nigh valueless. For it
is not the prediction of Isa concerning Cyrus to
which the Chronicler points as Jeremiah’s, but the
“70 years” of Bab supremacy spoken of in ver 21,
which Jeremiah actually did predict (cf Jer 25 11;
29 10). On the other hand, chs 40-66 were cer-
tainly ascribed to Isaiah as early as 180 BC, for
Jesus Ben-Sirach, the author of Ecclus, speaks of
Isaiah as the prophet who “saw by an excellent
spirit that which should come to pass at the last, and
comforted them that mourned in Zion” (Ecclus
48 20ff; cf Isa 40 1ff). Furthermore, there is
absolutely no proof that chs 1-39, or chs 40-66, or
any other section of Isaiah’s prophecies ever existed
by themselves as an independent collection; nor is
there any substantial ground for supposing that the
promissory and Messianic portions have been sys-
tematically interpolated by editors long subse-
quent to Isaiah’s own time. The earlier prophets
presumably did more than merely threaten.

(6) Arguments for one Isaiah.—It is as unreason-
able to expect to be able to prove the unity of Isa
as to suppose that it has been disproved. Internal
evidence is indecisive in either case. There are
arguments, however, which corroborate a belief
that there was but one Isaiah. Here are some of
those which might be introduced:

(a) The circle of ideas, which are strikingly the
same throughout the entire book: For example,
take the characteristic name for God, which is
almost peculiar to Isaiah, “the Holy One of Israel.”
This title for Jeh occurs in the Book of Isa a total
of 25 t, and only 6 t elsewhere in the OT, one of
which is a || passage in K. This unique epithet,
“the Holy One of Israel,” interlocks all the various
portions with one another and stamps them with
the personal imprimatur of him who saw the vision
of the majestic God seated upon His throne, high
and lifted up, and heard the angelic choirs singing:
“Holy, holy, holy, is Jeh of hosts: the whole earth
is full of his glory” (6 3). The presence of this
Divine title in all the different sections of the book
is of more value in identifying Isaiah as the author
of all these prophecies than though his name had
been inserted at the beginning of every chapter, for
the reason that his theology—his conception of
God as the Holy One—is woven into the very fiber
and texture of the whole book. It occurs 12 t in
chs 1-39, and 13 t in chs 40-66; and it is simply
unscientific to say that the various alleged authors
of the disputed portions all employed the same title


Isaiah


through imitation (cf 1 4; 5 19.24; 10 20; 12 6;
17:7; 29:19; 30 11.12.15; 311; 87 23; also
41 14.16.20; 43 3.14; 45 11; 47 4; 48 17; 49 7;
64 5; 56 5; 60 9.14; elsewhere, only iu 2 K 19
22; Ps 71 22; 78 41; 89 18; Jer 50 29; 51 5).

Another unique idea which occurs with consid-
erable repetition in the Book of lsa is the thought
of a “highway” (cf 11 16; 35 8; 403; 48 19;
49 11; 57 14; 6210). Another characteristic
idea is that of a “remuant”’ (cf 1 9; 10 20.21.22;
11 11.16; 14 22.30; 159; 16 14; 17 3; 2117;
28 5; 37 31; 46 3; cf 65 8.9). Another striking
trait of the book is the position occupied by ‘‘Zion”’
in the prophet’s thoughts (cf 2 3; 4 5; 18 7; 24 23;
98 16; 29 8; 30 19: 31 9; 38 5.20; 34 8: 46 13:
49 14; 51 3.16; 521; 59 20; 60 14; 62 1.11;
66 8). Still another is the oft-repeated expression,
“pangs of a woman in travail’’ (cf 18 8; 21 3; 26
17.18; 42 14; 54 1; 66 7). These, and many others
less distinctive, psychologically stamp the book with
an individuality which it is difficult to account for,
if it be broken up into countless fragments and dis-
tributed, as some do, over the centuries.

(b) The literary style: As negative evidence,
literary style is not a very safe argument; for, as
Professor McCurdy says, “In the case of a writer
of Isaiah’s environments, style is not a sure cri-
terion of authorship” (History, Prophecy and the
Monuments, II, 317,n.). Yetitis certainly remark-
able that the clause ‘for the mouth of Jeh hath
spoken it’’ should be found 3 t in the Book of Isa,
and nowhere else in the OT (cf 1 20; 40 5; 58 14).
And it is noteworthy that the phrase, “streams of
water,” should occur twice in Isa and nowhere else
(cf 30 25; 44 4 in the Heb). And very peculiar
is the tendency on the prophet’s part to emphatic
reduplication (cf 2 7.8; 6 3; 8 9; 24 16.23; 40 1;
43 11.25; 4815; 6112; 5719; 6210). In
fact, it is not extravagant to say that Isaiah’s style
differs widely from that of every other OT prophet,
and is as far removed as possible from that of Eze-
kiel and the post-exilic prophets.

(c) Historical references: Take, for example,
first, the prophet’s constant reference to Judah and
Jerus, his country and its capital (1 7-9; 3 8;
24 19; 25 2; 40 2.9; 62 4); likewise, to the temple
and its ritual of worship and sacrifice. In 1 11-15,
when all was prosperous, the prophet complained
that the people were profuse and formal in their
ceremonies and sacrifices; in 43 23.24, on the con-
trary, when the country had beeu overrun by the
Assyrian and Sennacherib had besieged the city,
the prophet reminds them that they had not brought
to Jch the sheep of their burnt offerings, nor honored
Him with their sacrifices; while in 66 1-3.6.20,
not only is the existence of the Temple and the ob-
servance of the ritual presupposed, but those are
sentenced who place their trust in the material
temple, and the outward ceremonials of temple-
worship. As for the “exile,’”’ the prophet’s attitude
to it throughout is that of both anticipation and
realization. Thus, in 7 1, judgment is only threat-
ened, not yet inflicted: “Che righteous is taken
away from the evil to come.’ That is to say, the
exile is described as still future. On the other
hand, in 3 8, “Jerus is ruined, and Judah is fallen,”
which seems to describe the exile as in the past;
yet, as everybody admits, these are the words of
Isaiah of the 8th cent. In 11 11.12, the prophet
says, “The Lord will set his hand again the second
time to recover the remnant of his people... .
from the four corners of the earth.” To interpret
such a statement literally and mechanically without
regard to 8th-cent. conditions, or to Isaiah’s mani-
fest attitude to the exile, leads to confusion. No
prophet realized so keenly or described so vividly
the destiny of the Hebrews. :


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1506


(d) The predictive element: This is the strongest
proof of the unity of the Book of Isa. Prediction
is the very essence of prophecy (cf Dt 18 22);
Isaiah was preéminently a prophet of the future.
With unparalleled suddenness, he repeatedly leaps
from despair to hope, from threat to promise, and
from the actual to the ideal. What Professor Kent
says of “Deutero-Isaiah” may with equal justice
be said of Isaiah himself: ‘While in touch with his
own age, the great unknown prophet lives in the at-
mosphere of the past and the future” (Sermons,
Epistles, and Apocalypses of Israel’s Prophets, 28).
Isaiah spoke to his own age, but he also addressed
himself to the ages to follow. His verb tenses are
characteristically futures and prophetic perfects.
Of his book A. B. Davidson’s words are particu-
larly true: ‘Jf any prophetic book be examined

. it will appear that the ethical and religious
teaching is always secondary, and that the essential
thing in the book or discourse is the prophet’s out-
look into the future’ (HDB, art. ‘Prophecy and
Prophets,” IV, 119).


Isaiah was exceptionally given to predicting: thus (a)
before the Syro-Ephraimitic war (734 BC), he predicted
that within 65 years Ephraim should he broken to pieces
(7 8); and that before the child Maher-shalal-hash-baz
should have knowledge to cry, ‘‘My father,’ or “My
mother,’’ the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Sa-
maria should he carried away (8 4; cf'7 16). These are,
however, hut two of numerous predictions, as shown
ahove, among his earlier prophecies (cf 1 27.28; 2 2-4;
6 13; 10 20-23; 11 6-16; 17 14).

(8B) Shortly before the downfall of Samaria in 722 BC,
Isaiah predicted that Tyre should he forgotten 70 years,
and that after the end of 70 years her merchandise should
be holiness to Jeh (23 15.18).

(y). In like manner prior to the siege of Ashdod in
711 BC, he proclaimed that within 3 years Moab should
he brought into contempt (16 14), and that within a
year all the glory of Kedar should fail (21 16).

(6) And not long prior to the siege of Jerus by Sen-
nacherib in 701 BC, he predicted that in an_ instant,
suddenly, a multitude of Jerusalem's foes should he as
dust (29 5); that yet a very little while and Lehanon
should be turned into a fruitful field (29 17); and that
Assyria shouid be dismayed and fall by the sword,
but not of men (30 17.31; 31 8). And more, that for
days heyond a year, the careless women of Jerus should
be tronbled (82_10.16—-20); and that the righteous in
Zion should see Jerus a quiet habitation, and return and
come with singing (83 17 ff; 35 4.10); but that Sen-
nacherih, on the contrary, should hear tidings and return
ae shooting an arrow into the city (37 7.26-29.


declare. ....


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Isaiah


OO Tr —  SseSsSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSsSSSSSSSSSsSSSSsee


Thave called him; . .. . from the beginning I have not
spoken in secret” (48 6-8.14~16).
explicit and emphatic.


1507

this time, even hidden things. .... Yea, from of old
thine ear was not opened..... Who among them hath
declared these things? .... I, even I, have spoken; yea,


Such predictions are


(e) Cyrus a subject of prediction: From all the
above-mentioned explicit and oft-repeated pre-
dictions one thing is obvious, namely, that great
emphasis is laid by the prophet on prediction
throughout the entire Book of Isa. And it must be
further allowed that “Cyrus” is represented by the
author as predicted, from any point of view. The
only question is, Does the prophet emphasize the
fact that he himself is predicting the coming of
Cyrus? or that former predictions concerning Cyrus
are now, as the prophet writes, coming to pass
before his readers’ eyes? Canon Cheyne’s remark
upon this point is instructive. He says: “The
editor, who doubtless held the later Jewish theory
of prophecy, may have inferred from a number of
passages, esp. 41 26; 48 3.6.14, that the first ap-
pearance of Cyrus had been predicted by an ancient
prophet, and observing certain Isaianic elements in
the phraseology of these chapters, may have identi-
fed the epic with Isaiah’ (Intro to the Book of

sa, 238).


Dr. G. A. Smith likewise allows that Cyrus is the ful-
filment of former predictions.

.He says: ‘‘Nor is it possible to argue, as some have
tried to do, that the prophet is predicting these things
as if they had already happened. For as part of an
argument for the unique divinity of the God of Israel,
Cyrus, ‘alive and irresistible,’ and already accredited
with success, is pointed out as the unmistakable proof
that former prophecies of a deliverance for Israel are
already coming to pass, Cyrus, in short, is not pre-
sented as a prediction, but as a proof that a prediction
is being fulfilled” (HDB, art. “Isaiah,” 493). And
further he says: ‘‘The chief claim, therefore, which chs
40 ff make for the God of Israel is His power to direct
the history of the world in conformity to a long-predicted
and faithfully followed purpose. This claim starts from
the proof that Jeh has long before predicted events now
happening or about to happen, with Cyrus as their
center. But this is much more than a proof of isolated

redictions, though these imply ommniscience. It is a

eclaration of the unity of history sweeping to the high
ends which have been already revealed to_Israel—an
exposition, in short, of_the Omnipotence, Consistence,
and qeactuness of the Providence of the one true God"
(ib, e


It is obvious, therefore, in any case, whether these
chapters are early or late, that Cyrus is the subject
of prediction. It really makes little difference at
which end of history one takes his stand, whether
in the 8th cent. BC with Isaiah, or in the 6th cent.
BC with ‘“Deutero-Isaiah.” Cyrus, to the author
of these chs, is the subject of prediction. In other
words, whether indeed the author is really pre-
dicting Cyrus in advance of all apparent fulfilment,
or Cyrus is the fulfilment of some ancient prediction
by another, does not alter the fact that Cyrus was
the subject of prediction on the part of somehody.
Accordingly, as was stated at the outset, the whole
question is, which does the prophet emphasize, (a)
the fact that he himself is predicting? or, (6) that
former predictions by someone else are now before
his eyes coming to pass? The truth is, the prophet
seers to live in the atmosphere of the past and the
future ag well as in the present, all of which are
equally vivid to his prophetic mind. This isa pecul-
iar characteristic of Isaiah. It is seen in the ac-
count he gives of his inaugural vision (ch 6), of
which Delitzsch remarks that it is “like a predic-
tion in the process of being fulfilled.” The same is
true of chs 24-27. There the prophet repeatedly
projects himself into the future, and speaks from the
standpoint of the fulfilment of his predictions. It
is esp. true of chs 40-48. At one time the prophet
emphasizes the fact that he is predicting, and a little
later he describes his predictions as coming to pass.
When, accordingty, a decision is mate as to when


the author predicted Cyrus, it is more natural to
suppose that he was doing so long before Cyrus’
actual appearance. This, in fact, is in keeping
with the test of true prophecy contained in Dt 18
22: “When a prophet speaketh in the name of Jeb,
if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the
thing which Jeh hath not spoken; the prophet hath
spoken it presumptuously, thou shalt not be afraid
of him.” Besides, there is a similar explicit pre-
diction in the OT, namely, that of King Josiah,
who was foretold by name two centuries before he
came (1 K 13 2; cf 2 K 23 15.16).

Dr. W. H. Cobb in the Journal of Bib. Literature
and Exegesis, 1901, 79, pleads for a ‘‘sbrinkage of
Cyrus,” because Cyrus figures only in chs 40-48,
and is then dismissed. Dr. Thirtle, on the other
hand, argues that the name ‘Cyrus’ is a mere
appellative, being originally not Kdéresh (Cyrus),
but héresh (‘“workman,” “‘artificer,”” ‘“image-
breaker’), and that 44 27.28 is a gloss (cf OT
Problems, 244-64). But in opposition to these
views the present writer prefers to write Cyrus
large, and to allow frankly that he is the subject of
extraordinary prediction. For the very point of
the author’s argument is, .hat he is predicting events
which Jeh alone is capable of foretelling or bringing
to pass; in other words, that prescience is the proof
of Jeh’s deity. Isaiah lived im an age when Jeh’s
secrets were first revealed privately unto His serv-
ants the prophets (cf Am 3 7). Political condi-
tions were unsettled and kaleidoscopic, and there
was every incentive to predict. That Isaiah actu-
ally uttered wonderful predictions is attested,
furthermore, both by Jesus Ben-Sirach in Ecclus
48 20-25 (written c 180 BC), and by Jos in his
Ant, XI, i, 1, 2 (dating from ¢ 100 AD); and these
are ancient traditions worthy of credence.

Recently, Mr. Oswald T. Allis, after a thorough
and exhaustive critical investigation of “the
numerico-climactic structure” of the poem in Isa
44 24-28, concludes that “the most striking and
significant features of the poem favor the view that
while the utterance was significant in and of itself,
it was chiefly significant in view of the exceptional
circumstance under which it was spoken, i.e. in view
of its early date. The chronological arrangement
of the poem assigns the Restoration and Cyrus to
the future. The perspective of the poem, together
with the abrupt change of person in the 2d strophe,
argues that the future is a remote future. And
finally the carefully constructed double climax
attaches a significance to the definiteness of the
utterance which is most easily accounted for if this
future was so remote that a definite disclosure con-
cerning it would be of extraordinary importance.”
And he further alleges that “it is impossible, if
justice is done to the plain declarations of Scrip-
ture, to limit the prophetic horizon of the prophet
Isaiah to the preéxilic period and that .. . . when
the form of the poem is recognized, there is every
reason to assign it to a preéxilic prophet, to Isaiah,
since the form of the poem is admirably calculated
to emphasize the fact that Cyrus and the Restora-
tion belong to a distant future, and to make it clear
that it is just because of this fact that the definite-
ness of the prophecy, the mention of Cyrus by name
is so remarkable and of such unique significance’
(Bib. and Theol. Studies, by the members of the
Faculty of Princeton Theological Seminary, Cen-
tennial vol, 1912, 628-29).

After all, why should men object to prediction
on so large a scale? Unless there is definiteness
about any given prediction, and unless it tran-
scends ordinary prognostication, there is no especial
value in it. Should it be objected, however, that
prediction of so mimute a character is “abhorrent
to reason,” the answer is already at band; it may


Isaiah, Ascen. of
Ishmael


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1508


be abhorrent to reason, but it is a handmaid to faith.
Faith has to do with the future, even as prediction has
to do with the future; and the OT is preéminently
a book which encourages faith. There is really no
valid objection to the prediction of Cyrus. For
the one outstanding differentiating characteristic
of Israel’s religion is predictive prophecy. The
Hebrews certainly predicted the coming of a Mes-
siah. Indeed, the Hebrews were the only people
of antiquity whose “Golden Age” lay in the future
rather than in the past. Accordingly, to predict
the coming of a Cyrus as the human agent of Israel’s
salvation is but the reverse side of the same prophet’s
picture of the Divine agent, namely, the ohedient,
Suffering Servant of Jeh, who would redeem Israel
from its sin. Deny to Isaiah the son of Amoz the
prediction concerning Cyrus, and it is but logical
to go farther and to deny to him the Messianic hope
which is usually associated with his name. Deny
to Isaiah the son of Amoz the predictions concern-
ing a return from captivity, and the prophecies of
his book are robbed of their essential character
and unique perspective. Emasculate those portions
of the Book of Isa which unveil the future, and they
are reduced to a mere vaticinium ex eventu, and
their religious value as Divine oracles is largely lost.


Litsrature.—So much has been written on Isalah’s
prophecies that only a selected list can be given here:

I. Commentaries on Isa: Owen_C. Whitehouse, The
New Century Bible, 2 vols, 1905; J. Skinner, The Cam-
bridge Bible for Schools and Colleges, 2 vols, 1896-98;
W. E. Barnes, The Churchman’s Bible, 2 vols, 1901-3;
G. A. Smith, The Expostior’s Bible, 2 vols, 1888-90;
Franz Delitzsch, Clark's Foreign Theological Library,
2 vols, 1892; ©. von Orelli, Clark's Foreign Theological
Library, 1895; T. K. Cheyne, The Prophecies of Isaiah,
2 vols, 1892; G. W. Wade, Westminster Commentaries,
1911; G. H. Box, The Book of Isa, 1909; G. B. Gray,
ICC, I, chs i-xxvii, 1912; II, chs xxviii-_Ixvi (forthcoming),
by G. B. Gray and A. S. Peake; J. E. McFadyen, ‘Book
of the Prophecies of Isaiah’? (The Bible for Home and
School), 1910; G. Campbell Morgan, The Analyzed
Bible, 2 vols, 1910; Alex. Maclaren, Expositions of Holy
Scripture, 2 vols, 1906; H. G. Mitchell, Isaiah: A Study
of cha 1-12, 1897; Niagelsbach in Lange’s Bibelwerk,
Eng. ed, 1878; J. A. Alexander, 1865; H. Ewald, Eng. ed,
1876-81; John Calvin, Eng. ed, 1850; R. Lowth, 1778;
Vitringa, 1732; W. Gesenius, 1820-21; F. Hitzig, 1833; C.
J. Bredenkamp, 1887; A. Dillmann, 1890, as revised by
Kittel, 1898; B. Duhm, in Nowack's Handkommentar zum
Fea 1892; K. Marti, 1900; A. Condamin (Rom Cath.),


Il. Introduction and Criticism: 8. R. Driver, Isaiah,
His Life and Times, in ‘‘The Men of the Bible Series,”’
1888; T. K. Cheyne, Iniro to the Book of Isa, 1895; W.
R. Smith, The Prophets of Israel, 2d ed, 1896; A. F. Kirk-
patrick, The Doctrine of the Prophets, 1892; J. W. Thirtle,
OT Problems, 1907; W. E. Barnes, An Exom. of Isa 24-27,
1891; G. Douglas, Isaiah One and His Book One, 1895;

J. Kennedy, A Popular Argument for the Unity of Isa,
1891; E. Koenig, The Exiles’ Baok of Consolation, 1899;
G. C. Workman, The Servant of Jeh, 1907; M. G. Glaze-
brook, Studies in the Book of Isa, 1910; R. H. Kennett,
The Composition of the Book of Isa in the Light of History
and Archaeology, 1910; R. R. Ottley, Isa according to

Hackmann, Die Zukunftserwartung des


of Israel, Isa 44 24-28,” in Bib. and Theol. Studies,
Princeton’s Centennial Commemoration vol, 1912, 579—
634: J. Hastings, The Great Texts of the Bible, 1910; C.
S. Robinson, The Gospel in Isa, 1895; E. Sievers, Me-
trische Studien, 1901; G. L. Robinson, The Boek of Isa,
1910; H. Guthe, Das Zukunfisbild des Jesaia, 1885;
Feldmann, Der Knecht_Gottes, 1907; W. Urwick, The
Servant of Jeh, 1877; K. Cramer, The Historical Back-
Gradad of Isa 56-66, 1905; A. B. Davidson, OT Prophecy,


Ifl. Arts. in Journals and Dictionaries: W. H. Cobb
in JBL, 1891, II; 1895, Land II; 1898, 1; 1901, I; 1908,
I; F. Brown, JBL, 1890, 1; W. H. Cobh, in the BS, 1882;
G. A. Smith, art. ‘‘Isaiah” in HDB, 1899; T. K. Cheyne,
in the ZB, 1901, and in the Enc Brit, 11th ed, 1910;
Jas. Robertson, in the Illustrated Bible Dict., 1908; E.
Koenig, inthe Standard Bible Dict., 1909; A. Klostermann
and J. A. Kelso, in The New Sch-Herz, 1910; A. Kloster-
mann in the RE, 1900; G. Vos, Presbyterian and Reformed
Review, 1898; D. S. Margoliouth, in The Temple Dict.,
1910; OC. A. Briggs, art. ‘‘ Analysis of Isa 40-62" in Harper


Memorial Volume.
Gsorce L. Ropinson
ISAIAH, ASCENSION OF. See Arocatyptic
LITERATURE.


ISCAH, iz’ka, is’ka (MDO", yiskah): Daughter of
Haran and sister of Milcah the wife of Nahor (Gen
11 29), Tradition identifies her with Sarai, Abram’s
wife; but without sufficient reason.


ISCARIOT, is-kar’i-ot.


ISDAEL, is’da-el (‘IoSafA, Isdaél): In 1 Esd 6
33; called “Giddel” in Ezr 2 56.


ISH (W", ’ish): In the following Heb proper
names, a prefix meaning “man of,’ or, collectively,
“men of’: Ish-bosheth, Ishhod, Ish-tob (but RV
correctly “the men of Tob”). See also Esupaat,
EsHpan; Iscariot.


ISHBAAL, ish’ba-al. See IsH-BOSHETH.


ISHBAH, ish’ba (maw, yishbah): A member of
the tribe of Judah, father of Eshtemoa (1 Ch 4 17).


ISHBAK, ish’bak (p2W", yishbak): A name in
the list of sons of Abraham by Keturah (Gen 25
2||1 Ch 1 32). These names probably represent
tribes; the tribe of Ishbak has not been certainly
identified.


ISHBI-BENOB, ish-bi-bé’nob (A224 "2D", yishbi
bhendbh): One of the four “born to the giant in
Gath” who were slain by David and his men (28
21 15-22). Ishhi-benob was slain by Abishai, and
David’s life saved by the act (vs 16.17).


ISH-BOSHETH, ish-bo’sheth (MPD-WN, "ish-
bésheth, “man of shame’; ‘IerBoobé, Iesbosthé):
Called SYD, ’eshba'al, “man of Baal” (1 Ch 8


are?

33), and "WW", ytshwi, “man of Jeh’’(?), perhaps for
WIR, ‘ishtyd (18 14 49). Cf Esupaan and
Isuvi (AV “Ishui’). We probably have the right
meaning of the name in Eshbaal and Ishvi, the
words Baal and Jeh being frequently interchanged.
The change to Ish-bosheth, “man of shame,” in
2S, where the story of his shameful murder is re-
lated, may be better explained as reference to this
(see MEPHIBOSHETH, whose name was also changed
from Merib-baal for similar reasons), than to find
here a suggestion of Baal-worship, but see HPN,
121, where the change is explained as a correction of
the scribes, in consequence of prophetic protests.

One of the sons of Saul (1 Ch 8 33; 9 39; 18S
14 49) who, when his father and brothers were
slain in the battle of Gilboa (1 S 31 1 ff), was pro-
claimed king over Israel by Abner, the captain of
Saul’s host, at Mahanaim (258 2 8ff). Ish-
bosheth was 40 years old at this time and reigned
over Israel 2 years (28 2 10). Judah, however,
proclaimed David its king. The consequence
was war (2 8 2 12ff). The house of David pre-
vailed against the house of Saul (2 § 3 1), but the
war did not come to a close until Abner, angry on
account of the rebuke he suffered from I. for his
unlawful intimacy with Rizpah, Saul’s concubine,
joined David (25 3 6ff). David’s condition to
return to him Michal, his wife, before peace could
be made, was fulfilled by I. (2 $3 14 f), but it was
not until after Abner’s death that I. seems to have
given up hopes of retaining his power (28 4 1 ff).
The shameful murder of I. by his own captains is
recorded in 2 8 4 5ff. David punished the mur-
derers who had expected reward and buried I. in
the grave of Abner at Hebron (2 S 4 12f).

. Artur L. BREsLico

ISHHOD, ish’hod (THUD, ’ishehddh, “man of
majesty’’): A man of the tribe of Manasseh (1 Ch
7 18, AV “Ishod’’).


See Jupas IscaRioT.


1509


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA }saiah, Ascen. of


ISHI, ish’] (VW, yish'z, “salutary’”’):

(1) A Jerahmeelite (1 Ch 2 31); the genealogy
may denote his membership by blood, or only by
adoption, in the tribe of Judah.

(2) A Judahite (1 Ch 4 20).

(3) A Simeonite, whose sons led 500 of their tribe
against the Amalekites in Mt. Seir (1 Ch 4 42).

(4) One of the chiefs of Manasseh E. of the Jor-
dan (1 Ch 6 24).


ISHI, ish’t, shi CW", ‘tshi, “my husband”;
LXX 6 dvip pov, ho anér mou): The name symbolic
of Jeh’s relation to Israel which Hosea (2 16) de-
clares shall be used when Baali, “my lord,’’ has
become hateful on account of its associations with
the worship of the Baals.


ISHIAH, i-shi’ya. See Issurau.
ISHIJAH, i-shi’ja. See Issmisaug.


. ISHMA, ish’ma (N12, yishma’, from the root
yasham, ‘‘to lie waste,’’ therefore meaning ‘‘deso-
late’): A brother of Jezrecl and Idbash, ‘‘the sons
of the father of Etam’” (1 Ch 4 3). They were
brothers of Hazzelelponi.


ISHMAEL, ish’mi-el ONvAw, yishma’é’l, “God
heareth,”” or “God may,” “shall hear”; "Iopaf,
Ismaél):

(1) The son of Abraham by Hagar, the Egyp
slave of his wife Sarah. The circumstances con-
nected with his birth reveal what seems to us to be
a very strange practice. It was customary among
ancient peoples to correct the natural defect of
barrenness by substituting a slave woman. In our
narrative, this is shown to be authorized and brought
about by the legitimate wife with the understanding
that the offspring of such a union should be regarded
as her own: “It may be that I shall obtain children
by her,” lit. “that I shall be builded by her” (Gen
16 2


The hopes of Sarah were realized, for Hagar gave
birth to a son, and yet the outcome was not fully
pleasing to Abraham’s wife; there was

1, Birth one serious drawback. As soon as
Hagar “saw that she had conceived,”
her behavior toward her mistress underwent a radi-
cal change; she was “despised in her eyes.” But
for the intervention of the angel of Jeh, the boy
might have been born in Egypt. For, being dealt
with hardly (or humbled) by Sarah, the handmaid
fled toward that country. On her way she was told
by the angel to return to her mistress and submit
herself “under her hands.” She obeyed, and the
child who was to be as ‘‘a wild ass among men” was
born when his father was 86 years old (Gen 16 7-16).
At the age of 13 years the boy was circumcised
(Gen 17 25) in accordance with the Divine com-
mand received by Abraham: “Every

2. ,Circum- male among you shall be circum-
cision cised’”’ (Gen 17 10). Thus young Ish-
mael was made a party to the cove-

nant into which God had entered with the lad’s
father. The fact that both Abraham and his son
were circumcised the same day (Gen 17 26) un-
doubtedly adds to the importance of Ishmael’s par-
taking of the holy rite. He was certainly made to
understand how much his father loved him and how
deeply he was concerned about his spiritual welfare.
We may even assume that there was a time when
Abraham looked upon Ishmael as the promised seed.
His error was made clear to him when God promised
him the birth of a son by Sarah. At first this
seemed to be incredible, Abraham being 100 years
of age and Sarah 90. And yet, how could he dis-
believe the word of God? His cherished, though


mistaken, belief about Ishmael, his doubts regarding
the possibility of Sarah’s motherhood, and the first
faint glimmer of the real meaning of God’s promise,
all these thoughts found their expression in the
fervid wish: “O that Ishmael might live before
thee!’ (Gen 17 18). Gradually the truth dawned
upon the patriarch that God's thoughts are not the
thoughts of men, neither their ways His ways. But
we have no reason to believe that this entire changing
of the mental attitude of Abraham toward Ishmael
reacted unfavorably on his future treatment of this
son “born of the flesh” (cf Gen 21 11). If there
were troubles in store for the boy likened by the
angel of Jeh to a wild ass, it was, in the main, the
youngster’s own fault.

When Isaac was weaned, Ishmael was about 16
years of age. The weaning was made an occasion

for great celebration. But it seems the
3. Banish- pleasure of the day was marred by the
ment objectionable behavior of Ishmael.
“And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the
Egyp .... mocking” (Gen 219). Her jealous
motherly love had quickened her sense of obser-
vation and her faculty of reading the character of
children. We do not know exactly what the word
used in the Heb for “mocking” really means. The
LXX and the Vulg render the passage: ‘When
Sarah saw the scn of Hagar... . playing with
Isaac,” and St. Paul followed a later tradition when
he says: “He that was born after the flesh perse-
cuted him that was born after the Spirit” (Gal 4
29). Lightfoot (in his notes to the Ep. to the Gal)
says: ‘‘At all events the word seems to mean mock-
ing, jeering.’’ At any rate, the fact remains that
Sarah objected to the bringing up of the son of
promise together with the “mocker,” and so both
mother and son were banished from the tents of
Abraham.

Now there came a most critical time in the life of
young Ishmael. Only some bread and a bottle of
water were ‘put on the shoulder’ of Hagar by
Abraham when he expelled her with her son. Aim-
lessly, as it seems, the two walked about in the
wilderness of Beersheba. The water was soon
spent, and with it went all hope and energy. The
boy, being faint with thirst and tired out by his
constant walking in the fierce heat of the sun, seemed
tobe dying. Sohis mother put him rapidly down
in the shade of some plant. (We do not share
the opinion of some writers that the narrative of
Gen 21 8ff represented Ishmael as a little boy
whom his mother had carried about and finally
flung in the shade of some shrub. Even if this
passage is taken from a different source, it is cer-
tainly not in conflict with the rest as to the age of
Ishmael.) After this last act of motherly love—
what else could she do to help the boy?—she re-
tired to a place at some distance and resignedly ex-
pected the death of her son and perhaps her own.

For the 2d time in her life, she had a marvelous
experience. ‘God heard the voice of the lad”’ and
comforted the unhappy mother most wonderfully.
Through His angel He renewed His former promise
regarding her son, and then He showed her a wellof
water. The lad’s life was saved and, growing up,
he became in time an archer. He lived in the
wilderness of Paran and was married by his mother
to an Egyp wife (Gen 21 21).

When Abraham died, his exiled son returned to
assist his brother to bury their father (Gen 26 9).

In the same chapter we find the names
4. His of Ishmael’s 12 sons (vs 12 ff) and a
Children brief report of bis death at the age of

137 years (ver 17). According to Gen
28 9 he also had a daughter, Mahalath, whom Esau
took for his wife; in Gen 36 3 her name is given
as Basemath.


sent History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1510


The character of Ishmael and his descendants
(Arabian nomads or Bedouins) is very accurately
and vividly depicted hy the angel of
5. De- Jeh: ‘He shall be as a wild ass among
scendants men; his hand shall be against every
Man, and every man’s hand against
him” (Gen 16 12). These nomads are, indeed,
roaming the wilds of the desert, jealous of their in-
dependence, quarrelsame and adventurous. We
may well think of their progenitor as of a proud,
undaunted and rugged son of the desert, the very
counterpart of the poor hoy lying half dead from
fatigue and exposure under the shrub in the wilder-
ness of Beersheha.
The person and the history of Ishmael, the son of Abra-
ham, ‘‘born after the flesh,” is of special interest to the
student of the NT because St. Paul uses him,
6. Inthe in theEp.totheGal, asa type of those Jews
who cling to the paternal religion in such a
NT manner as to be unable to discern the tran-
sient character of the OT institutions, and
esp. those of the Mosaic law. By doing so they could not
be made to see the true meaning of the law, and instead
of embracing the grace of God as the only means of ful-
filling the law, they most bitterly fought the central doc-
trine of Christianity and even persecuted its advocates.
Like Ishmael, they were born of Hagar, the handmaid or
slave woman; like him, they were Ahraham’s sons only
‘after the flesh,"' and _ their ultimate fate is foreshadowed
in the casting out of Hagar and her son. They could not
expect to maintain the connection with the true Israel,
and even incase they should acclaim Christ their Messiah
they were not to be the leaders of the church or the ex-
pounders of its teachings (Gal 4 21-28).
(2) The son of Nethaniah (Jer 40 8—41 18; cf
2 K 25 23-25). It is a dreary story of jealousy
and treachery which Jeremiah has recorded in chs
40, 41 of his book. After the destruction of Jerus
and the deportation of the better class of Jewish
citizens, it was necessary to provide for some sort
of a government in the depopulated country. Pub-
lic order had to be restored and maintained; the
crops of the fields were endangered and had to be
taken care of. It was thus only common political
prudence that dictated to the king of Babylon the
setting up of a governor for the remnant of Judah.
He chose Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, for the diffi-
cult position. The new officer selected for his
place of residence the city of Mizpah, where he was
soon joined by Jeremiah. All the captains of the
Jewish country forces came to Mizpah with their
men and put themselves under Gedaliah’s orders
(Jer 40 13). Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the
son of Elishama ‘‘of the seed royal’? (2 K 26 25)
was among their number—all of which must have
been rather gratifying to the new governor. But
he was destined to be cruelly disappointed. A
traitor was among the captains that had gathered
around him. Yet the governor might have pre-
vented his dastardly scheme. Johanan, the son of
Kareah, and other loyal captains warned him of the
treachery of Ishmael, telling him he was induced
by Baalis, the Ammonite king, to assassinate the
governor. But the governor’s faith in Ishmael
was not to be shaken; he even looked upon Joha-
nan’s report as false and calumnious (Jer 40 16).
About 2 months after the destruction of Jerus,
Ishmael was ready to strike the mortal blow. With
10 men he came to Mizpah, and there, at a banquet
given in his honor, he killed Gedaliah and all the
Jews and Chaldacans that were with him. He suc-
ceeded in keeping the matter secret, for, 2 days after
the horrible deed, he persuaded a party of 80 pious
Jews to enter the city and killed all but 10 of them,
throwing their bodies into a pit. These men were
coming from the ruins of the Temple with the offer-
ings which they had intended to leave at Jerus.
Now they had found out, to their great distraction,
that the city was laid waste and the Temple de-
stroyed. So they passed by Mizpah, their beards
shaven, their clothes rent, and with cuts about their


persons (Jer 41 5). We may, indeed, ask indig-
nantly, Why this new atrocity? The answer may
he found in the fact that Ishmael did not kill all of
the men. He spared 10 of them because they
promised him some hidden treasures. This shows
his motive. He was a desperate man and just then
carrying out a desperate undertaking. He killed
those peaceful citizens because of their money, and
money he needed to realize his plans. They were
those of a traitor to his country, inasmuch as he
intended to deport the inhabitants of Mizpah to the
land of his high confederate, the king of the Am-
monites. Among the captives were Jeremiah and
the daughters of the Jewish king. But his efforts
came to naught. When Johanan and the other
captains were told of Ishmael’s unheard-of actions,
they immediately pursued the desperate adven-
turer and overtook him by the “great waters that
are in Gibeon.’’ Unfortunately, they failed to
capture Ishmael; for he managed to escape with
eight men to the Ammonites. See, further, Grpa-
LIAH.

(3) A descendant of Benjamin and the son of
Azel (1 Ch 8 38; cf 9 44).

(4) The father of Zebadiah who was “the ruler
of the house of Judah, in all the king’s [Jehoshaphat,
2 Ch 19 8] matters” (2 Ch 19 11). ;

(5) The son of Jehohanan, and a “captain of
hundreds,” who lived at the time of Jehoiada and
Joash (2 Ch 23 1). ;

(6) One of the sons of Pashhur the priest. He
was one of those men who had married foreign
women and were compelled to “put away their
wives” (Ezr 10 22). WititiamM Baur


ISHMAEL (Icpasa, Ismaél):
(1) AV “Ismael” (Jth 2 23), the son of Abraham


by Hagar.
(2) 1 Esd 9 22 (AV, RV “‘Ismael”’), corresponding
to Ishmael in Ezr 10 22. See preceding art.


ISHMAELITES, ish’mi-el-its (O"SNINW, yish-
mé lim): The supposed descendants of Ishmael, the
son of Abraham and Hagar, whom Abraham sent
away from him after the birth of Isaac (Gen 21
j4-21). The sons of Ishmael are given in Gen 25
13.14; they were twelve in number and gave rise
to as many tribes, but the term Ishmaelite has a
broader signification, as appears from Gen 37 28.
36, where it is identified with Midianite. From
Gen 16 12 it may be inferred that it was applied
to the Bedawin of the desert region E. of the Jordan
generally, for the character there assigned to Ish-
mael, “His hand shall be against every man, and
every man’s hand against him,” fits the habits of
Bedawin in all ages. Such was the character of the
Midianites as described in Jgs 7, who are again
identified with the Ishmaelites (8 24). These ref-
erences show that the Ishmaelites were not confined
to the descendants of the son of Abraham and
Hagar, but refer to the desert tribes in general, like
“the children of the east’? (Jgs 7 12).

. H. Porter

ISHMAIAH, ish-ma’ya (“2Y2U", yishmatyah,
‘Jeh is hearing’):

(1) A man of Gibeon, chief of David's 30 great
warriors, who came to him at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 4,
AV “Ismaiah’’).

(2) Chief of the armed contingent of the tribe
of Zebulun, which served David in the monthly
order of the tribes (1 Ch 27 19).


ISHMEELITES, ish’mécl-its (NPD, yish-
melt). See IsHMAELITEs.


ISHMERAI, ish’mé-ri (WW, yishmeray, from
shamar, meaning ‘to hedge about,” i.e. “io guard,”


1811


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA [shmael


Israel, History of


and therefore a “guard,” “‘protector’): A deseend-
ant of Benjamin, son of Epaal, resident of Jerus,
one of the “heads of fathers’ houses throughout
their generations, chief men’ (1 Ch 8 18).


ISHOD, i’shod, ish’od (THAW, ’ishehddh): AV
1 Ch 7 18 for IsHHon (q.v.).


ISHPAH, ish’pa (MED, yishpah, “firm,”
“strong’): A man of the tribe of Benjamin, of the


house of Beriah (1 Ch 8 16).


ISHPAN, ish’pan (jBW , yishpan, lit. “he will
hide’): Descendant of Benjamin, son of Shashak,
one of “the chief men, heads of fathers’ houses”;
lived at Jerus (1 Ch 8 22).


ISH-SECHEL, ish’sé-kel (3 DN, “ish sekhel,
“man of discretion’): Ezra, at one time in need
of ministers for the house of God, sent ‘unto Iddo
the chief at the place Casiphia.” ‘And according
to the good hand of our God upon us they brought
us a man of discretion [m “‘Ish-sechel’’], of the sons
of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel” (Ear
8 18). This is the only reference to Ish-sechel.


ISH-TOB, ish’tob (ATQ WX, ’ish tabh, ARV “the
men of Tob’): A place in Pal, probably a small
kingdom, large enough, however, to supply at least
12,000 men of valor to the children of Ammon in
their struggle against Joab, David’s general (2 S
10 6.8). See Isx.


ISHUAH, ish’d-a, ISUAH, is’ti-a (TIW>, yish-
wah, lit. “he will level’). See Isuuar; IsHvau;
IsuHvI.


ISHUAI, ish’t-i, ISHUI, ish’i-i (I, yishu7,
“level’’). See Isuvi.


ISHVAH, ish’va (MNW", yishwah, “even,” “level’’;
AV Ishuah and Isuah): Second son of Asher (Gen
46 17; 1 Ch 7 30). As only the families of his
brothers Ishvi, etc, are mentioned in Nu 26 44,
the supposition is that he left no issue.


ISHVI, ish’vi (W", yishwi, “equal’’):

(1) The third son of Asher (Gen 46 17; 1 Ch
7 30), and founder of the family of the Ishvites (Nu
26 44, AV “Jesuites’), AV ‘Tsui,’ “Jesui,’”’ and
“Tshui.””

2) The name is also found among the sons of
Saul (1 S 14 49), AV “Ishui.”


ISLAND, i’land, ISLE, il ([1] "&, *z, “island” or
‘isle’; ARV has “eoast” or ‘“coast-land” in Isa
20 6; 23 2.6; RVm has “coast-lands”’ in Gen 10
5; Isa 11 11; 24 15; 69 18; Jer 25 22; Ezk 39 6;
Dnl 11 18; Zeph 2 11; RVm has “sea-coast” in
Jer 47 4. [2] pl. DYN, 'tytm, AV “wild beasts of
the islands,” RV ‘wolves,’ RVm “howling creatures”
[Isa 13 22; 34 14; Jer 50 39]. [3] vyclor, néston,
“small island” [Acts 27 16]. [4] vfjcos, nésos, ‘island’
[Acts 13 6; 27 26; 28 1.7.9.11; Rev 1 9; 6 14; 16
20]): Except as noted above, ‘2 in RV is tr? “‘isle”’
or “island.”’ Arvap (q.v.), a Phoen island-eity N.
of Tripoli, Syria, is mentioned in Gen 10 18; 1 Ch
116; Ezk 27 8.11. This and Tyre were the only
important islands on the coast, both of them very
small. We find references to Kittim or Chittim,
Cyprus (Gen 104; Nu 24 24; 1 Ch17; Isa
93 1.12; Jer 210; Ezk 27 6; Dnl 11 30); to
Elishah, perhaps Carthage (Gen 10 4; 1 Ch 1 7;
Ezk 27 7); to “isles of the nations’ (Gen 10 5;
Zeph 2 11) 5 to “isles of the sea’ (Est 10 1; Isa


11 11; 24 15; Ezk 26 18); to ‘‘Tarshish and the
isles’ (Ps 72 10; cf Isa 66 19); to “isle [RVm
“‘sea-coast”] of Caphtor”’ (Jer 47 4). Communica-
tion with these islands or distant coasts is kept up
by the Tyrians (Ezk 27 3.15). The Jews were not
a maritime people, and in early times their geo-
graphical knowledge was very limited. Of 32 OT
passages referring to ‘island’ or “‘isle,”’ 25 are in
Isa, Jer, and Ezk. In the NT, besides the passages
noted above, and Patmos (Rev 1 9), various islands
are mentioned by name in connection with the voy-
ages of St. Paul, e.g. Cyprus, Crete, Lesbos, Samos,
Samothrace, Chios, Melita, Sicily (Syracuse, Acts
28 12). “Jackals” is a perfectly possible tr of
‘tym (AV “wild beasts of the islands,’ RV
“wolves,” RVm “howling creatures”). See Coast;
GEOGRAPHY; JACKAL; WOLF.
Aurrep Exiy Day

ISLES OF THE GENTILES (Gen 10 5): ARV
‘Ssles [m ‘‘coast-lands”] of the nations,”’ said of the
territories of the sons of Japheth. The reference is
to the eoasts of the Western Mediterranean, with
their islands (cf ‘isles of the sea,” Est 10 1; Ezk
26 18, etc). See TaBLe or Narrons.


ISMACHIAH, is-ma-ki’a (WWD, yismakh-
yaha, “Jeh will sustain”): One of the “overseers
under the hand of Conaniah and Shimei his brother,
by the appointment of Hezekiah the king, and
Azariah the ruler of the house of God” (2 Ch 31 18).

ISMAEL, is’m4-el. See IsHmar..

ISMAERUS, is-ma-é’rus (Iepdypos, Ismdéros):
AV “Omaerus’” (1 Esd 9 34), corresponding to
Amram ion Ezr 10 34.


ISMAIAH, is-ma’ya.
ISPAH, is’pa.
ISRAEL, iz’ra-el.
ISRAEL, HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE:


INTRODUCTORY
1. Sources
(1) The OT
*5 Josephus
(3) The Monuments
2. Religious Character of the History
. Onieins oF IsRAEL IN Pre-Mosaic Times
1. Original Home
2.
3


See Isumatau.
See Isupan,


See Jacos.


Ethnographical Origin
. Patriarchal Origins and History
(1) Patriarchal Conditions—Gen 14
$33 Ideas of God
3) Descent into Egypt
II. Nationality UNDER MossEs
1. Israel in Egypt
(1) Chronology
2) Moses
2. Historical Character of the Exodus
0 Egyptian Version of the Exodus
3 Geographical Matters
(3) The Wilderness Sojourn
{4) Entrance into Canaan
III. Periop or THE JUDGES
1. General Character of Period
. The Different Judges —
. Chronology of the Period
. Loose Organization of the People
HE Kinepom: IsRaEL-JuDAH
Samuel
The Kingdom of Saul
David


who


IV.


Solomon

. Division of the Kingdom

. Sources of the History of the Kingdom

. Chronological Matters

V. Periop or tHE Separatep Krnopoms

1. Contrasts and Vicissitudes of the Kingdoms
2. The Successive Reigns—Jeroboam I, etc
3. The Literary Prophets

VI. Time oF THE BABYLONIAN EXILE
1. Influence of the Exile
2. Daniel 2
3. Elephantine Papyri


NOSP WD Pap


Israel, History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1512


VII. Return rrom tHe EXiLe anp THE ResTORATION


1. Career of Cyrus
2. First_ Return under Zerubbabel

(1) Building of the Temple

(2) Haggai and Zechariah
3. Ezra and Nehemiah

Malachi
Tue Jews uNpDER ALEXANDER aNp His Suc-
CESSORS
1. Spread of Hellenism
2. The Hasmoneans
3. Herod

IX. Tus Romans

1. Division of Territory
2. Destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans
Later Insurrection of Bar-Cochba
3. Spiritual Life of Period
Appearance of Jesus Christ
LITERATURE

Introductory.—The chief and best source from

which we can learn who this people was and what
was its history is the Bible itself, esp.

1. Sources the OT, which tells us the story of this
people from its earliest beginnings.

(1) In the OT —The origins of Israel are narrated
in Gen; the establishment of the theocracy, in the
other books of the Pent; the entrance into Canaan,
in the Book of Josh; the period preceding the kings,
in the Book of Jgs; the establishment of the mon-
archy and its development, in the Books of 8, and
the opening chapters of the Books of K, which latter
report also the division into two kingdoms and the
history of these down to their overthrow. The
Books of Ch contain, || with the books already men-
tioned, a survey of the historical development from
Adam down,to the Bab captivity, but confine this
account to the theocratical center of this history
and its sphere. Connected with Ch are found the
small Books of Ezr and Neh, which probably origi-
nally constituted a part of Ch, but which pass over
the Exile and begin at once with the story of the
Return. Then, too, these two books contain only
certain episodes in the history of the Return, which
were of importance for the restoration of the Jewish
theocracy, so that the story found in them is any-
thing but complete. With the 5th cent. BC the
Bib. narrative closes entirely. For the succeeding
centuries we have nothing but some scattered data;
but for the 2d pre-Christian cent. we have a new
source in the Books of the Macc, which give a con-
nected account of the struggles and the rule of the
Asmoneans, which reach, however, only from 174
to 185 BC.

The historical value of the OT books is all the
greater the nearer the narrator or his sources stand
in point of time to the events that are recorded;
e.g. the contents of the Books of K have in general
greater value as historical sources than what is
reported in the Books of Ch, written at a much later
period. Yet it is possible that a later chronicler
could have made use of old sources which earlier
narrators had failed to employ. This is the actual
state of affairs in connection with a considerable
number of matters reported by the Bib. chroniclers,
which supplement the exceedingly meager extracts
furnished by the author of the Books of K. Then,
further, the books of the prophets possess an ex-
traordinary value as historical sources for the special
reason that they furnish illustrations of the histori-
cal situation and events from the lips of contempora-
ries. As an example we can refer to the externally
flourishing condition of the kingdom of Judah under
King Uzziah, concerning which the Books of K report
practically nothing, but of which Ch give details
which are confirmed by the testimony of Isaiah.

(2) Josephus ——A connected account of the his-
tory of Israel has been furnished by Flavius Jose-
phus. His work entitled Jewish Antiquities, how-
ever, as far as trustworthiness is concerned, is again
considerably inferior to the Books of Ch, since the
later traditions of the Jews to a still greater extent


VIII.


influenced his account. Only in those cases in
which he could make use of foreign older sources,
such as the Egyp Manetho or Phoen authors, does
he furnish us with valuable material. Then for the
last few centuries preceding his age, he fills out a
certain want. Esp. is he the best authority for the
events which he himself passed through and which
he reports in his work on the Jewish Wars, even if
he is not free from certain personal prejudices
(see JosErpHUS, Fiavius). For the customs and
usages of the later Jewish times the traditions de-
posited in the Talm are also to be considered. Much
less than to Jos can any historical value be credited
tothe Alexandrian Jew, Philo. Theforeign authors,
e.g. the Gr and the Lat historians, contain data
only for the story of the nations surrounding Israel,
but not for the early history of Israel itself.

(3) The Monuments On the other hand, the
early history of Israel has been wonderfully en-
riched in recent times through the testimonies of
the monuments. In Pal itself the finds in historical
data and monuments have been, up to the present
time, rather meager. Yet the excavations on the
sites of ancient Taanach, Megiddo, Jericho, Gezer
and Samaria have brought important material to
light, and we have reasons to look for further archae-
ological and literary finds, which may throw a clear
light on many points that have remained dark and
uncertain. Also in lands round about Pal, impor-
tant documents (the Moabite Stone; Phoen inscrip-
tions) have already been found. Esp. have the
discovery and interpretation of the monuments
found in Egypt, Assyria and Babylonia very materi-
ally advanced our knowledge of the history of Israel.
Not only has the connection of the history of this
people with universal history been clearly illumi-
nated by these finds, but the history of Israel itself
has gained in tangible reality. In some detail
matters, traditional ideas have given way to clearer
conceptions; e.g. the chronology of the OT, through
Assyriological research, has been set on a safer
foundation. Butallin all, these archaeological dis-
coveries have confirmed the confidence that has
been placed in the Bib. historical sources.

It is true that the rulos applied to profane history
cannot, without modification, be applied to the his-

torical writings of the Hebrews. The
2. Religious Bib. narrators are concerned about


Character something more than the preservation
of the of historical facts and data. Just as
History little is it their purpose to glorify their


people or their rulers, as this is done’
on the memorial tablets of the Egyp, the Assyr,
and the Bab kings. Looked at merely from the
standpoint of profane history, there are many omis-
sions in the OT historical books that are found
objectionable. Sometimes whole periods are passed
over or treated very briefly. Then, too, the political
pragmatism, the secular connection in the move-
ments of the nations and historical events, are often
scarcely mentioned. The standpoint of the writer
is the religious. This appears in the fact that this
history begins with the creation of the world and
reports primitive traditions concerning the origin
of mankind and their earliest history in the light of
the revelation of the God of Israel, and that it
makes this national history a member in the general
historical development of mankind. Nor was this
first done by the author of the Pent in its present
shape. Already the different documentary sources
found combined in the Pent, namely E, J and P,
depict the history of Israel according to the plan
which the Creator of the world had with this people.
Also, when they narrate the national vicissitudes
of Israel, the writers are concerned chiefly to exhibit
clearly the providential guidance of God. They
give special prominence to those events in which


1518


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Israel, History of


the hand of God manifests itself, and describe with
full detail the lives of those agents of whom Jeh
made use in order to guide His people, such as
Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon and others. But
it is not the glory of these men themselves that
the writers aim to describe, but rather their im-
portance for the spiritual and religious greatness of
Israel. Let us note in this connection only the
extreme brevity with which the politically success-
ful wars of David are reported in 28; and how frag-
mentary are the notices in which the author of the
Books of K reports the reigns of the different kings;


and how briefly he refers for all the other details |


of these kings to books that, unfortunately, have
been lost for us. But, on the other hand, how full
are the details when the Bible gives us its account
of the early history of a Samuel or of a David, in
which the providential guidance and protection of
Jeh appear in such a tangible form; or when it
describes the building of the temple by Solomon,
so epoch-making for the religious history of Israel,
or the activity of such leading prophets as Elijah
and Elisha. Much less the deeds of man than the
deeds of God in the midst of His people constitute
the theme of the narrators. These facts explain, too,
the phenomenal impartiality, otherwise unknown in
ancient literatures, with which the weaknesses and
the faults of the ancestors and kings of Israel are
reported by the Bib. writers, even in the case of their
most revered kings, or with which even the most dis-
graceful defeats of the people are narrated.

It cannot indeed be denied that this religious and
fundamental characteristic is not found to the same
degree in all the books and sources. The oldest
narratives concerning Jacob, Joseph, the Judges,
David and others reveal a naive and childlike natur-
alness, while in the Books of Ch only those things
have been admitted which are in harmony with the
regular cultus. The stories of a Samson, Jeph-
thah, Abimelech, Barak, and others impress us
often as the myths or stories of old heroes, such as
we find in the traditions of other nations. But the
author of the Book of Jgs, who wrote the introduc-
tion to the work, describes the whole story from the
standpoint of edification. And when closely ex-
amined, it is found that the religious element is not
lacking, even in the primitive and naive OT narra-
tive. ‘This factor was, from the outset, a unique
characteristic of the people and its history. To this
factor Israel owed its individuality and existence
as a separate people among the nations. But in
course of time it became more and more conscious
of its mission of being the people of Jeh on earth,
and it learned to understand its entire history
from this viewpoint. Accordingly, any account of
Israel’s history must pay special attention to its
religious development. For the significance of this
history lies for us in this, that it constitutes the
preparation for the highest revelation in Christ
Jesus. In its innermost heart and kernel it is the
history of the redemption of mankind. This it is
that gives to this history its phenomenal character.
The persons and the events that constitute this
history must not be measured by the standards of
everyday life. If in this history we find the provi-
dential activities of the living God operative in a
unique way, this need not strike us as strange, since
also the full fruit of this historical development,
namely the appearance of Jesus Christ, transcends
by far the ordinary course of human history. On
the other hand, this history of Israel is not to be
regarded as a purely isolated factor. Modern re-
searches have shown how intimately this history
was interwoven with that of other nations. Already,
between the religious forms of the OT and those of
other Sem peoples, there have been found many
relations. Religious expressions and forms of


worship among the Israelites often show in lan-
guage and in cultus a similarity to those of the an-
cient Canaanites, the Phoenicians, the Syrians, the
Babylonians, and the Egyptians. But it is a mis-
take to believe that the history and the religion of
Israel are merely an offspring of the Bab. As the
Israelites clung tenaciously to their national life,
even when they were surrounded by powerful
nations, or were even scattered among these na-
tions, as in the Exile, thus too their religion, at
least in its official representatives, bas been able at
all times to preserve a very high originality and
independence under the influence of the Divine
Spirit, who had filled it.
I. Origins of Israel in Pre-Mosaic Times.—The
Israelites knew at all times that Canaan was not
their original home, but that their
1. Original ancestors had immigrated into this
Home land. What was their earlier and
earliest home? Tradition states that
they immigrated from Haran in the upper Eu-
phrates valley. But it is claimed that they came
to Haran from Ur of the Chaldees, i.e. from a city
in Southern Babylonia, now called Mugheir. This
city of Ur, now well known from Bab inscriptions,
was certainly not the original home of the ancestors
of Israel. They rather belonged to a purely Sem
tribe, which had found its way from’ Northern
Arabia into these districts. A striking confirma-
tion of this view is found in a mural picture on the
rock-tombs of Benihassan in Upper Egypt. The
foreigners, of whom pictures are here given (from
the time of the XIIth Dynasty), called Amu,
namely Bedouins from Northern Arabia or from
the Sinai peninsula, show such indisputable Jewish
physiognomies that they must have been closely
related to the stock of Abraham. Then, too, the
leader of the caravan, Ebsha‘a (Abishua), has a name
formed just like that of Abraham. When, in later
times, Moses fled to the country of the Midianites,
he doubtless was welcomed by such tribal relatives.
The Israelites at all times laid stress on their
ethnographical connection with other nations.
They knew that they were intimately


2. Ethno- related to a group of peoples who have
graphical the name of Hebrews. But they
Origin traced their origin still farther back


to the tribal founder, Shem. Lin-
guistics and ethnology confirm, in general, the closer
connection between the Sem tribes mentioned in
Gen 10 21 ff. Undeniable is this connection in the
cases of Assur, Aram, and the different Arabian
tribes. A narrower group of Semites is called
Hebrews. ‘This term is used in Gen in a wider sense
of the word than is the case in later times, when it
was employed as a synonym for Israel. According
to its etymology, the word signified “‘those beyond,”
those who live on the other side of the river or have
come over from the other side. The river meant is
not the Jordan, but the Euphrates. About the
same time that the ancestors of Israel were immi-
grating into Canaan and Egypt, other tribes also
emigrated westward and were called, by the Ca-
naanites and by the Egyptians, ‘ibhrim. This term
is identical with Habiri, found in-the Am Tab, in
which complaint is made about the inroads of such
tribes. The Israelites cannot have been meant
here, but related tribes are. Possibly the Egyp
Apriu is the same word.
The Israelites declared that they were descended from
@ particular family. On account of the patriarchal char-


acter of their old_tribal life, it is not a
8. Patri- matter of douht that, as a fact, the tribe
archal


did grow out of a single family. The tri-

SEs bal father, Abraham, was without a doubt
Origins and the head of the small tribe, which through
History its large family of_children developed into
different tribes. Only we must not forget
that such a tribe could rapidly be enlarged by receiving


Israel, History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1514


into lt also serfs and clients (cf Gen 14 14). These last-
mentioned also regarded the head of the tribe as their
father and considered themselves as his ‘‘sons,"’ without
really being his descendants. Possibly the tribe that
immigrated first to Haran and from there to Canaan
was already more numerous than would seem to be the
case according to tradition, which takes into considera-
tion only the leading personalities. Secondly, we must
remember that the Israelites, because of their patriarchal
life, had become accustomed to clothe all the relations of
nations to nations in the scheme of the family. In this
way such genealogies of nations as are found in Gen 10
and 11 originated. Here peoples, cities and countries have
also been placed in the genealogies, without the author
himself thinking of individual persons in this connection,
who had borne the names, e.g. of Mizraim (Egypt),
Cush (Ethiopia), etc, and were actually sons of Ham.
The purpose of the genealogy in this form is to express
only the closer or more remote relationship or connection
to a group of nations. Gen 25 1ff also is a telling
example, showing how independently these groups are
united. A new wife (Keturah) does not_at this place
fit into the family history of Abraham. But the writer
still wants to make mention of an Arabian group, which
was also related to Israel by blood, but in fact stood
more distant from the Israelites than did the Ishmaelites.
Out of this systematic further development of the living
tradition, however, one difficulty arises. It is not in all
place easy, indeed not always possible, to draw the

e between what is reliable tradition and what is a freer
continuation. But it is a misinterpretation of the his-
torical situation, when the entire history of the patri-
archs is declared to be incredihle, and when in such
sharply defined personalities as Abraham, Jacob, Joseph,
and others, only personifications of tribes are found, the
later history of which tribes is said to be embodied in the
lives of these men; e.g. the name Abraham cannot
have been the impersonal name of a tribe or of agod. It
is found as the name of a person on old Bab tablets (Abu
ramu); but originally in the nomadic tribe was doubtless
pronounced ‘abhi ram, i.e. ‘‘My father [God] is exalted.''
The same is true of the name Jacob (really Jakoh-el);
cf Joseph (Joseph-el), Ishmael, and others, which find
their analogies in old Arabian names.


(1) Patriarchal conditions—Gen 14.—Further, the
conditions of life which are presupposed in the
history of the Patriarchs are in perfect agreement
with those which from the Am Tab we learn existed
in Canaan. While formerly it was maintained
that it would have been impossible for a single tribe
to force its way into Canaan at that time when the
country was thickly populated, it is now known
that at that very time when the ancestors of the
Israelites entered, similar tribes also found their
way into the land, sometimes in a peaceable way,
sometimes by force. Egypt for the time being had
control of the land, but its supremacy was at no
place very strong. And the ‘tbhrim, as did others
who forced their way into the country, caused the
inhabitants much trouble. Esp. does Gen 14, the
only episode in which a piece of universal history
finds its way into the story of the tribal ancestors,
turn out to be a document of great value, which
reflects beautifully the condition of affairs m Asia.
Such expeditions for conquest in the direction of
the Mediterranean lands were undertaken at an
early period by Bab rulers, Sargon I of Akkad and
his son Naram Sin. The latter undertook an expe-
dition to the land of Magan along the exact way of
the expedition described in Gen 14, this taking
place in the days of Amraphel, i.e. Hammurabi.
The fact that the latter was himself under an Ela-
mitic superior is in perfect agreement with the story
of the inscriptions, according to which the famous
Hammurabi of Babylon had first freed himself
from the supremacy of Elam. The fact that Ham-
murabi, according to accepted chronology, ruled
shortly after the year 2000 BC, is also in agreement
with Bib. chronology, which places Abraham in
this very time. These expeditions into the country
Martu, as the Babylonians call Syria, had for their
purpose chiefly to secure booty and to levy tribute.
That the allied kings themselves took part in this
expedition is not probable. These were punitive
expeditions undertaken with a small force.

This ch 14 of Gen seems to be a translation of an old


cuneiform tablet. As a rule the stories of the patri-
archal age for a long time were handed down orally, and


naturally were modified to a certain extent. Then, too,
scholars have long since discovered different sources, out
of which the story in its present form has been compiled.
This fact explains some irregularities in the story: e.g.
the chronological data of the document P, which ar-
ranges its contents systematically, do not always har-
monize with the order of events as reported by the other
two leading documents, E and J, the first of which is per-
haps the Ephraimitic and the second the Judaic version
of the story. But, under all circumstances, much greater
than the difference are the agreements of the sources.
They, contain the same picture of this period, which
certainly has not been modified to glorify the partici-
pants. Itis easily seen that the situation of the fathers,
when they were strangers in the land, was anything but
comfortable. A poetical or perfectly fictitious popular
account would have told altogether different deeds of
heroism of the founder of the people. The weaknesses
and the faults of the fathers and mothers in the patri-
archal families are not passed over in silence. But the
fact that Jeh, whom they trusted at all times, helped
them through and did not suffer them to be destroyed,
but in them laid the foundation for the future of His
people, is the golden cord that runs through the whole
history. And in this the difference between the indi-
vidual characters finds a sharp expression; e.g. Abra-
ham's magnanimity and tender feeling of honor im refer-
ence to his advantage in worldly matters find their ex-
pression in narratives which are ascribed to altogether
different sources, as Gen 13 8ff (J), 14 22 ff (special
source); 23.7ff (P). In what an altogether different
way Jacob insists upon his advantage! This consist-
ency in the way in which the different characters are
portrayed must awaken confidence in the historical
character of the narratives. Then, too, the harmony
with Egyp manners and customs in the story of a
even in its minutest details, as these have been empha-
sized particularly by the Egyptologist Ebers, speaks for
this historical trustworthiness.


(2) Ideas of God.—Further, the conception of God
as held by these fathers was still of a primitive char-
acter, but it contains the elements of the later re-
ligious development (see IskaEL, RELIGION OF).

(3) Descent into Egypt.—During a long period of
famine the sons of Jacob, through Divine provi-
dence, which made use of Joseph as an instrument,
found refuge in Egypt, in the marshes of which
country along the lower Nile Sem tribes had not
seldom had their temporary abodes. The land of
Goshen in the N.E. part of the Delta, Ed. Naville
(The Shrine of Saft-el-Henneh and the Land of Goshen,
London, 1887) has shown to be the region about
Phakusa (Saft-el-Henneh). These regions had at
that time not yet been made a part of the strictly
organized and governed country of Egypt, and
could accordingly still be left to such nomadic
tribes. For the sons of Jacob were still wandering
shepherds, even if they did, here and there, after
the manner of such tribes, change to agricultural
pursuits (Gen 26 12). If, as is probable, at that
time a dynasty of Sem Hyksos was ruling in lower
Egypt, it is all the more easily understood that
kindred tribes of this character were fond of settling
along these border districts. On account of the
fertility of the amply watered districts, men and
animals could increase rapidly, and the virile tribe
could, in the course of a few centuries, grow into a
powerful nation. One portion of the tribes pastured
their flocks back and forth on the prairies; another
builded houses for themselves among the Egyptians
and engaged in agricultural pursuits and in garden-
ing (Nu 11 5). Egyp arts and trades also found
their way among this people, as also doubtless the
art of writing, at least in the case of certain indi-
viduals. In this way their sojourning in this
country became a fruitful factor in the education
of the people. This stay explains in part the fact
that the Israelites at all times were more receptive
of culture and were more capable than their kins-
men, the Edomites, Ammonites and Moabites, and
others in this respect. Moses, like Joseph, had
learned all the mysteries of Egyp wisdom. On
the other band, the sojourn in this old, civilized
country was a danger to the religion of the people
of Israel. According to the testimony of Josh 24
14; Ezk 20 7 ff; 23 8.19, they adopted many


1515


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Israel, History of


heathen customs from their neighbors. It was
salutary for them, that the memory of this sojourn

was embittered for them by hard oppression.
If, Nationality under Moses.—It is reported in
Ex 1 8 that a new Pharaoh ascended the throne,
who knew nothing of Joseph. This


1. Israel doubtless means that a new dynasty
in Egypt came into power, which adopted a new

policy in the treatment of the Sem
neighbors. The expulsion of the Hyksos had pre-


ceded this, and the opposition to the Semitics had
become more acute. The new government devel-
oped a strong tendency to expansion in the direction
of the N.E. Under these circumstances it is not sur-
prising that the laws of the empire were vigorously
enforced in these border districts and that an end
was made to the liberties of the unwelcome shepherd
tribes. Thisled to constantly increasing measures of
severity. In this way the people became more and
more unhappy and finally were forced to emigrate.

(1) Chronology —lIt is still the current convic-
tion that the Pharaoh of the oppression was
Ramescs II, a king who was extraordinarily am-
bitious of building, whose long reign is by Eduard
Meyer placed as late as 1310 to 1244 BC. His
son Merenptah would then be the Pharaoh of the
Exodus. But on this supposition, Bib. chronology
not only becomes involved in serious difficulties,
since then the time of the Judges must be cut down
to unduly small proportions, but certain definite
data also speak in favor of an earlier date for the
Exodus of Israel. Merenptah boasts in an inscrip-
tion that on an expedition to Syria he destroyed the
men of Israel (which name occurs here for the first
time on an Egyp monument). And even the father
of Rameses II, namely Seti, mentions Asher among
those whom he conquered in Northern Pal, that is,
in the district afterward occupied by this tribe.
These data justify the view that the Exodus already
took place in the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty,
a thing in itself probable, since the energetic rulers
of this dynasty naturally have inaugurated a new
method of treating this province. The oppression
of Israel would then, perhaps, be the work of Thoth-
mes III (according, to Meyer, 1501-1447 BC), and
the Exodus would take place under his successor,
Amenophis II. In harmony with this is the claim
of Manetho, who declares that the ‘Lepers,”’ in
whom we recognize the Israelites (see below), were
expelled by King Amenophis.

The length of the sojourn of the Israelites in
Egypt, according to Gen 15 13 (P), was in round
numbers 400 years; more exactly, according to Ex
12 40f (P), 430 years. But the last-mentioned
passage in LXX reads, “the sojourn of the sons of
Jacob, when they lived in Egypt and in the land of
Canaan.” (The same reading is found in the Sam
text, only that the land of Canaan precedes that of
Egypt.) Since, according to this source (P), the
Patriarchs lived 215 years in Canaan, the sojourn in
Egypt would be reduced also 215 years. This is the
way in which the synagogue reckons (cf Gal 3 17),
as also Jos (Ant, II, xv, 2). In favor of this shorter
period appeal is made to the genealogical lists, which,
however, because they are incomplete, cannot decide
the matter. In favor of a longer duration of this
sojourn we can appeal, not only to Gen 15 13 (LXX
has the same!), but also to the large number of those
who left Egypt according to Nu 1 and 26 (P), even
if the number of 600,000 men there mentioned, which
would presuppose a nation of about two million souls,
is based on a later calculation and gives us an impos-
sible conception of the Exodus.

(2) Moses.—While no account has been preserved.
concerning the sojourn of the Israelites in Egypt,
the history of the Exodus itself, which signifies the
birth of Israel as a nation, isfully reported. In this


crisis Moses is the prophetical mediator through
whom the wonderful deed of God is accomplished.
All the deeds of God, when interpreted by this
prophet, become revelations for the people. Moses
himself had no other authority or power than that
which was secured for him through his office as the
organ of God. He was the human instrument to
bring about the synthesis between Israel and Jeh
for all times. He had, in doing this, indeed pro-
claimed the old God of the fathers, but under the
new, or at any rate hitherto to the people unknown,
name of Jeh, which is a characteristic mark of the
Mosaic revelations to such an extent, that the more
accurate narrators (H and P) begin to make use
of this name only from this period of time on. In
the name of this absolute sovereign, God, Moses
claims liberty for Israel, since this people was Jeh’s
firstborn (Ex 4 22). The contest which Moses
carries on in the name of this God with Pharaoh
becomes more and more a struggle between this
God and the gods of Egypt, whose earthly repre-
sentative Pharaoh is. The plagues which come over
Egypt are all founded on the natural conditions of
the country, but they occur in such extraordinary
strength and rapidity at Moses’ prediction, and
even appear at his command, that they convince
the people, and finally Pharaoh himself, of the
omnipotence of this God on the soil of this country.
In the same way the act of deliverance at the Red
Sca can be explained as the coéperation of natural
causes, namely wind and tide. But the fact that
these elementary forces, just at this critical time,
proved so serviceable to the people of God and de-
structive to their enemies, shows unmistakably the
miraculous activity of God. This the Israelites
experienced still further on the journey through the
desert, when they were entirely dependent on Di-
vine leadership and care. The outcome of these
experiences, and at the same time its grandest
demonstration, was the conclusion of the covenant
at Mt. Smmai. From this time on Jeh was Israel’s
God and Israel was the people of Jeh. This God
claimed to be the only and ahsolute ruler over the
tribes that were now inwardly united into one
nation. From this resulted as a matter of_course,
that Moses as the recognized organ of this God was
not only the authority, who was to decide in all dis-
putes concerning right, but also the one from whom
a new and complete order of legal enactments pro-
ceeded. Moses hecame the lawgiver of Israel.

Even if the history of the origin of the OT covenant is
uniqne in character, it is nevertheless profitable to take
note of an analogy which is found in a related people
and which is adapted to make much in Israel's history
clearer. Mohammed also, after he had at the critical

oint of his career persuaded his followers to migrate
rom their homes, soon after, in Medina, concluded a
covenant, according to which he, as the recognized
speaker of Allah, claimed for himself the right to decide
in all disputes. He, too, in his capacity as the prophet
of God, was consulted as an infallible authority in al)
questions pertaining to the cultus, the civil and the crimi-
nal laws, as also in matters Bi tere to politics and to
war. And his decisions and jndgments, uttered in the
name of Allah, were written down and. afterward col-
lected. This Koran, too, became the basis of sacred law.
And by causing the hitherto divided and antagonistic
tribes to subject themselves to Allah, Mohammed united
these his followers into a religious communion and in this
way, too, into a national body. Mohammed has indeed
copied the prophecy, of earlier times, bnt the work of
Moses was original in character and truly inspired by
God.

The historical character of the exodus out of

Egypt cannot be a matter of doubt, though some

suspect that the entire nation did not
2. Histori- take part in the march through the
cal Char- Red Sea, but that certain tribes had
acter of the before this already migrated toward
Exodus the East. We must not forget that

the song of victory in Ex 15 does not
mention a word about Pharaoh’s being himself de-


Israel, History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1516


stroyed in going through the Sea. It is only the
late Ps 136 15 that presupposes this as a certainty.
That an entire nation cannot emigrate in a single
night cannot be maintained in view of the fact that
the inhabitants of the same Wadi-Tumildt, through
which Israel marched, so late as the last century,
emigrated in a single night and for similar reasons
(ef Sayce, Monuments, 249).

(1) Egyptian version of the Exodus —The fact
that, the Egyp monuments report nothing of this
episode, so disgraceful to that people, is a matter
of course, in view of the official character of these
accounts and of their policy of passing over in abso-
lute silence all disagreeable facts. And yet in the
popular tradition of the people, which Manetho
has handed down, there has bee preserved some
evidence of this event. It is indeed true that what
this author reports about the Hyksos (see above)
does not belong here, as this people is not, as Jos
thinks, identical with the Israelites. However (CAp,
I, xxvi, 5 ff), he narrates a story which may easily
be the tradition concerning the exodus of the chil-
dren of Israel as changed by popular use. King
Amenophis, we are told, wanted to see the gods.
A seer, who bore the same name, promised that his
wish would be gratified under the coudition that the
country would be cleansed of lepers and all others
that were unclean; and it is said that he accord-
ingly drove 80,000 such persons into the stone
quarries E. of the Nile. As the seer was afraid
that these measures would be displeasing to the gods
and bring upon the land a subjection of 13 years to
the supremacy of foreigners, he gave up to these
lepers the former city of the Hyksos, Avaris by
name. Here they appointed a priest by the name
of Osarsiph, later called Moses, as their chief, who
gave them a special body of laws and in these did
not spare the sacred animals. He also carried on
war against the Egyptians, the Hyksos helping
him, and he even governed Egypt for 13 years,
after which he and his followers were driven out
into Syria. Similar stories are found in Chaero-
moun, Lysimachus, and others (CAp, I, xxxii, 36;
cf Tacitus, Hist. v.3-5). Wheu we remember that
it is nonsense to permit lepers to work in stone
quarries and that the Egyptians also otherwise
call the Semites Aatu, i.e. “plague,” then this story
must be regarded as referring to such a non-Egyp
nation. Hecataeus of Abdera has a report of this
matter which is much more like the Bib. story, to
the effect, namely, that a plague which had broken
out in Egypt led the people to believe that the gods
were angry at the Egyptians because they had neg-
lected the religious cultus; for which reason they
expelled all foreigners. A part of these is said to
have migrated under the leadership of Moses to
Judaea and there to have founded the city of Jerus
(cf Diodorus Siculus x1.3; ef xxxvi.1).

(2) Geographical matters.—The Red Sea, through
which the Israelites went under the leadership of
Moses, is without a doubt the northern extension of
this body of water, which in former times reached
farther inland than the present Gulf of Suez; cf
Edouard Naville, The Store-City of Pithom and the
Route of the Exodus, 1885; and The Route of the
Exodus, 1891. This savant is entitled to the credit
of having identified the station Sukkoth on the basis
of the monuments; it is the modern Tell-Mashtta
and identical with Pithom, which was the name of
the sanctuary at that place. Later the city was
called Herodpolis. The route accordingly went
through the modern Wadi-Tumildi to the modern
Bitter Sea, N. of Suez. It is a more difficult task
to trace the route geographically on the other side
of the Sea. For it is a question whether “the
Mountain of Jeh,” which formed the goal of the
journey, is to be located on the Sinai peninsula, or


in the land of the Edomites, or even on the western
coast of Arabia. A. H. Sayce and others reject the
traditional location of Sinai on the peninsula named
after this mountain, and declare that the Israelites
marched directly eastward toward the Gulf of
Akaba. The reasons for this are found in the work
of Sayce, The Verdict of the Monuments, 263 fi.
But even if on this supposition a number of diffi-
culties fall away, there nevertheless are many argu-
ments in favor of the traditional location of Sinai,
esp. the grandeur of the chain itself, for which a
rival worth mentioning has not been discovered in
the land of the Edomites or in Northwestern Arabia.
The Sinai traveler, E. H. Palmer, has also shown
how splendidly the surroundings of the Sinai chain,
esp. the Jebel Musa with the Ras Sufsafeh, is
adapted for the purpose of concluding a covenant.

(3) The wilderness sojourn.—The duration of the
sojourn in the “desert” is everywhere (as in Am
5 25) given as 40 years. In harmony with this is
the fact that only a few of those who had come out
of Egypt lived to enter Canaan. The greater part
of these 40 years the Israelites seem to have spent
at Kadesh. At any rate, there was a sanctuary at
that place, at which Moses administered justice,
while the different tribes probably were scattered
over the prairies and over the tillable districts. The
central sanctuary, which Moses established, was the
Tabernacle, which contained the Ark of the Cove-
nant, the sanctissimum. This sacred ark with the
cherubim above it represents the throne of God,


-who is thought to be enthroned ahove the cherubim.


The ark itself is, as it were, His footstool. As in
Egyp sanctuaries not infrequently the most sacred
laws are deposited beneath the feet of the statue of
the gods, thus the sacred fundamental laws of God
(the Decalogue), on two tablets, were deposited in
this ark. This Ark of the Covenant presupposes
an invisible God, who cannot be represented by any
image. The other laws and ordinances of Moses
covered the entire public and private legislation,
given whenever the need for these made it necessary
to determine such matters. In giving these laws
Moses connected his system with the old traditional
principles already current among the tribes. This
fact is confirmed by the legal CH, which contains
remarkable parallels, esp. to Ex 20—23 19. But
Moses has elevated the old traditional laws of the
tribes and has given them a more humane character.
By putting every enactment in the light, of the reli-
gion of Jeh, and by eliminating everything not in
harmony with this religion, he has raised the people
spiritually and morally to a higher plane.

Among the people, the undercurrents of super-
stition aud of immorality were indeed still strong.
At the outset Moses had much to contend with in
the opposition of the badly mixed mass of the peo-
ple. And the fact that he was able for the period
of 40 years to hold the leadership of this stubborn
people without military force is a phenomenal
work, which shows at all hands the wonderful co-
operation of Jeh Himself. However, he did not
indeed succeed in raising the entire people to the
plane of his knowledge of God and of his faith in
Go This generation had to die in the wilderness,
because it lacked the sanctified courage to take pos-
session of the land of promise. But the foundation
had been laid for the theocracy, which must not in
any way be identified with a hierarchy.

(4) Entrance into Canaan—It was Joshua, the
successor of Moses, who was enabled to finish the
work and to take possession of the land. Not far
from Jericho he led the people over the Jordan aud
captured this city, which had been considered im-
pregnable. After that, with his national army, he
conquered the Canaaunitish inhabitants in several
decisive battles, near Gibeon and at the waters of


Caan
Ve NRE Re


fi


“ISRAEL” STELE IN MUSEUM AT CAIRO


1517


Merom, and then went back and encainped at
Gilgal on the Jordan. After this he advanced with
his tribe of Ephraim into the heart of the land, while
the southern tribes on their part forced thelr way
into the districts assigned to them. Without
reasons this account has beeu attacked as unre-
liable, and critics have thought that originally the
different tribes, at their own initiative, either peace-
ably or by force, had occupied their land. But it
is entirely natural to suppose that the inhabitants
of the country who had allied themselves to resist
this occupation by Israel, had first to be made sub-
missive through several decisive defeats, before
they would permit the entrance of the tribes of
Israel, which entrance accordingly often took place
without a serious struggle. That the occupation
of the land was not complete is shown in detail in
Jgs 1. Also in those districts in which Israel had
gained the upper hand, they generally did not wage
the war of annihilation that Moses had commanded,
but were content with making the Canaanites, by
the side of whom they settled, bondmeu and sub-
jects. This relation could, in later time, easily be
reversed, esp. in those cases in which the original
inhabitants of the country were in the majority.
Then, too, it must be remembered that the latter
enjoyed a higher state of civilization than the Is-
raelites. It was accordingly an easy matter for
the Israelites to adopt the customs and the ideas
of the Canaanites. But if this were done, their
religion was also endangered. Together with the
sacred “holy places” (baméth) of the original in-
habitants, the altars and the sanctuaries there
found also came into possession of the Israelites.
Among these there were some that had been sacred
to the ancestors of Israel, and with which old mem-
ories were associated. As a consequence, it readily
occurred that Israel appropriated also old symbols
and religious ceremonies, and even the Baals and
the Astartes themselves, however little this could
be united in principle with the service of Jeh. But
if the Israelites lost their unique religion, then their
connection with the kindred tribes and their na-
tional independence were soon matters of history.
They were readily absorbed by the Canaanites.
III. Period of the Judges.—In such a period of
weakened national and religious life, it could easily
happen that Israel would again lose
1. General the supremacy that it had won by the
Character sword. It was possible that the
of Period Canaanites could again bring into
their power larger parts of the land.
Also energetic and pushing nomadic tribes, such as
the Ammonites, the Moabites, or other warlike
peoples, such as the Philis, could bring the country
under subjection, as actually did occur in the period
of the Judges. The Book of Jgs reports a number
of such instances of the subjection of Israel, which
did not extend over the whole land, and in part
occurred in different sections of the country at the
same time. Judah and Simeon, the two tribes in
the south, as a rule took no part in these contests,
and had their own battles to fight; and the same is
true of the tribes E. of the Jordan, among whom
Northern Manasseh and Ephraim were in closest
alliance. After a longer or shorter period of op-
pression, there followed in each case a revival of the
national spirit against such oppression. And in all
these cases the popular hero who became the liber-
ator appealed to the religious consciousness that
formed a bond of union between all the Israelitish
tribes and their common God Jeh. In however
wild a manner the youthful vigor of the people may
have found its expression on these occasions, they
are nevertheless conscious of the fact that they are
waging a holy war, which in every case also ended
with the victory over the heathen spirit and false


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Israel, History of


worship that had found their way into Israel. The
most precious historical monument from these
times is the song of Deborah (Jgs 5), which, like a
mirror, reflects faithfully the conditions of affairs,
and the thoughts of that age.

Jgs 17-21 belong to the beginning of this period.
The first of these old stories narrates the emigration
of a large portion of the tribe of Dan to the extreme
north of the country and the origin of idolatry in
that region (chs 17,18). But the second story,
too, both in form and contents, is, at least in part,
very old and its historical value is amply protected
against the attacks of modern critics by Hos 9 9;
10 9. This story reports a holy war of revenge
against the tribe of Benjamin, which was unwilling
to render satisfaction for a nefarious crime that had
been committed at Gibeah in its territory. In the
feeling of close solidarity and of high responsibility
which appears in connection with the punishment of
this crime, we still see the influence of the periods
of Moses and Joshua.

First it is narrated of a king of Aram-naharaim
that he had oppressed Israel for a period of 8 years


Jgs 3 8). This probably means a
2. The king of the Mitanni (Sayce, Monu-
Different ments, 297, 304), who at that time
Judges were trying to force their way through


Canaan into Egypt. It was Othniel,
the Kenazite, belonging to a tribe that was related
to Judah, who delivered Israel. A second liber-
ator was the Benjamite Ehud, who delivered the
southeastern portion of the country from the servi-
tude of Eglon, the king of the Moabites, by putting
the latter to death (Jgs 3 12ff), On a greater
scale was the decisive battle against the Canaan-
itish kings in the north, when these had formed an
alliance and had subjected Israel for a period of
20 years. At the appeal of Deborah, Barak con-
quered Sisera, the hostile king and leader of a
mighty army of chariots, in the plain of Kishon
(Jgs 4,6). Inthe same region the battle of Gideon
was fought with the plundermg Bedouin swarms
of the Midianites, who had repeatedly oppressed
Israel (chs 6-8). Abimelech, an unworthy son of
the God-fearing hero, after the death of his father,
had established a local kingdom in Shechem,
which stood for only a short time and came to a
disgraceful end. Little more than the names are
known to us of Tola, of the tribe of Issachar, and
of Jair, in Gilead (10 1 ff). More fully is the story
of Jephthah told, who delivered the country from
the Ammonites coming from the east (ch 11), with
which was also connected a struggle with the jealous
Ephraimites (ch 12); and still more fully are the
details reported of the personal contests of the
Nazirite dimen belonging to the tribe of Dan,
against the Philis making their inroads from the
south, and who for many years proved to be the
most dangerous enemies of Israel.

All these heroes, and a few others not so well
known, are called judges, and it is regularly re-
ported how long each of these “judged” Israel.
They were not officials in the usual sense of the
term, but were liberators of the people, who, at
the inspiration of Jeh, gave the signal for a holy
war, After the victory they, as men of Jeh,
then enjoyed distinction, at least in their own
tribes; and in so far as it was through their doing
that the people had been freed, they were the high-
est authorities in political, legal, and probably, too,
in religious questions. They are called judges in
conscious contradistinction from the kingly power,
which in Israel was recognized as the exclusive
prerogative of Jeh, so that Gideon declined it as
improper when the people wanted to make him
king (8 22f). The people recognized the Spirit
of Jeh in the fierce energy which came over these


Israel, History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1518


men and impelled them to arouse their people out
of their disgraceful lethargy. For this reason, too,
they could afterward be trusted in making their
judicial decisions in harmony with the mind and
the Spirit of God, as this had been done already by
the prophetess Deborah in the time of oppression.
Yet, at least in the case of Samson (notwithstand-
ing 16 31), it is not probable that he ever was en-
gaged in the administration of justice. It is not
even reported of him that he fought at the head of
the people, but he carried on his contests with the
Philis in behalf of himself individually, even if, as
one consecrated of God, he were a witness for the
power of God.
The chronology of the period of the Judges ex-
hibits some peculiar difficulties. If we add together
the data that are given in succession
3. Chro- in the Book of Jgs, we get from Jgs
nology of 3 8—16 31,410yearsaltogether. But
the Period this number is too large to make it har-
monize with the 480 years mentioned
in 1K 61. Jewish tradition (e.g. Sédher ‘Olam)
accordingly does not include the years of oppression
in this sum, but makes them a part of the period
of the individual judges. In this way about 111
years are eliminated. But evidently the redactor
of the Book of Jgs did not share this view. Modern
critics are of the opinion that the writer has dove-
tailed two chronological methods, one of which
counted on the basis of periods of forty years each,
while the other was more exact and contained odd
numbers. In this way we can shorten this period as
does the Sédher ‘Olam. At any rate, it is justifiable,
and is suggested by 10 7, to regard the oppression
by the Ammonites (10 8 ff) and the oppression by
the Philis (3 1ff) as contemporaneous.
other events, too, which in the course of the narra-
tive are related as following each other, may have
taken place at the same time or in @ somewhat
different sequence, as the author used different
sources for the different events. But for this very
reason his story deserves to be credited as historical.
Such characters as Deborah, Jephthah, Ehud,
Gideon, Abimelech and Samson are described as
tangible historical realities. Even if, in the case
of the last-mentioned, oral tradition has added
decorative details to the figure, yet Samson cannot
possibly be a mere mythological character, but must
have been a national hero characteristic of this
period, in whom are represented the abundance of
physical and mental peculiarities characteristic of
the youthful nation, as also their good-natured
indifference and carelessness over against their
treacherous enemies.
The lack of a central political power made itself
felt. all the more in the period of the Judges, since,
because of the scattered condition of


4, Loose the people in the country that had
Organiza- been so minutely parceled out, and
tion of the because of the weakening of the reli-
People gious enthusiasm of the preceding age,

the decper unity of heart and mmd
was absent. It is indeed incorrect to imagine that


at this time there was a total lack of governmental
authority. A patriarchal organization had been
in force from the beginning. The father of the
family was the lawful head of those belonging to
him: and a larger clan was again subject to an
“elder,” with far-reaching rights in the adminis-
tration of law, but also with the duty to protect
his subordinates, and in case of want to support
them. Unfortunately we are nowhere informed how
these elders were chosen or whether their offices
were hereditary. Only a very few passages, such
as Isa 3 6f, throw a certain light on the subject.
This institution of the elders Moses had already
found established and had developed farther (Ex


18 13 ff). It was retained in all the periods of
Israel’s history. When the people began to live
together in larger centers, as a natural consequence
bodies of such city elders were established. The
tribes, too, had “elders” at their head. But for
@ united action of the whole nation this arrange-
ment did not suffice; and esp. in the case of war
the people of Israel felt that they were at a dis-
advantage compared with their enemies, who had
kings to lead them. For this reason the desire for
a king steadily grew in Israel. The dictators of the
period of the Judges satisfied their needs only for the
time being.

IV. The Kingdom: Israel-Judah.—In the time
when the Israelites were oppressed by the Philis
the need of a king was esp. felt. As Samson had
come to his death in servitude, the people them-
selves thus, at the close of this period of glorious
victories, were under the supremacy of a warlike
race, which had only in recent times settled on the
western coast of Pal, and from this base was forcing
its conquests into the heart of the country. ;

After the most disastrous defeats, during which
even the Ark of the Covenant was lost, there arose
for the people, indeed, a father and a
deliverer in the person of Samuel, who
saved them during the most critical
period. What his activity meant for the uplift of
the people cannot be estimated too highly. He
was, above all, during peace the faithful watchman
of the most, sacred possessions of Israel, a prophet
such as the people had not seen since the days of
Moses; and he doubtless was the founder of those
colonies of prophetical disciples who were in later
times so influential in the development of a theo-
eratical spirit in Israel. He guarded the whole
nation also with all his power, by giving to them
laws and cultivating piety in the land.

But as Samuel, too, became old and the people
concluded for good reasons that his rule would have

no worthy successors, their voice


1. Samuel


2. The could no longer be silenced, and they
Kingdom demanded a king. Samuel tried in
of Saul vain to persuade the people to desist


from their demand, which to him
seemed to be an evidence of distrust in the provi-
dence of Jeh, but was himself compelled, by inspi-
ration of God, to submit to their wishes and anoint
the new king, whom Jeh pointed out to him.
It is indeed maintained by the critics that there
are several accounts extant in S concerning the
selection of Saul to the kingdom, and that these
accounts differ in this, that the one regards the
kingdom as a blessing and the other as a curse.
The first view, which is said to be the older, is
claimed to be found in 1S 9 1-10.16, and 11;
while the second is said to be in 8; 10 17-27; 11
12-14. Whatever may be the facts in regard to
these sources, this is beyond any doubt, that Samuel,
the last real theocratic leader, established the
kingdom. But just as little can the fact be doubted,
that he took this step with inner reluctance, since
in his eyes this innovation meant the discarding of
the ideals of the people to which he himself had
remained true during his lifetime. The demand of
the people was the outgrowth of worldly motives,
but Jeh brought it about, that the “Anointed of
Jeh” signified an advance in the history of the
kingdom of God.

Saul himself, at first, in a vigorous and efficient
manner, solved the immediate problems and over-
came the enemies of his people. But he soon began
to conceive of his kingdom after the manner of
heathen kingdoms and did not subject himself to
Jeh and His appointed representative. There soon
arose an open conflict between him and Samuel;
and the fact that the Spirit of God had departed


1519


from him appears in his melancholy state of mind,
which urged him on to constantly increasing deeds
of violence. That under these circumstances God’s
blessing also departed from him is proved by the
collapse of his life’s work in his final failures against
the Philis.

In contrast with this, David, his successor, the
greatest king that Israel ever had, had a correct

conception of this royal office, and
38. David even in his most brilliant successes
did not forget that be was called to
rule only as “the servant of Jeh” (by which name
he, next to Moses, is called oftenest in the Bible).
As a gifted ruler, he strengthened his kingdom from
within, which, considering the heterogeneous char-
acter of the people, was not an easy matter, and
extended it without by overpowering jealous neigh-
bors. In this way it was he who became the real
founder of a powerful kingdom. The conquest of
Jerus and its selection as the capital city also are an
evidence of his political wisdom. It is indeed true
that he, too, had his personal failings and that he
made many mistakes, which caused him political
troubles, even down to his old age. But his humil-
ity at all times made him strong enough again to
subject himself to the hand of Jeh, and this humility
was based on the attitude of his spirit toward Jeh,
which shows itself in his Pss. In this way he really
came to be a connecting link between God and his
people, and upon this foundation the prophets built
further, who prophesied a still closer union of the
two under a son of David.

While Saul was a Benjamite, David was of the
tribe of Judah, and was for a short time the king of
this tribe in Hebron, before the other tribes, be-
coming tired of the misrule of a descendant of Saul,
also voluntarily chose him as their king. He soon
after this established as the center of his new king-
dom the city of Jerus, which really was situated on
the territory that had been assigned to Benjamin;
and he also set this city apart as the religious center
of the people by transferring the Ark of the Cove-
nant to this place. In this way David, through his
wisdom and his popular bravery, succeeded in
uniting the tribes more firmly under his supremacy,
and esp. did he bring the tribe of Judah, which down
to this time had been more for itself, into closer
connection with the others. Israel under David
became a prominent kingdom. This position of
power was, as a matter of fact, distasteful to their
neighbors round about. The Philis tried to destroy
the ambitious kingdom, but were themselves re-
peatedly and definitely overpowered. But other
neighboring people, too, who, notwithstanding the
fact that David did not assume an offensive atti-
tude toward them, assumed a hostile attitude toward
him, came to feel his superiority. Particularly
severe and tedious was the war against the allied
Ammonites and Syrians; and although the Edom-
ites, too, regarded this as a favorable time for at-
tacking Israel, this struggle also ended in a complete
triumph for David. The surrounding countries
became subject to him from the Mediterranean
Sea to Hamath (2 8 8 9), and from the territory
of the Lebanon, the inhabitants of which assumed
a friendly attitude, to the borders of Egypt, which
also recognized the new rule.

Solomon, the son of David, developed inwardly
the powerful kingdom which he had inherited. To

his father he seemed to be the right
4. Solomon man for this because of his peaceful

temperament and his high mental
abilities. He justified the hopes placed in him.
Out of love to Jeh he built the temple on Mt. Zion,
regulated the affairs of state and the administra~
tion of justice, and by commercial treaties with the
Phoenicians (King Hiram) brought about great


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Israel, History of


prosperity in the land. His was the “golden”
period in Israel. The culture and civilization, too,
of the people were materially advanced by Solomon
as he widened their horizon and introduced the lit-
erature of Proverbs, which had up to this time been
more extensively cultivated by the neighboring
people (Edom, Arabia, Egypt). He even developed
this literature into a higher type. On the other
hand, the brilliant reign of Solomon brought serious
dangers to thenew kingdom. His liberal-mindedness
in the treatment of his foreign wives, in permitting
them to retain their heathen worship, probably
because he thought that in the end it was the same
Divinity which these women worshipped under a
different form, endangered the theocracy with its
serious cultus and its strict morality. Through
this conduct the king necessarily forfeited the sym-
pathy of the most pious Israelites. At the same
time, his love for magnificent structures surpassed
the measure which was regarded as correct for the
“Anointed of Jeh.” Then, too, his efforts, in them-
selves justifiable, to establish a more perfect organ-
ization of the monarchy, produced a great deal of
dissatisfaction. Solomon did not understand, as did
his father, how to respect the inherited liberty-loving
tendencies of his people. The heavy services and
taxation, to which the people were compelled to sub-
mit, were deeply felt, most of all by the Ephraimites,


_ who at times had exhibited a jealous spirit, and could


not forget their lost hegemony.
So long, indeed, as the wise Solomon and his ad-
visers were at the helm, the various rebellious tend-
encies could not make themselves
§. Division felt. But after his death the catas-
of the trophe came. His son, Rehoboam, at
Kingdom the Diet in Shechem, at which the
Ephraimites placed before him a kind
of capitulation before his coronation, showed that
he did not at all understand the situation. His
domineering attitude brought things to a head, and
he must have been glad that at least the tribe of
Judah remained faithful to him. The northern
tribes chose for their king Jeroboam (I), who before
this had already taken part in rebellious agitations,
as the kingdom had been predicted to him by the
prophet Ahijah (1 K 11 2 ff). Israel was torn into
two parts.
With this rupture the powerful kingdom estab-
lished by David had reached its end. In regard
to this flourishing period in Israel’s
6. Sources history we are, on the whole, well
of the His- informed through the sources. Esp.
tory of the in 28 9-20 and 1 K 2,3, we have
Kingdom a narrator who must have been a con- ,
temporary of the events recorded.
Klostermann surmises that this may have been
Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok (2 S 16 27); while
Duhm, Budde, Sellin and others believe it to have
been the priest Abiathar. Less unity is in evidence
in the first Book of 8, containing the history of the
youth of David, which evidently was often de-
scribed. The Books of Ch have only secondary
value for the life of David. These books narrate
in full detail the story of the preparations made by
David for the erection of the temple and of his
organization of the Levites. In regard to the reign
of Solomon, the Books of K report more fully.
Concerning the later kings, they generally give only
meager extracts from more complete sources, which
excerpts, however, have been shown to be reliable.
The interest which the narrator has in telling his
story is the religious. Esp. does he carefully note
the fact as to the relation of the different kings to
the cultus. Special sources have been used in com-
piling the detailed stories of the great prophets
Elijah and Elisha, which are inserted in the history
of the two kingdoms. On the other hand, the Books


Israel, History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1520


of Ch pass over entirely all reference to the work of
the prophets of the Northern Kingdom, as they
ignore the entire history of the Ephraimitic kingdom
since the interest of these books is centered on the
sanctuary in Jerus. Also in the case of the Judacan
history, the much older Books of K deserve the
precedence. Yet we owe to the writer of Ch a
number of contributions to this history, esp. where
he has made a fuller use of the sources than has
been done by the author of the Books of K. The
suspicion that everything which Ch contains,
beyond what is to be found in K, is unhistorical,
has turned out to be groundless. Thus, e.g., it
would be impossible to understand the earlier
prophecies of Isaiah under Jotham at all, if it did
not appear from Ch to what prosperity and influ-
ence the people of Jerus had by that time again
attained. For it is only Ch that give us an account
of the flourishing reign of his predecessor Uzziah,

who is treated but briefly in K.
The chronology of the earlier portions of the
period of the Kings is dependent on the date of the
division of the kingdom. This date


7. Chrono- can be decided on the basis of the
logical careful chronological data of the
Matters Books of K, which do not indeed agree


in all particulars, but are to be adjusted
by the Assyr chronology. If we, with Kamp-
hausen, Oettli and Kittel, regard the year 937 BC
as the time of the division of the kingdom, then
Solomon ruled from 977 to 937; David, from 1017 to
977. The length of the reign of Saul is not known,
as the text of 1S 13 1 is defective. It is very
probable that we can credit him with about twenty
years, according to Jos (Ant, X, viii, 4), i.e. from
about 1037-1017. In this case David transferred
the seat of government to Jerus about the year
1010, and the completion of the erection of the temple
of Solomon took place m 966. But this basal date
of 937 is not accepted as correct by all scholars.
Klostermann places the date of the rupture of the
kingdom in the year 978; Koehler, in 973. For
later chronological data, Assyr sources are an im-
portant factor. The Assyrians were accustomed
to call each year after the name of an official (imu),
and eponym lists are extant for 228 years. In
these reference is made to an eclipse of the sun,
which astronomically has been settled as having
taken place on July 15, 763. We have in this list
then the period from 893 to 666. On this basis,
it is made possible to determine the exact dates of
the different military expeditions of the Assyr
rulers and their conflicts with the kings of Judah
- and Israel, on the presupposition, however, that
the Assyr inscriptions here used really speak of
these kings, which in a number of cases is denied.
Valuable help for determining the chronology of
this period is the fall of Samaria in the year 722 and
the expedition of Sennacherib against Jerus in 701,
and then the fall of Jerus in 587 and 586. The
distribution of the years between these dates to
the individual kings is in places doubtful, as the
numbers in the text are possibly corrupt, and in the
synchronistic data of the Books of K mistakes may
have been made.
V. Period of the Separated Kingdoms.—The
two separated kingdoms differed materially. The
kingdom of Ephraim was the more
1. Contrasts powerful of the two. It embraced,


and Vicis- according to an inaccurate usage of
situdes of the words, 10 tribes; and to this
the King- kingdom the vassals, such as Moab,
doms as a rule remained subject, until


they emancipated themselves. But,
on the other hand, this Northern Kingdom was
less firm spiritually. Even the resident city of
the king changed frequently, until Omri founded


the city of Samaria, which was well adapted for
this purpose. The dynasties, too, were only of
short duration. It occurred but rarely that one
family was able to maintain its supremacy on the
throne through several generations. A revolu-
tionary character remained fixed in this kingdom
and became its permanent weakness. On the other
hand, the smaller and often overpowered kingdom
of Judah, which faithfully adhered to the royal line
of David, passed through dangerous crises and had
many unworthy rulers. But the legitimate royal
house, which had been selected by Jeh, constituted
spiritually a firm bond, which kept the people
united, as is seen, e.g., by a glance at the addresses
of Isaiah, who is thoroughly filled with the con-
viction of the importance of the house of David, no
matter how unworthy the king who happened to
rule might appear to him. In a religious respect,
also, the arbitrary break with Zion proved to be fatal
for the Northern Kingdom.

Jeroboam.—It is true that faithful prophets of
Jeh, such as the Abijah of Shiloh mentioned above,

and Shemaiah (1 K 12 22 ff), pro-
2. The Suc- claimed that the fateful division of the
cessive kingdom was a Divinely intended
Reigns judgment from Jeh. But they soon

were compelled to reach the conclusion
that Jeroboam did not regard himself as a servant
of Jeh, but as a sovereign who, through his own
power and through the favor of the people, had
secured the rule, and hence could arbitrarily decide
all matters in reference to the cultus and the sacred
sanctuaries of the people. According to his own
will, and for political reasons, he established the
new national sanctuary at Bethel, and another at
Dan. At both shrines he caused Jeh to be wor-
shipped under the image of a calf, which was to
constitute a paganizing opposition to the Ark of the
Covenant on Mt. Zion, even if it was the idea that
Jeh, the God of the Covenant, was to be worshipped
in these newimages. In doing this, the king followed
ancient national customs, which had broken with
the purity of the Mosaic religion (concerning, image-
worship in Dan we have heard before. See GoLpEN
Catr). His sojourn in Egypt, too, where he had
lived as a fugitive, had doubtless furnished the king
incentives in this direction. He created a priest-
hood that was submissive to his wishes, and dis-
regarded the opposition of the few prophets who
protested against the policy of the king. His suc-
cessors, too, walked “in the ways of Jeroboam.”’
The independent prophets, however, did not die
out, but, rather, prophecy developed its greatest
activity in this very Northern Kingdom. As arule,
in its work it stood in opposition to the government,
but at times it succeeded in gaining the recognition
of the rulers.

Omri.—The earliest times of the divided king-
doms are, from a political point of view, character-
ized by the fact that the kingdoms on the Euphrates
and the Tigris, namely Assyria and Babylon, still
had enough to do with themselves, and did not yet
make any inroads into the Mediterranean lands; but,
rather, it was the Syrians who first caused a good
deal of trouble to the Northern Kingdom. Jero-
boam did not succeed in founding a dynasty.
Already his son Nadab was eliminated by a usurper
Baasha. The latter’s son too, Elah, was murdered,
after a reign of two years. It was not, however, his
murderer Zimri, or Tibni, who strove to secure the
kingdom for himself, but Omri who became king
(1 K 16), and who also attained to such prominence
abroad that the cuneiform inscriptions for a long
time after call Israel ‘the land of Omri.” His ability
as a ruler was seen in the fact that the establish-
ment of Samaria as the capital city was his work.
The inscription on the Mesha stone reports that he


1521


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Israel, History of


algo established the sovereignty of Israel vigorously
on the east side of the Jordan.

Ahab.—His son Ahab, too, was an energetic and
brave ruler, who succeeded in gaining a number of
victories over the Syrians, who were now beginning
to assume the offensive in a determined manner.
Then, too, he was politic enough to win over to his
interests the kingdom of Judah, with which his

redecessors had lived in almost constant warfare.

n this policy he succeeded, because the noble and
large-hearted king Jehoshaphat was more receptive
to such fraternal relations than was good for him.
An expedition jointly undertaken by these two
kings against Syria brought Jehoshaphat into ex-
treme danger and ended with the death of Ahab.

Ahab’s fate was his wife Jezebel, the daughter
of the Phoen king Ethbaal (Ithobal, according to
Jos, Ant, VIII, xiii, 2 and CAp, I, 18), who had
been a priest of Astarte. This intermarriage with
a fanatical heathen family brought untold and end-
less misfortune over all Israel. This bold and
scheming woman planned nothing less than the
overthrow of the religion of Jeh, and the substi-
tution for it of the Baal and the Astarte cultus. As
a first step she succeeded in having the king tolerate
this religion. The leading temple in the new resi-
dent city, Samaria, was dedicated to the Baal
cultus. Already this introduction of a strange and
lascivious ethnic religion was a great danger to the
religion and the morals of the people. Hosts of
Baal priests, ecstatic dervishes, traversed the
country. Soon the queen undertook to persecute
the faithful worshippers of Jeh. The fact that these
men protested against the tolerance of this foreign
false religion was interpreted as disobedience ou
their part to the king. Many faithful prophets
were put to death. At this critical period, when
the existence of the religion of Jeh was at stake,
the prophet Elijah, the Tishbite, appeared on the
stage, and through a bitter struggle reéstablished
the worship of Jeh. However, the fateful influence
that this woman exerted was thereby not yet de-
stroyed. It extended to Judah also.

Rehoboam.—In the kingdom of Judah, apart from
the apostasy of different tribes, which left him only
the vigorous tribe of Judah and portions of Benja-
min, Dan, Simeon, and Levi, Rehoboam experienced
also other calamities, namely, a destructive invasion
and tribute imposition by King Shishak of Egypt
(Egyp Sheshonk, founder of the XXIId Dynasty;
1K 14 25f; cf 2 Ch 12 2ff). While under Sol-
omon the relations of Israel to the Egyp court
had in the beginning been very friendly, this was
changed when a new dynasty came to the throne.
After Jeroboam had failed in his first revolutionary
project, he had found refuge at the court of Shishak
ad 11 40). It is possible that Jeroboam made
the Egyp king lustful for the treasures of Jerus.
The Egyptians did not, as a matter of fact, stop at
the Ephraimitic boundaries, but in part also in-
vaded the territory of Jeroboam; but their chief
objective was Jerus, from which they carried away
the treasures that had been gathered by Solomon.
On the temple wall of Karnak this Pharaoh_has
inscribed the story of this victory and booty. From
the names of the cities found in this inscription,
we learn that this expedition extended as far as
Megiddo and Taanach. :

Abijah—Rehoboam was succeeded by his son
Abijah, or Abijahu, according to Ch (the Abijam
of K is hardly correct). He ruled only 3 years.
But even during this short reign he was compelled
to engage in a severe struggle with Jeroboam (1 K
15 6; see details in 2 Ch 13).

Asa.—In every respect the reign of the God-
fearing Asa, who sought to destroy the heathenism
that had found its way into the cultus, was more


fortunate. He also experienced Jeh’s wonderful
help when the Cushite Zerah made an incursion
into his land (2 Ch 14 8 ff), ie. probably Osor-
kon I, who, however, did not belong to an Ethiopian
dynasty. Possibly he is called an Ethiopian be- -
cause he came into the country with Nubian troops.
Less honorable was his conduct in the conflict. with
Baasha. When he was sorely pressed by the latter
he bought, through the payment of a large tribute,
the assistance of the Syrian king, Ben-hadad I, who
up to this time had been an ally of Baasha. This
bribing of foreigners to fight against their own
covenant people, which was afterward often re-
peated, was rebuked by a bold prophet in the
presence of the pious king, but the prophet was
compelled to suffer abuse for his open testimony
(2 Ch 16 7 ff).

Jehoshaphat —A much more noble conduct charac-
terized the dealings of Jehoshaphat in relation to the
Northern Kingdom. His fault was that he entered
too fully into the selfish offers of friendship made by
Ahab. The worst step was that, in order to confirm
his covenant, he took for his son Jehoram as wife,
Athaliah, the danghter of Jezebel. Jehoshaphat
was a chivalrous ally, who also joined Ahab’s son,
Jehoram, in a dangerous war against the Moabites;
as this people under their king Mesha had made
themselves free from Israel and had taken the offen-
sive against them. For the inner affairs of the king-
dom his reign was more fortunate. He was a God-
fearing and an energetic prince, who did much to
elevate the people in a material and a religious way
and perfected its political organization. Nor did
he fail to secure some noteworthy successes. How-
ever, the fact that the warning words of the prophets
who rebuked him because of his alliance with the
half-heathenish house of Omri were not the fanati-
cal exaggerations of pessimistic seers, appears at
once after his death.

Jehoram.—His son Jehoram, after the manner
of oriental despots, at once caused his brothers to be
put to death, of which doubtless his wife Athaliah
wasthe cause. This woman transplanted the policy
of Jezebel to Judah, and was scheming for the down-
fall of the house of David and its sanctuary. Under
Jehoram the power of Judah accordingly began to
sink rapidly. Edom became independent. The
Philis and the Arabians sacked Jerus. Even the
royal princes, with the exception of Ahaziah, the
youngest son of Athaliah, were expelled. When the
latter ascended the throne she had the absolute
power in her hands.

Jehu.—During this time the judgment over the
house of Omri was fast approaching. The avenger
came in the person of the impetuous Jehu, who had
been anointed king by one of the disciples of Elisha
in the camp of Ramoth in Gilead. According to
i K 19 16, the order had already been given to
Elijah to raise this man to the throne; but the com-
pliance with this command appears to have been
delayed. As soon as Jehu became aware that he
was entrusted with this mission, he hastened to
Jezreel, where Ahaziah, king of Judah, was just
paying a visit to Jehoram, and slew them both.
With heartless severity he extended this slaughter,
not only to all the members of the house of Omri,
together with Jezebel, but also to those numerous
members of the Davidiec royal house who fell into
his hands. He likewise destroyed the adherents of
Baal, whom he had invited to their death in their
sanctuary at Samaria. Deserved as this judgment.
upon the house of Jeroboam was (2 K 10 30),
which Jehu, according to higher command, carried
out, he did this in an unholy mind and with hardness
and ambitious purpose. The puritanical Rechab-
ites had sanctioned his action; but as more and
more the true character of Jehu began to reveal


Israel, History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1522


itself, he lost the sympathies of the pious, and Hosea
announced to his house the vengeance for his bloody
crimes at Jezreel (Hos 1 4).

_ The Assyrians.—In Jehu’s reign occurred the
inroads toward the W. on the part of the Assyrians.
This people already in the time of Ahab, under their
king, Shalmaneser IJ, had forced their way as far
as Karkar on the Orontes, and had there fought a
battle in 854 with the Syrians and their allies, among
whom Ahab is also mentioned, with 2,000 chariots
and 10,000 soldiers. If this is really Ahab, the
king of Israel, which is denied hy some, then he, at
that time, fought against Assyria in conjunction
with the Syrians, who otherwise had been so bitterly
attacked by him. The Assyrians boast of this vic-
tory, but seem to have won it at a heavy price, as
they did not press on farther westward. When in
842 Shalmaneser came a second time, Jehu was
certainly not among the allies of the Syrians. The
Assyrians do not seem, on this occasion, to have
been opposed by so powerful a league, and were
able to attack the Syrians whom they conquered
at Saniru (Hermon, Anti-Lebanon) in a much more
determined manner. They laid siege to Damascus
and laid waste the surrounding country. The
Hauran and Bashan were made a desert. In their
march of victory they pressed forward as far as
the Mediterranean. Phoenicia and other countries
hrought tribute. Among these nations Shal-
maneser expressly mentions Jahua (‘“‘Jehu, the son
of Omri’ [!]), who was compelled to deliver up gold
and silver bars and other valuable possessions.
But this expensive homage on the part of Jehu did
not help much. Shalmaneser came only once more
(839) into this neighborhood. After this the
Assyrians did not appear again for a period of 35
years. All the more vigorously did the Syrians
and other neighboring people make onslaughts on
Israel. How fearfully they devasted Israc] appears
from Am 1.

Jehoahaz.—Under his son Jehoahaz the weakness
of Israel became still greater. In his helplessness,
the Lord finally sent him a deliverer (2 K 13 3 ff)
This deliverer was none other than the Assyr king,
Adad-nirari III (812-783), who, through a military
incursion, had secured anew his supremacy over
Western Asia, and had besieged the king of Damas-
cus and had forced him to pay an immense tribute.
In this way Israel, which had voluntarily rendered
submission to him, was relieved of its embarrass-
ment by the weakening of Syria.

Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz, experienced more
favorable conditions. He also conquered Amaziah,
the king of Judah; and his son, Jeroboam IT, even
succeeded in restoring the old boundaries of the
kingdom, as the prophet Jonah had predicted (2 K
14 24 ff). His reign was the last flourishing period
of the kingdom of Ephraim. See, further, IsRazt,
KINGDOM OF.

Athaliah.—The kingdom of Judah, in the mean-
while, had passed through severe crises. The
most severe was caused by that Athaliah, who,
after the murder of her son Ahaziah by Jehu, had
secured absolute control in Jerus, and had abused
this power in order to root out the family of David.
Only one son of the king, Joash, escaped with his
life. He, a boy of one year, was hidden in the
temple by a relative, where the high priest Jehoiada,
who belonged to the party opposed to the heathen-
minded queen, concealed him for a period of 6 years.
When the boy was 7 years old Jehoiada, at a well-
timed moment, proclaimed him king. His eleva-
tion to the throne, in connection with which event
the terrible Athaliah was put to death, introduced
at the same time an energetic reaction against the
heathendom that had found its way even into Judah,
and which the queen had in every way favored.


Joash was predestined to bea theocratic king. And,
in reality, in the beginning of his reign of 40 years,
he went hand in hand with the priests and the
prophets of Jeh. After Jehoiada’s death, however,
he tolerated idolatrous worship among the princes
(2 Ch 24 17 ff), and by doing so came into con-
flict with the faithful prophet Zechariah, the son of
his benefactor Jehoiada, who rebuked him for his
wrong, and was even stoned. A just punishment
for this guilt was recognized in the misfortune which
overtook the king and his country... The Syrian
king, Hazael, when he was engaged in an expedi-
tion against Gath, also took possession of Jerus and
made it pay tribute, after having apparently in-
flicted a severe defeat on the people of Judah, on
which occasion many princes fell in the battle and
Joash himself was severely wounded. Toward the
end of his reign there was also much dissatisfac-
tion among his suhjects, and some of his courtiers
finally murdered him (2 K 12 20f).
Amaziah.—However, his son Amaziah, who now
ascended the throne, punished the murderers. The
king was successful in war against the Edomites.
This made him bold. He ventured to meet Joash,
the king of Israel, in battle and was defeated and
captured. The people of Judah suffered the deepest
humiliation. A large portion of the walls of Jerus
was torn down (2 K 14 11 ff). Amaziah did not
feel himself safe even in his own capital city, be-
cause of the dissatisfaction of his own subjects, and
he fled to Lachish. Here he was murdered. So
deep had Judah fallen, while Jeroboam II succeeded
in raising his kingdom to an unthought-of power.
Uzziah.—But for Judah a turn for the better
soon set in under Uzziah, the same as Azariah in
K, the son of Amaziah, who enjoyed a long and
prosperous reign.
Prosperous as Israel outwardly appeared to be dur-
ing the reigns of these two kings, Jeroboam II and
Uzziah, the religious and moral condi-


3. The tions of the people were just as little
Literary satisfactory. This is the testimony
Prophets of the prophets Amos and Hosea, as


also of Isaiah and Micah, who not
much later began their active ministry in Judah.
It is indeed true that these were not the first prophets
to put into written form some of their prophetic
utterances. The prophecies of Obadiah and Joel
are by many put at an earlier date, namely Obadiah
under Jehoram in Judah, and Joel under Joash in
Judah. At any rate, the discourses of the prophets
from this time on constitute an important con-
temporaneous historical source. They illustrate
esp. the spiritual condition of the nation. Through-
out these writings complaints are made concerning
the heathen superstitions and the godless cultus of
the people, and esp. the corruption in the admin-
istration of the laws, oppression of the poor and the
helpless by the rich and the powerful, and pride
and luxury of all kinds. In all these things the
rophets see a terrible apostasy on Israel’s part.
ut also the foreign policy of the different kings,
who sought help, now of the one and then of the
other of the world-powers (Egypt, Assyria), and
tried to buy the favor of these nations, the prophets
regarded as adultery with foreign nations and as
infidelity toward Jeh. As a punishment they an-
nounced, since all other misfortunes sent upon them
had been of no avail, an invasion through a con-
queror, whom Amos and Hosea always indicate
shall be Assyria, and also deportations of the people
into a heathen land, and an end of the Jewish state.
Improbable as these threats may have seemed to
the self-satisfied inhabitants of Samaria, they were
speedily realized.
Successors of Jeroboam II.—After the death of
Jeroboam, the strength of the Northern Kingdom


1523


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Israel, History of


collapsed. His son Zechariah was able to maintain
the throne for only 6 months, and his murderer
Shallum only one month. The general Menahem,
who put him out of the way, maintained himself as
king for 10 years, but only by paying a heavy
tribute to the Assyr ruler Pul, i.e. Tiglath-pileser
III, who ruled from 745-727 (ef 2 K 16 19f).
Pekah.—His son Pekahiah, on the other hand,
soon fell by the hands of the murderer Pekah (2 K
15 25), who allied himself with Syria against Judah.
The latter, however, invited the Assyrians to come
into the country; and these, entering in the year
734 BC, put an end to the reign of this usurper,
aneee he was actually put to death as late as 730


Hoshea.—The last king of the Northern Kingdom,
Hoshea (730-722 BC), had the Assyrians to thank
for his throne; but he did not keep his fidelity as a
vassal very long. As soon as Tiglath-pileser was
dead, he tried_to throw off the Assyr yoke. But
his successor Shalmaneser IV (727-723 BC), who
already in the first year of his reign had again
subdued the rebellious king Elulaios of Syria,
soon compelled Hoshea also to submit to his
authority. Two years later Hoshea again joined
a conspiracy with the Phoenicians against Assyria,
in which they even counted on the help of the Egyp
king, who in the Bible is called So or Seve (Egyp
name is Shabaka). Now the Assyrians lost all
patience. They at once came with their armies.
Hoshea seems to have voluntarily submitted to the
power of the Great King, who then made him a
captive. The people, however, continued the
struggle. Samaria, the capital city, was besieged,
but did not fall until the 3d year (722 BC) into the
hands of the enemy. Shalmaneser, in the mean-
while, had died and Sargon II had become his suc-
cessor. The city was indeed not destroyed, but a
large portion of the inhabitants, esp. the leaders,
were deported and transplanted to Northern Meso-
potamia and to Media. Sargon states that the
number of deported Israelites was 27,290. Promi-
nent persons from other cities were also doubtless
to be included in those deported. On the other
hand, the Assyr king settled Bab and Syrian prison-
ers of war in Samaria (721 BC), and in the year 715
BC, Arabs also. But the country, to a great extent,
continued in a state of desolation, so that Esar-
haddon (680-668 BC) and Ashurbanipal (667-626
BC) sent new colonists there, the last mentioned
sending them from Babylonia, Persia and Media
(ef 2 K 17 24 ff). In these verses the Bab city
of Cuthah is several times mentioned, on account
of which city the Jews afterward called the Samari-
tans Cuthites. This report also makes mention
of the religious syncretism, which of necessity re-
sulted from the mixture of the people. But we
must be careful not to place at too small figures the
number of Israelites who remained in the country.
It is a great exaggeration when it is claimed, as it
is by Friedrich Delitzsch, that the great bulk of the
inhabitants of the country of Samaria, or even of
Galilee, was from this time on Babylonian.

Uzziah and Jotham—The kingdom of Judah,
however, outlived the danger from Assyria. As
King Uzziah later in his life suffered from leprosy,
he had Jotham as a co-regent during this period.
The earliest discourses of Isaiah, which belong to
this period (Isa 2-4, 6), show that in Jerus the
people were at that time still enjoying the fruits
oe prosperity of a long period of peace. But
immediately after the death of Jotham, when the
youthful Ahaz began to rule, the onslaught of the
allied Syrians and Ephraimites took place under
Rezin, or better Rezon, and Pekah. This alliance
purposed to put an end to the Davidic reign in
Jerus, probably for the purpose of making this


people, too, a member of the league against the dan-
gerous Assyrians. The good-sized army of Judah
seems to have fallen a victim to the superior power
of the allies before the situation described in Isa 7
could be realized, in which the siege of the city
is described as already imminent. The Edomites
also at that time advanced against Judah. Elath,
the harbor city on the Red Sea, from which Uzziah,
too, as had been done by Solomon long before, sent
out trading vessels, at that time came into their
power. For 2 K 16 6 probably speaks of Edom
and not of Aram (cf 2 Ch 28 17). In his anxiety,
Ahaz, notwithstanding the advice of. Isaiah to the
contrary, then appealed to the king of Assyria, and
the latter actually put in his appearance in 734 BC
and overcame the power of Syria and Ephraim, as
we have seen above. However, the intervention
of this world-power brought no benefit to Judah.
Without this disgraceful appeal to a heathen ruler,
Jeh, according to the promise of Isaiah, would
have protected Jerus, Aa Ahaz had only believed.
And the Assyrians did not prevent the Philis and
the Edomites from falling upon Judah. The
Assyrians themselves soon came to be the greatest
danger threatening Judah. Ahaz, however, was an
unstable character in religious affairs, and he copied
heathen forms of worship, and even sacrificed his
son to the angry sun-god, in order to gain his favor.
The tribute that the people had to pay to Assyria
was already a heavy burden on this little kingdom.

Hezekiah -—His noble and God-fearing son,
Hezekiah (724-696 BC), was also compelled to
suffer from the consequences of this misgovernment.
The temptation was great to enter into an alliance
with his neighbors and the Egyptians, so strong in
cavalry, for the purpose of ridding Judah of the
burdensome yoke of the Assyrians. In vain did
Isaiah warn against such unworthy self-help. At
the advice of the ministers of Hezekiah, and because
of the trust put in Egypt, the tribute was finally
refused to the Assyrians. Hezekiah also -sought
to establish closer connections with Merodach-
baladan, the king of Babylon and the enemy of the
Assyrians, when the latter, after a dangerous sick-
ness of the king, had sent messengers to Jerus in
order to congratulate him on the restoration of his
health. This story, found in 2 K 20, belongs
chronologically before 2 K 18 13 ff, and, more accu-
rately, in the 14th year of Hezekiah mentioned in
18 13. However, the expedition of Sennacherib
which is mistakenly placed in that year, took place
several years later: according to the Assyr monu-
ments, in the year 701 BC.

Sennacherib.—In the year 702 BC Sennacherib,
with a powerful army, marched over the Lebanon
and subdued the rebellious Phoenicians, and
marched along the seacoast to Philistia. The in-
habitants of Ekron had sent their king, Padi, who
sympathized with the Assyrians, to Hezekiah.
Sennacherib came to punish Ekron and Ascalon.
But he was particularly anxious to overpower
Judah, which country his troops devastated and
depopulated. Now Hezekiah recognized his dan-
ger, and offered to submit to Sennacherib. The
latter accepted his submission conditionally on the
payment of a burdensome tribute, which Hezekiah
delivered faithfully (2 K 18 14-16). Then Sen-
nacherib was no longer satisfied with the tribute
alone, but sent troops who were to despoil Jerus.
Isaiah, who surely had not sanctioned the falling
away from the Assyr supremacy and had prophe-
sied that the inhabitants of Jerus would suffer a
severe punishment, from that moment, when the
conqueror had maliciously broken his word, spoke
words of comfort and advised against giving up the
city, no matter how desperate the situation seemed
to be (Isa 37 1 ff). The city was then not given


Israel, History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1524


up, and Sennacherib, on account of a number of
things that occurred, and finally because of a pesti-
lence which broke out in his army, was compelled
to retreat. He did not return to Jerus, and later
met his death by violent hands. This deliverance of
Jerus through the miraculous providence of God
was the greatest triumph of the prophet Isaiah.
Within his kingdom Hezekiah ruled successfully.
He also purified the cultus from the heathen influ-
ences that had forced their way into it, and was
a predecessor of Josiah in the abolition of the sacri-
fices on the high places, which had been corrupted
by these influences.

Manasseh.—Unfortunately, his son Manasseh
was little worthy of succeeding him. He, in every
way, favored the idolatry which all along had been
growing secretly. He maugurated bloody perse-
cutions of the faithful prophets of Jeh. According
to a tradition, which it must be confessed is not
supported by undoubted testimony, Isaiah also,
now an old man, became a victim of these perse-~
cutions. Images and altars were openly erected to
Baal and Astarte, Even in the temple-house on
Mt. Zion, an image of Astarte was standing. As
a result of this ethnic cultus, immorality and sen-
suality found their way among the people. At the
same time the terrible service of Moloch, in the
valley of Hinnom, demanded the sacrifice of chil-~
dren, and even a son of the king was given over to
this worship. The Book of Ch, indeed, tells the
story of a terrible affliction that Manasseh suffered,
namely that an Assyr general dragged him in chains
to Babylon for having violated his promises to
them, but that he was soon released. This is not
at all incredible. He seems to have taken part in
a rebellion, which the brother of the Assyr king,
who was also vice-king in Babylon, had inaugu-
rated. This sad experience may have forced Ma-
nassch to a certain kind of repentance, at least,
so that he desisted from his worst sacrileges. But
his son Amon continued the old ways of his father,
until after a brief reign be was put to death.

Josiah.—Much more promising was his young son
Josiah, who now, only 8 years old, came to the
throne. It is quite possible that, in view of such
frequent changes in the disposition of the successors
to the throne, his mother may have had great in-
fluence on his character. Concerning Josiah, see
2 K 22 1ff. With increasing clearness and con-
sistency, he proceeded to the work of religious
reformation. A special impetus to this was given
by the finding of an old law book in the temple, the
publication of which for the first time revealed the
fearful apostasy of the times. The finding of this
book in the temple, as narrated in2 K 22 3 ff, took

lace in connection with the restoration of that

uilding on a larger scale, which at that time had
been undertaken. And very probably Edouard
Naville is right in believing, on the basis of Egyp
analogies, that this document had been imbedded
in the foundation walls of the building. Whether
this had been done already in the days of Solomon
is not determined by this fact. From the orders
of Josiah we can conclude that the book which was
found was Dt, which lays special stress on the fact
that there shall be a central place for the cultus, and
also contains such threats as those must have been
which frightened Josiah. But under no circum-
stances was Dt a lawbaok that had first been written
at this time, or a fabrication of the priest Hilkiah
and his helpers. It would rather have been possible
that the discovered old law was rewritten in changed
form after its discovery and had been adapted to
the language of the times. The people were obliged
to obey the newly discovered law and were in-
structed in it. :

Jeremiah.—The prophet Jeremiah also, who a


few years before this had been called to the pro-
phetic office, according to certain data in the text,
participated in this proclamation of the law of the
covenant throughout the land. This change for
the better did not change the tendency of his pro-
phetic discourses, from what these had been from
the beginning. He continued to be the accuser
and the prophet of judgment, who declared that the
destruction of the city and of the temple was near
at hand. He looked too deeply into the inner cor-
ruption of his people to be misled by the external
transformation that was the result of a command
of the ruler. And only too soon did the course of
events justify his prediction. With the person of
the God-fearing Josiah, the devotion of the people
to the law was also buried and the old curse every-
where broke out again. ;

The Chaldaeans.—In a formal way Jeremiah was
probably influenced by the incursions of the Scyth-
lans, which occurred during his youth, and who
about this time marched from the plain of Jezreel
toward Egypt (cf Herodotus 1.103 ff); which event
also made a gloomy impression on his contemporary
Ezekiel, as appears from his vision of Gog in the
land of Magog. However, we are not to suppose
that Jeremiah, when describing the enemy coming
from the north, whom he saw from the time of his
call to the prophetic office, meant merely this band
of freebooters. The prophet had in mind a world-
power after the type of the Assyrians, who always
came from the north into Canaan. The Assyrians
indeed were in process of disintegration, and Nine-
veh fell under the attacks of the Medes and the
Persians in the year 607-606 BC. The heir of the
Assyr power was not Egypt, which was also striving
for universal supremacy, but was the Babylonian,
or rather, more accurately, the Chaldaean dynasty
of Nabopolassar, whose son Nebuchadnezzar had
overpowered the Egyptians at Carchemish in 605
BC. From this time on Jeremiah had pointed out
the Chaldaeans and Nebuchadnezzar, who soon
afterward became their king, as the agents to carry
out the judgment on Jerus.

Already a few years before this Judah’s good star
had gone down on the horizon. When Pharaoh-
necho II came to Pal by the sea route, in order to
march northeast through the plain of Jezreel, to
give the final and fatal blow to the sinking kingdom
of the Assyrians, King Josiah opposed him on the
plain of Megiddo, probably because of his obliga-
tions as a vassal to the king of Assyria. In the
battle of Megiddo (609 BC), Josiah was mortally
wounded. No greater calamity could have be-
fallen Judah than the death of this king, who was
deeply mourned by all well-meaning people, and
who was the last of the house of David that was a
credit to it.

The successors of Josiah—By popular election
the choice now fell on Jehoahaz, a younger son of
Josiah, called by Jeremiah (22 11) Shallum. But
he found no favor with Necho, who took him pris-
oner in his camp at Riblah and carried him to
Egypt (2 K 23 30ff). The Egyp king himself
selected Jehoiakim, hitherto called Eliakim, an
older son of Josiah, who had been ignored by the
people, to be king in Jerus, a prince untrue to Jeh,
conceited, luxury-loving and_hard-hearted, who, in
addition, through his perfidious policy, brought
calamity upon the land. He formed a conspiracy
against Nebuchadnezzar, to whom he had begun
to pay tribute in the 5th year of his reign, and in
this way brought it about that the Syrians, the
Moabites and the Ammonites, who had taken sides
with the Assyrians, devastated the land of Judah,
and that finally the king of Babylon himself came
to Jerus to take revenge. It is not clear what
was the end of this king. According to 2 Ch


1525


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Israel, History of


36 6, compared with 2 K 24 6, he seems to have
died while yet in Jerus, and after he had already
fallen into the hands of his enemies. His son
Jehoiachin did not experience a much better fate.
After ruling three months he was taken to Babylon,
where he was a prisoner for 37 years, until he was
pedoned (2K 24 8 ff; 26 27 ff). Together with

ehoiachin, the best portion of the inhabitants of
Jerus, about 10,000 men, esp. the smiths and the
builders, were deported.

Zedekiah, the last king of Judah.—Once more the
Babylonians set up a king in Jerus in the person of
Zedekiah, an uncle of Jehoiachin, and accordingly
a son of Josiah, called Mattaniah, who afterward
was called Zedekiah. He governed for twelve
years (597-586 BC), and by his life, morally and
religiously corrupt, sealed the fate of the house and
of the kingdom of David. The better class among
the leading and prominent people had been ban-
ished. As a result, the courtiers of the king urged
him to try once again some treacherous schemes
against the Bab rulers and to join Egypt in a con-
spiracy against them. However earnestly Jeremiah
and Ezekiel warned against this policy, Zedekiah
nevertheless constantly yielded to his evil advisers
and to the warlike patriotic party, who were de-
termined to win Back in battle the independence of
thecountry. While he atfirst, through an embassy,
had assured the Great King of his loyalty (Jer 29
3), and still in the 4th year of his reign had person-
ally visited in Babylon as a mark of his fidelity (Jer
51 59), he was induced in the 9th year of his reign
to make an alliance with the Egyptians against the
Babylonians and to refuse to render obedience to
the latter. Nebuchadnezzar soon came and sur-
rounded the city. At the announcement that an
Egyp army was approaching, the siege was again
raised for a short time. But the hope placed by
Zedekiah on his ally failed him. The Babylonians
began again to starve out the city. After a siege
of 18 months, resistance proved futile. The king
tried secretly to break through the circle of be-
siegers, but in doing so was taken prisoner, was
blinded by the Bab king and taken to Babylon. The
majority of the prominent men and state officials,
who were taken to the encampment of the con-
queror in Riblah, were put to death. The con-
quered city of Jerus, esp. its walls and towers,
together with the temple, were totally destroyed.
Nearly all the inhabitants who could be captured
after the slaughter were dragged into captivity,
and only people of the lower classes were left be-
hind in order to cultivate the land (2 K 26 11).
Gedaliah, a noble-minded aristocrat, was appointed
governor of the city, and took up his residence in
Mizpah. At this place it seemed that a new kernel
of ihe people was being gathered. Jeremiah also
went there. However, after two months this good
beginning came to an end. Gedaliah was slain by
Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, an anti-Chaldaean,
a fanatical and revengeful descendant of the house
of David. The murderer acted in coéperation with
certain Ammonitish associates and fled to the king
of Ammon. The Jews in later times considered the
murder of Gedaliah as an especially great national
calamity, and fasted on the anniversary of this
crime. And as the people also feared the revenge
of the Babylonians, many migrated to Egypt, com-
pelling Jeremiah, now an old man, to accompany
them, although he prophesied to them that no good
would come of this scheme. They first stayed at
the border city Tahpanhes, near Pelusium, and then
scattered over Upper and Lower Egypt.

VI. Time of the Babylonian Exile.—The in-
habitants of Judah, who had been deported by
Nebuchadnezzar at different times, were settled by
him in Babylonia, e.g. at the river Chebar (Ezk


1 1), near the city of Nippur. From Hilprecht’s
excavations of this city, it has been learned that
this river, or branch of the Euphrates
1. Influence river, is to be found at this place, and
of the is not to be confounded with the river
Exile Chaboras. In the same way, the many
contract-tablets with Jewish names
which have been found at Nippur, show that a large
Jewish colony lived at that place. Of the fate of
these banished Jews for a period of 50 years, we
hear almost nothing. But it is possible to learn
what their condition was in exile from the Book of
Ezk and the 2d part of Isa. Land was assigned to
them here, and they were permitted to build houses
for themselves (Jer 29 5ff), and could travel
around this district without restraint. They were
not prisoners in the narrow sense of the word.
They soon, through diligence and skill in trade,
attained to considerable wealth, so that most of
them, after the lapse of half a century, were perfectly
satisfied and felt no desire to return home. For
the spiritual development of the people the exile
proved to be a period of great importance. In the
tst- place, they were separated from their native
soil, and in this way from many temptations of
heathenism and idolatry, and the like. The terrible
judgment that had come over Jerus had proved
that the prophets had been right, who had for a
long time, but in vain, preached genuine repentance.
This did not prove to be without fruit (cf Zec 1 6).
While living in the heathen land, they naturally
became acquainted with heathendom in a more
crass form. But even if many of the Jews were
defiled by it, in general the relations of the Israel-
ites toward the idol-worshipping Babylonians were
antagonistic, and they became all the more zeal-
ous in the observance of those religious rites which
could be practised in a foreign Jand, such as rest
on the Sabbath day, the use of meats, circumcision,
and others. But with marked zeal the people
turned to the spiritual storehouse of their traditions,
namely their sacred literature. They collected the
laws, the history, the hymns, and treasured them.
It was also a noteworthy progress that such prophets
as Ezekiel, Jeremiah and Daniel received prophetic
visions while on heathen soil. The people also
learned that the heathen, in the midst of whom
they lived, became receptive of the higher truths of
Israel’s religion. Esp. does the 2d part of Isa, chs
40-66, show that they began to understand the
missionary calling of Israel among the nations of the
world.
The Book of Dnl reports how a God-fearing and
law-abiding Jew, through his prophecies, attained
to prominent positions of influence at
2. Daniel the courts of different rulers. From
the Book of Ezk we learn that the
prophets and the elders cared for the spiritual wants
of the people, and that they held meetings, at which
indeed it was not permitted to offer sacrifices, but
at which the word of Jeh was proclaimed. ere
we find the beginnings of what afterward was the
synagogue-system.
A remarkable picture of the Jewish diaspora in
Upper Egypt is furnished by recently discovered
papyri at Elephantince. From these it


3. Ele- appears that in the 6th cent. BC, not
phantine only a large and flourishing Jewish
Papyri colony was to be found at: this place,


but also that they had erected here a
fine temple to Jeh where they brought their sacrifices .
to which they had been accustomed at home. In
an Aram. letter, still preserved and dating from the
year 411 BC, and which is addressed to the governor
Bagohi, in Judaea, these Jews complain that their
temple in Yéb (Hlephantine, near Syene) had been
destroyed in the same year. It also states that


Israel, History of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1526


this temple had been spared on one occasion by
Cambyses, who was in Egypt from 525 to 521 BC.
The answer of Bagohi also has been preserved, and
he directs that the temple is to be built again and
that meal offerings and incense are again to be in-
troduced. Probably intentionally, mention in this
letter is made only of the unbloody sacrifices, while in
the first letter burnt sacrifices also are named. The
sacrifices of animals by the Jews would probably have
aroused too much the anger of the devotees of the
divine ram, which was worshipped at Syene. Up to
the present time we knew only of the much later
temple of the high priest Onias IV at Leontopolis (160
BC). Cf Jos, Ant, X1I, iii, 1-3; BJ, VH, x, 2, 3.

VII. Return from the Exile andthe Restoration.
—In the meanwhile there was a new readjustment of
political supremacy among the world-
powers. The Pers king, Koresh
(Cyrus), first made himself free from
the supremacy of Media which, after
the capture of the city Ecbatana, became a part
of his own kingdom (549 BC). At that time Na-
bonidus was the king in Babylon (555-538 BC), who
was not displeased at the collapse of the kingdom
of the Medes, but soon learned that the new ruler
turned out to be a greater danger to himself, as
Cyrus subjugated, one after the other, the smaller
kingdoms in the north. But Nabonidus was too
unwarlike to meet Cyrus. He confined himself to
sending his son with an army to the northern
boundaries of his kingdom. On the other hand,
the king of the Lydians, Croesus, who was related
by marriage to King Astyages, who had been snb-
dued by Cyrus, began a war with Cyrus, after he
had formed an alliance with Egypt and Sparta. In
the year 546 BC, he crossed the river Halys. Cyrus
approached from the Tigris, and in doing so already
entered Bab territory, conquered Croesus, took
his capital city Sardis, and put an end to the king-
dom of Lydia. The pious Israelites in captivity,
under the tutelage of Deutero-Isaiah, watched these
events with the greatest of interest. For the
prophet taught them from the beginning to see in
this king “the deliverer,’’ who was the instrument
of Jeh for the return of the Israelites out of captivity,
and of whom the prophets had predicted. And
this expectation was fulfilled with remarkable
rapidity. The victorious and aggressive king of
Persia could now no longer be permanently checked,
even by the Babylonians. It was in vain that King
Nabonidus had caused the images of the gods from
many of his cities to be taken to Babylon, in order
to make the capital city invincible. This city
opened its doors to the Pers commander Ugbaru
(Gobryas) in 588 BC, and a few months later Cyrus
himself entered the city. This king, however, was
mild and conciliatory in bis treatment of the people
and the city. He did not destroy the city, but
commanded only that a portion of the walls should
be razed. However, the city gradually, in the course
of time, became ruins.

Cyrus also won the good will and favor of the
subjugated nations by respecting their religions. He
returned to their shrines the idols of Nabonidus, that
had been taken away. But he was particularly con-
siderate of the Jews, who doubtless had complained
to him of their fate and had made known to him their
prophecies regarding him as the coming deliverer.

In the very first year of his reign over Babylon
he issued an edict (2 Ch 36 22f; Ezr 1 1 ff) that

permitted the Jews to return home,


1. Career
of Cyrus


2. First with the command that they should
Return again erect their temple. For this
under purpose he directed that the temple-


Zerubbabel vessels, which Nebuchadnezzar had
taken away with him, should be


returned to them, and commended that those


Israelites who voluntarily remained in Babylon
should contribute money for the restoration of the
temple. At the head of those to be returned stood
Sheshbazzar, who is probably identical with Zerub-
babel, although this is denied by some scholars;
and also the high priest, Joshua, a grandson of the
high priest, Seraiah, who had been put to death by
Nebuchadnezzar. They were accompanied by
only a small part of those in exile, that is by 42,360
men and women and children, male and female
servants, esp. from the tribes of Judah, Benjamin
and Levi, but of the last-mentioned tribes more
priests than other Levites. After several months
they safely arrived in Pal, probably 537 BC. Some
of them settled down in Jerus, and others in sur-
rounding cities and villages. They erected the
altar for burnt sacrifices, so that they were again
able in the 7th month to sacrifice on it.

Building the temple——The cornerstone of the
temple was also solemnly laid at that time in the 2d
year of the Return (Ezr 3 8 ff). But the erectionof
the temple must have been interrupted in a short
time, since it was not until the 2d year of Darius
(520 BC), at the urgent appeal of the prophets Hag-
gai and Zechariah, that the work of building was
energetically prosecuted. For this reason many
scholars deny this cornerstone-laying in the year
536 BC. However, it still remains thinkable that
several attempts were made at this work, since the
young colony had many difficulties to contend with.
Then, too, the memoirs of Ezra and Nehemiah, which
have been worked over by the author of Ch, report
the history of these times only in parts. The his-
torical value of these literary sources has been con-
firmed by those Aram. papyri found in Upper Egypt.

In the year 516 BC, after 4 years of building,
the temple was completed and dedicated. After

this we have no information for a
3. Ezra period of 58 years. Then we learn
and that Ezra, the scribe, in the 7th year
Nehemiah of Artaxerxes [I (458 BC), came with

a new caravan of about 1,500 men
with women and children from Babylon to the
Holy Land. He had secured from the king the
command to establish again in the land of the
Jews the law, in which he was a prominent ex-
pert, and he tried to do this by earnest admoni-
tions and instructive discourses addressed to the
people. The acme of the activity of Ezra was the
meeting of the people described in Neh 8-10 on the
Feast of the Tabernacles, on which occasion the
entire nation solemnly came under obligation to
observe the law. According to the present position
of these chapters this act took place in 444 BC; but
it is probable that it happened before the arrival
of Nehemiah, whose name would accordingly have
to be eliminated in 8 9. This pericope would then
belong to the memoirs of Ezra and not to those of
Nehemiah. After some years there came to help
Ezra in his work, Nehemiah, a pious Jew, who was
a cupbearer to the king, and at his own request
was granted leave of absence in order to help the city
of Jerus, which he had heard was in dire straits.
Its walls were in ruins, as the neighboring nations
had been able to hinder their rebuilding, and even
those walls of the city that had been hastily re-
stored, had again been pulled down. Nehemiah
came in the year 445-444 BC from Shushan to Jerus
and at once went energetically to work at rebuilding
the walls. Notwithstanding all oppositions and in-
trigues of malicious neighbors, the work was suc-
cessfully brought to a close.

The hostile agitations, in so far as they were not
caused by widespread envy and hatred of the Jews
among the neighboring peoples, had a religious
ground. Those who returned, as the people of
Jeh, held themselves aloof from the peoples living


1527


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Israel, History of


round about them, esp. from the mixed pcoples
of Samaria. Samaria was the breeding-place for
this hostility against Jerus. The governor at that
place, Sanballat, was the head of this hostile league.
The Jews had declined to permit the Samaritans
to codperate in the erection of the temple and
would have no religious communion with them.
The Samaritans had taken serious offence at this,
and they accordingly did all they could to prevent
the building of the walls in Jerus, which would be
a hindrance to their having access to the temple.
But Nehemiah’s trust in God and his energy over-
came this obstacle. The policy of exclusiveness,
which Ezra and Nehemiah on this occasion and at
other times followed out, evinces a more narrow
mind than the preéxilic prophets had shown. In
the refusal of intermarriage with the people living
around them they went beyond the Mosaic law, for
they even demanded that those marriages, which
the Israelites had already contracted with foreign
women, should be dissolved. But this exclusiveness
was the outcome of legal conscientiousness, and at
this period it was probably necessary for the self-
preservation of the people of Jeh.
Malachi.—From the prophecies of Malachi, who
was almost a contemporary of the two mentioned,
it can be seen that the marriages with the foreign
women had also brought with them a loosening of
even the most sacred family ties (Mal 2 14f). After
an absence of 12 years, Nehemiah again returned
to Shushan to the court; and when he later returned
to Jerus he was compelled once more to inaugurate
a stringent policy against the lawlessness which was
violating the sanctity of the temple and of the
Sabbath commandment. He also expelled a certain
Manasseh, a grandson of the high priest, who had
married a daughter of Sanballat. This Manasseh,
according to Jos (Ant, XI, viii, 2), erected the
sanctuary on Mt. Gerizim, and established the
priesthood at that place. This is no doubt correct.
These accounts of Jos are often combined without
cause with the times of Alexander the Great, al-
though they transpired about 110 years earlier.
The history of the Jews in the last decades of the
Pers rule is little known. Under Artaxerxes ITI
(Ochus), they were compelled to suffer much, when
they took part in a rebellion of the Phoenicians and
Cyprians. Many Jews were at that time banished
to Hyrcania on the southern coast of the Caspian
Sea. The Pers general, Bagoses, came to Jerus and
forced his way even into the temple (Jos, Ant, XI,
vii, 1). He undertook to install as high priest, in
the place of John (Jochanan), his brother Joshua
(Jesus). The latter, however, was slain by the
former in the temple. For the first time the office
of the high priest appears as more of a political
position, something that it never was in the pre-
exilic times, and according to the law was not to be.
VIN. The Jews under Alexander and His Suc-
cessors.—As the Jews were then tired of the rule of
the priests, they were not dissatisfied
1. Spread with the victorious career of Alex-
of Hellen- ander the Great. He appears to
ism have assumed a friendly attitude
toward them, even if the story reported
by Jos (Ant, XI, vili, 4) is scarcely historical.
The successors of Alexander were also, as a rule,
tolerant in religious matters. But for political and
geographical reasons, Pal suffered severely in these
times, as it lay between Syria and Egypt, and was an
object of attack on the part of both the leading
ruling families in this period, the Ptolemies in
Egypt and the Seleucidae in Syria. At the same
time Hellenism, which had been so powerfully ad-
vanced by Alexander as a factor of civilization and
culture, penetrated the land of Israel also. Gr
culture and language spread soon in Pal and in many


places was supreme. The more strict adherents
of Judaism recognized in this a danger to the Mosaic
order of life and religion, and all the more zealously
they now adhered to the traditional ordinances.
These were called the hdsidhim, or the Pious
(‘Aovdaior, Hasidatoi, 1 Macc 2 42; 7 13; 2 Macc
14 6). The world-transforming Hellenistic type
of thought spread esp. among the aristocrats and
the politically prominent, and even found adherents
among the priests, while the hdsidhim belonged
to the less conspicuous ranks of the people.

A struggle fer life and death was caused between


these two tendencies by the Syrian king, Antiochus [V
(Epiphanes), inte whese hands the sever-


2. The eignty of Pal had fallen. He undertook
Hasmo- nothing less than to root out the hated

Jewish religion. Jn the year 168 BC he
neans commanded that the temple of Jeh in


F , Jerus should be dedicated to the Olym-
pian Jupiter and ferbade mest stringently the observ-
ance ef the Sabbath and circumcision. A large portion
ef the peeple did net resist his oppression, but adapted
themselves to this tyrannical heathendom. Others
suffered and died as martyrs. Finally in the year 167
BC a priest, Mattathias, gave the signal fer a deter-
mined resistance, at the head ef which stood his brave
sons, the Hasmeneans, or Maccabees. First his son Judas
undertook the leadership of the faithful. He succeeded
in freeing Jerus frem the Syrians. He restored the
temple en Mt. Zion. The temple was dedicated anew
and was given over te the eld cultus. After a number
of victorious campaigns, Judas Maccabaeus died the
death of a here in 161 BC. His brother, Jonathan, who
teek his place at the head of the mevement, tried to
secure the independence ef the land rather through
deliberate planning than threugh military power. He
assumed, in additien to his secular power, alse the high-
precsily dignity. After his death by violence in 143 BC,

e was succeeded by his brother Simen as the bearer of
this deuble honor. The Hasmoneans, however, rapidly
became werldly minded and lest the sympathies of the
hdsidhim. The son of Simen, Jehn Hyrcanus (135-106
BO), breke entirely with the Pious, and his family, after
his death, came to an end in disgraceful struggles for

ewer. The rule of the land fell into the hands of

ered, a tyrant of Idumaean origin, whe was supported
by the Romans. Frem 37 BC he was the recegnized king
ef Judah. See Asmonnans; Maccasens.


IX. The Romans.—After the death of Herod
(4 BC), the kingdom, according to his last will, was
to be divided among his three sons.
1. Division Archelaus received Judaea; Antipas,
of Territory Galilee and Peraea; Philip, the border
lands in the north. However, Arche-
laus was soon deposed by the Romans (6 AD), and
Judaea was made a part of the province of Syria,
but was put under a special Roman procurator, who
resided in Caesarea. These procurators (of whom
the best known was Pontius Pilate, 26-36 AD), had
no other object than to plunder the land and the
people.
In this way a conflict was gradually generated
between the people and their oppressors, which
ended with the destruction of Jerus by
2. Destruc- the Romans in 70 AD. As early as
tion of 40 AD this rupture almost took place,
Jerusalem when the Syrian legate Petronius, at
by the the command of Caligula, undertook
Romans to place a statue of the emperor in
the temple of Jerus. On this occasion
King Agrippa I, who was again ruling the whole
territory of Herod, succeeded in adjusting the
conflict. His son Agrippa II was given a much
smaller kingdom (40-100 AD). He, too, sought to
prevent the people from undertaking a struggle
with the Romans, butin vain. By his unscrupulous
treatment of the people, the procurator Gessius
Florus drove the Jews into an insurrection. The
party of the Zealots gained the upperhand. Florus
was compelled to leave Jerus (66 AD). Even the
good-sized army which Cestius Gallus commanded
could not get control of the city, but was completely
overpowered by the Jews on its retreat at Beth-
horon. Now the entire country rose in rebellion.
The Romans, under the leadership of Vespasian,


Israel, History of tm INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Israel, King. of


advanced with considerable power and first con-
quered Galilee, then under Jos (67 AD). In Jerus,
in the meanwhile, different parties of the Jews were
still fighting each other. Titus, the son of Ves-
pasian, took the chief command after Vespasian
had already conquered the E. Jordan country and
the western coast, but had hastened to Rome in
order to become emperor. Titus completely sur-
rounded the city a few days before the Passover
festival in the year 70. On the northern side the
Romans first broke through the first and newest
city wall, and after that the second. The third
offered a longer resistance, and at the same time
famine wrought havoc in Jerns. At last the battle
raged about the temple, during which this structure
went up in flames. According to the full descrip-
tion by Jos (BJ, VI, iv, 3 ff), Titus tried to prevent
the destruction of the temple; according to Sul-
picius Severus (Chron. II, 20), however, this de-
struction was just what he wanted. A few forti-
fied places yet maintained themselves after the fall
of Jerus, e.g. Machaerus in the E. Jordan country,
but they could not hold out very long.

Later insurrection of Bar-Cochba.—Once again
the natural ambition for independence burst out
in the insurrection of Bar-Cochba (132-35 AD).
Pious teachers of the law, esp. Rabbi Akiba, had
enkindled this fire, in order to rid the country of the
rule of the Gentiles. However, notwithstanding
some temporary successes, this insurrection was
hopeless. Both the city and the country were
desolated by the enraged Romans still more fear-
fully, and were depopulated still more than in 70.
From that time Jerus was lost to the Jews. They
lived on without a country of their own, without
any political organization, without a sanctuary,
in the Diaspora among the nations.

The spiritual and religious life of the Jews during
the period preceding the dissolution of the state

was determined particularly by the
8. Spiritual legalistic character of their ideals and
Life of the their opposition to Hellenism. Their


Period religion had become formalistic to a
great extent since their return from
the exile. The greatest emphasis was laid on obe-


dience to the traditional ordinances, and these latter
were chiefly expositions of ceremonial usurpers.
Appearance of Jesus Christ—The crown of the
history of Israel-Judah was the appearance of Jesus
Christ. Looked at superficially, it may indeed
appear as though His person and His life had but
little affected the development of the national his-
tory of Israel. However, more closely viewed, we
shall see that this entire history has its goal in Him
and finds its realization in Him. After full fruit
had developed out of this stock, the latter withered
and died. He was to be the bearer of salvation for


all mankind.

Lrrearature.—The earliest historian of Israel was the
Jew, Flavius Josephus, in the 1st Christian cent. His
example found few followers in the early church, and
we mention only the Chronicle of Sulpicius Severus.
The subject is handled theologically by Augustine in
his De Civitate Det. It was only in the 17th cent. that a
keen interest was awakened in this subject. Cf esp.
James Usher, Annales Veteris et Novi Testamenti, Loudon,
1605; J. B. Bousset, Discours sur [histoire untverselle,
Paris, 1681; Humphrey Prideaux, The Old and the New
Testament Connected in the History of the Jews and
Neighboring Nations, 2 vols, London, 1716; S. Shukford,
The Sacred and Profane History of the World Connected,
London, 1727, this work treating the subject apologeti-
cally against the Deists. Cf also J. Saurin, Discours
historiques, Amsterdam, 1720. Cocceius and his school
systematized this history on the basis of their theological
tenets, e.g. Gurtler, Systema theol. prophetica, Frankfurt,
1724. ore systematic is the work of Vitringa, Hypothe-
sts historiae et chronologiae sacrae, Frankfurt, 1708. The
Lutheran church furnished the excellent work of Franz
Budde, Historia Eccles. Veteris Testamenti, Jena, 1715.
In the 18th cent., Bengel’s school furnished some good
histories of Israel, such as M. F. Roos's Binleitung in die
bibl, Geschichte, 1700. More popular is the work of J.


1528


J. Hess. The best Catholic work from this time is J.
Jahn's Archaeologie, 1802; while the Rationalistic period
furnished Lorenz Bauer's Geschichte der hebr. Nation,
1800. In the 19th cent. the rationalistic and the con-
servative tendencies run paralicl, and a new impulse
was given to the study of this history by the phenomenal
archaeological finds in Egypt and in Assyria and Babylon.
Critical reconstruction of Israel's history characterizes
the works of Reuss, Graf, Kuenen, Wellhausen. Other
works of prominence are the Geschichte des Volkes Gottes,
hy Ewald; Kurtz, Geschichte des alten Bundes (these are
tra); Hitzig, Geschichte des Volkes Israel, with critical
tendency. The work of August Koehler, Lehrbuch der
btblischen Geschichte, AT, is positive, while Wellhausen’s
Geschichte Israels is a classic of the advanced school.
Other works mostly critical are the histories of Renan,
Kuenen, Stade, Winckler, Piepenbring, Cornill, Guthe,
Cheyne, and others. Kittel’s Geschichte der Hebrder
(tr4) is more moderate in tone. For the NT the richest
storehouse is Schtirer’s Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes
im GZeitalter Jesu Christi (tra); Hausrath’s Neutesta-
mentliche Zettgeschichte is also good. From the Jewish
standpoint this history has been treated by S. Fried-
lander, Geschichte des Israel-Volkes; and J. M. Jost,
Geschichte der Israeliten; Moritz Raphall, Post-biblical
History of the Jews from the Close of the OT till the De-
struction of the Second Temple, in the Year 70. fi
Among English works may be especially mentioned
Milman's History of the Jews and Stanley's, Lectures on
the History of the Jewish Church, with smaller works by
Ottley and others. ‘ oe :
American works on the subject from the critical point
of view are a History of the Heb People, by Kent, and a
History of the Jewish People by Kent and Riggs in the
“Historical Series for Bible Students,"’ published by
Messrs. Scribner. Cf also McCurdy, History, Proghecy
and the Monuments; Toy, Judatsm and Christianity; H.P.


Smith, OT History.
C. von ORELLI
ISRAEL, KINGDOM OF:


I. Tue First Perrop
1. The Two Kingdoms
2. The Ist Dynasty
3. The IId Dynasty
4, Civil War
II. Pxrrriop or tHe Syrian Wars
1. The IlId Dynasty
. World-Politics
. Battle of Karkar
Loss of Territory
Reform of Religion
Revolution
The [Vth Dynasty
Renewed Prosperity
. Anarchy
Ill, Deowne anp Faun
1. Loss of Independence
2. Decline
3. Extinction
4. Summary
LIvERATURB


I. The First Period.—The circumstances leading
up to the foundation of the Northern Kingdom of
Israel, or the Kingdom of the Ten

1. The Two Tribes, have been detailed under the
Kingdoms heading Kincpom or Jupan. From
a secular point of view it would be

more natural to regard the latter as an offshoot from
the former, rather than the converse. But not only
is the kingdom of Judah of paramount importance
in respect of both religion and literature, but its
government also was in the hands of a single dy-
nasty, whereas that of the Northern Kingdom
changed hands no less than 8 t, during the two and
a half cents. of its existence. Moreover, the South-
ern Kingdom lasted about twice as long as the other.
No sooner had Jeroboam I been elected the first
tuler of the newly founded state than he set about
Inanaging its affairs with the energy

2. The Ist for which he was distinguished (1 K
Dynasty 11 28). To complete the disruption
: he established a sanctuary in opposi-
tion to that of Jerns (Hos 8 14), with its own order
of priests (2 Ch 11 14; 13 9), and founded two
capital cities, Shechem on the W. and Penuel on
the E. of the Jordan (1 K 12 25). Peace seems to
have been maintained between the rival govern-
ments during the 17 years’ reign of Rehoboam, but
on the accession of his son Abijah war broke out
(li K 16 6.7; 2 Ch 13 3ff). Shortly afterward
Jeroboam died and was succeeded by his son Nadab,


OWN AMP Ors


1529


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 18!el, History of


Israel, King. of


who was a year later assassinated, and the Ist
Dynasty came to an end, after an existence of 23
years, being limited, in fact, to a single reign.
The turn of the tribe of Issachar came next.
They had not yet given aruler to Israel; they could
claim none of the judges, but they
3. The IId_ had taken their part at the assembling
Dynasty of the tribes under Deborah and
Barak of Naphtali. Baasha began
his reign of 24 years by extirpating the house of his
predecessor (1 K 15 29), just as the ‘Abbd4sids
annihilated the Umeiyads. The capital was now
Tirzah (1 K 1417; Cant 6 4), a site not yet
identified. His Judaean contemporary was ASA
(q.v.), who, like his father Abijah, called in the aid
of the Syrians against the Northern Kingdom.
Baasha was unequal to the double contest and was
forced to evacuate the ground he had gained. His
son Elah was assassinated after a reign of a year,
as he himself had assassinated the son of the
founder of the preceding dynasty, and his entire
family and adherents were massacred (1 K 16 11).
The name of the assassin was Zimri, an officer of
the charioteers, of unknown origin and tribe. But
the kingship was always elective, and
4. Civil War the army chose Omri, the commander-
in-chief, who besieged and took Tir-
zah, Zimri setting the palace on fire by his own
hand and perishing in the flames. A second pre-
tender, Tibni, a name found in Phoenician and
Assyrian, of unknown origin, sprang up. He was
quickly disposed of, and security of government
was reéstablished.
Il. Period of the Syrian Wars.—The founder of
the new dynasty was Omri. By this time the
Northern Kingdom was so much a
1. The Id united whole that the distinctions of
Dynasty tribe were forgotten. We do not know
to what tribe Omri and his successors
belonged. With Omri the political sphere of action
of Israel became wider than it had been before, and
its internal affairs more settled. His civil code
was in force long after his dynasty was extinct, and
was adopted in the Southern Kingdom (Mic 6 16).
The capital city, the site of which he chose, has
remained a place of human habitation till the
present day. Witbin the last few years, remains of
his building have been recovered, showing a great
advance in that art from those believed to go back
to Rehoboam and Solomon. He was, however,
unfortunate in his relations with Syria, having lost
some towns and been forced to grant certain trading
concessions to his northern neighbors (1 K 20 34).
But he was so great a king that long after his death
the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes was known to the
Assyrians as ‘“‘the house of Omri.”
Contemporarily with this dynasty, there occurred
a revival of the Phoen power, which exerted a power-
ful influence upon the Israelite kings
2. World- and people, and at the same time the
Politics Assyrians once more began to inter-
fere with Syrian politics. The North-
ern Kingdom now began to play a part in the game
of world-politics. There was peace with Judah,
and alliance with Phoenicia was cemented by the
marriage of Ahab, it seems after his father’s death,
with Jezebel, the daughter of Ethbaal (1 K 16 31).
This led to the erection of a temple in Samaria in
which the Tyrian Baal was worshipped, while side
by side with it the worship of Jeh was carried on as
before. Jt seems as if the people had fallen back
from the pure monotheism of Moses and David
into what is known as henotheism. Against this
relapse Elijah protested with final success. Ahab


was a wise and skilful soldier, without rashness, but-


also without decision. He defeated a Syrian coali-
tion in two campaigns (1 K 20) and imposed on


Ben-hadad the same conditions which the latter had
imposed on Omri. With the close of the reign of
Asa in Judah, war ceased between the two Israelite
kingdoms and the two kings for the first time became
friends and fought side by side (1 K 22). In the
reign of Ahab we note the henncine of decay in the
state in regard to personal liberty and equal justice.
The tragedy of Naboth’s vineyard would not have
happened but for the influence of Tyrian ideas, any
more than in the case of the famous windmill which
stands by the palace of Sans Souci at Potsdam. A
further improvement in the art of building took
place in this reign. The palace of Ahab, which has
recently been recovered by the excavations carried
on by the Harvard University Expedition under
Dr. G. A. Reisner, shows a marked advance in fine-
ness of workmanship upon that of Omri.
The object of Ben-hadad’s attack upon Ahab
seems to have been to compel him to join a league
founded to resist the encroachments of
3. Battle | Assyria upon the countries bordering
of Karkar upon the Mediterranean. The con-
federates, who were led by Ben-hadad,
and of whom Ahab was one, were defeated by Shal-
maneser II in the battle of Karkar. The date is
known from the inscriptions to have been the year
854-853. It is the first quite certain date in Heb
history, and from it the earlier dates must be reck-
Hed be working backward. Ahab seems to have
seized the moment of Syria’s weakness to exact by
force the fulfilment of their agreement on the part
of Ben-hadad (1 K 22).
On the other hand, the king of Moab, Mesha,
appears to have turned the same disaster to account
throwing off his allegiance io
4. Loss of Israel, which dated from the time of
Territory David, but had apparently lapsed
until it was enforced anew by Omri
(M8, ll. 4 ff, but 1. 8 makes Omri’s reign + half
Ahab’s=40 years). Ahab’s son and _ successor
Jehoram (omitting Ahaziah, who is chiefly notable
as a devotee of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron), with
the aid of Jehoshaphat and his vassal, the king of
Edom, attempted to recover his rights, but in vain
(2 K 3). It may have been in consequence of
the failure of this expedition that the Syrians
again besieged Samaria and reduced it to great
straits (2 K 6 24; 7), but the date is uncertain.
Jehoram replied with a counter-attack upon the E.
of the Jordan.
It was no doubt owing to his connection with the
king of Judah that Jehoram so far modified the
worship and ritual as to remove the
5. Reform worst mnovations which had come to
of Religion prevail in the Northern Kingdom (2 K
3 1-3). But these half-measures did
not satisfy the demands of the time, and in the
revolution which followed both he and his dynasty
were swept away. ‘The dynasty had lasted, ac-
cording to the Bib. account, less than half a century.
The religious reformation, or rather revolution,
which swept away almost entirely both royal houses,
bears a good deal of resemblance to
6. Revolu- the Wahhdbi rising in Arabia at the
tion beginning of the 18th cent. It_took
its origin from prophetism (1 K 19
16), and was supported by the Rechabite Jonadab.
The object of the movement headed by Jehu was
nominally to revenge the prophets of Jeh put to
death by order of Jezebel, but in reality it was much
wider and aimed at nothing less than rooting out
the Baal-worship altogether, and enforcing a return
to the primitive faith and worship. Just as the
Wahbhabis went back to Mohammed’s doctrine, as
contained in the Kor’4n and the Tradition, and as
the Rechabites preserved the simplicity of the early
desert life, so Jehu went back to the state of things


Israel, King. of
Israel, Rel. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1530


as they were at the foundation of the Northern
Kingdom under Jeroboam I.
Jehu’s reforms were carried out to the letter, and
the whole dynasty of Omri, which was responsible
for the innovations, was annihilated
7. IVth like its predecessors. The religious
Dynasty fervor, however, soon subsided, and
Jehu’s reign ended in disaster. Ha-
zael, whose armies had been exterminated by the
forces of Assyria, turned his attention to the eastern
territory of Israel. In the turbulent land of Gilead,
the home of Elijah, disappointed in its hopes of
Jehu, he quickly established his supremacy (2 K
10 32 ff). Jehu also appreciated the significance
of the victories of Assyria, and was wise enough to
send tribute to Shalmaneser II. This was in the
year 842. Under his son and successor Jehoahaz the
fortunes of Israel continued to decline, until Hazael
imposed upon it the most humiliating conditions
(Am 1 3-5; 2 K 13 1 ff).
Toward the end of the reign of Jehoahaz, however,
the tide began to turn, under the leadership of a
military genius whose name has not
8. Renewed been recorded (2 K 13 5); and the
Prosperity improvement continued, after the
death of Hazael, under his son Je-
hoash (Joash), who even besieged and plundered
Jerus (2 K 14 8 ff). But it was not until the long
reign of Jeroboam II, son of Jehoash, that the fron-
tiers of Israel, were, for the first time since the begin-
ning of the kingdom, restored to their ideal limits.
Even Damascus and Hamath were subdued (2 K
14 28). But the prosperity was superficial. Jero-
boam II stood at the head of a military oligarchy,
who crushed the great mass of the people under them.
The tribune of the plebs at this time was Amos of
Tekoa. His Cassandra-like utterances soon ful-
filled themselves. The dynasty, which had been
founded in blood and had lasted some 90 years,
on the accesssion of Jeroboam’s son Zachariah gave
place to 12 years of anarchy.
Zachariah was almost immediately assassinated
by Shallum, who within a month was in turn assas-
sinated by Menahem, a soldier of the
9, Anarchy tribe of Gad, stationed in Tirzah, to
avenge the death of his master. The
low social condition of Israel at this time is de-
picted in the pages of Hos. The atrocities per-
petrated by the soldiers of Menahem are mentioned
by Jos (Ané, IX, xi, 1).
III, Decline and Fall.—Meantime Pul or Pulu
had founded the second Assyr empire under the
name of Tiglath-pileser III. Before


1. Loss of conquering Babylonia, he broke the
Independ- power of the Hittites in the W., and
ence made himself master of the routes


leading to the Phoen seaports. As
the eclipse of the Assyr power had allowed the
expansion of Israel under Jeroboam II, so its revival
now crushed the independence of the nation for-
ever. Menahem bought stability for his throne by
the payment of an immense bribe of 1,000 talents
of silver, or $2,000,000, reckoning the silver talent
at $2,000. The money was raised by means of an
assessment of 50 talents each upon all the men of
known wealth. The payment of this tribute is
mentioned on the Assyr monuments, the date being
738.
Menahem reigned 10 years. His son Pekahiah
was, soon after his accession, assassinated by one
of his own captains, Pekah, son of
2. Decline Remaliah, who established himself,
with the help of some Gileadites, as
king. He formed an alliance with Rezin of Damas-
cus against Israel, defeating Ahaz in two pitched
battles, taking numerous captives, and even reach-
ing the walls of Jerus. The result was disastrous


to both allies. Ahaz called in the aid of the Assyr-
ians. Tiglath-pileser put an end to the kingdom of
Damascus, and deported the inhabitants of Northern
and Eastern Pal. The kingdom of Israel was re-
duced to the dimensions of the later province of
Samaria. Pekah himself was assassinated by Ho-
shea, who became king under the tutelage of the
Assyr overlord. The depopulated provinces were
filled with colonists from the conquered countries of
the East. The year is 734.
Hoshea was never an independent king, but the
mere vassal of Assyria. He was foolish enough to
withhold the annual tribute, and to
8. Extinc- turn to Egypt for succor. Meanwhile,
tion Tiglath-pileser III had been succeeded
by Shalmaneser IV. This king laid
siege to Samaria, but died during the siege. The
city was taken by his successor Sargon, who had
seized the throne, toward the end of the year 722.
The Northern Kingdom had lasted 240 years,
which fall into three periods of about 80 years each,
the middle period being the period of
4. Sum- theSyrian wars. Asit was fully formed
mary when it broke off from the Southern
Kingdon, its history shows no develop-
ment or evolution, but is made up of undulations of
prosperity and of decline. It was at its best imme-
diately after its foundation, and again under Jero-
boam II. It was strong under Baasha, Omri and
Ahab, but generally weak under the other kings.
Every change of dynasty meant a period of anarchy,
when the country was at the mercy of every in-
vader. The fortunes of Israel depended entirely
on those of Assyria. When Assyria was weak,
Israel was strong. Given the advance of Assyria,
the destruction of Israel was certain. This was
necessary and was clearly foreseen by Hosea (9 3,
etc). The wonder is that the little state, surrounded
by such powerful neighbors, lasted as long as it
did. See, further, Isnanz, History oF, V.


LirERATURE.—The most important works. are
Ewald, Geschichte des Volkes Israel (ET by Martinean
and Glover); elihausen, Geschichte Israels; Deren-
bourg, Essai sur l'histoire... . de la Palestine; and
there are many more. Ewald is best known to Eng.
readers through the medinm of Dean Stanley's Lectures
on the History of the Jewish Church. See further under
Curono.tocy; IsRaEL, and arts. on individual kings.

Tuomas HunTER WEIR


ISRAEL, RELIGION OF:


I. Intropuction: Husroricayn CONSIDERATION OF
THE RELIGION OF IsRABL
II. Hisroricat OuTLINE
1. Pre-Mosaic Religion of the Ancestors of Israel
(1) The Traditional View
(2) The Modern View
(3) A Higher Conception of the Deity; ’ilu, 'é
34 Totemism, Animism, etc
5) Conception of God
(6) Cultus
2. The Mosaic Covenant with Jehovah
(1) The Covenant-Idea
2 The Covenant-God, Jehovah
3) Monotheism of Moses
(4) Impossibility of Representing Jehovah by an


mage
(3) Ethical Character of the God of Moses
6) The Theocracy
(7) The Mosaic Cultus
3. The Religion of Israel before the 8th Century BC
(1) Decay of Religion in Canaan
(2) The Theocratic Kingdom
(3) Religious Ideals of the Psalms from the
Time of David
(4) Wisdom Literature from the Time of Solo-


mon
5) The Sanctuary on Mt. Zion
6) The Religion of the Kingdom of Ephraim

7) Elijah and Elisha
4. Development of the Religion of Israel from the

8th Cent. BC to the Exile

es The Writing Prophets

2) Their Opposition to the Cultus
4
5
6


Their Preaching of the Judgment
Their Messianic Promises
Reformations

Destruction of Jerusalem


1531


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Israel, King. of
Israel, Rel. of


5. The Babylonian Exile |
33 Spiritual Purification through the Exiie
2) Relations to the Gentile World
6. Religion of the Post-exilic Period
1) Life under the Law
2) Hellenism
Pharisees and Sadducees
(4) Essenes
(5) Pesitive Connections between Judaism and
Hellenism :
(6) Apocaiyptic Literature
IfI. Conenusion: CHaracteristic FEATURES OF THE
RE .IGIon or IsRraBu
1, The Living God
2. The Reiation of Man te This God
LITERATURE


I. Introduction.—In former times it was the
rule to draw out of the OT its religious contents
ouly for dogmatic purposes, without making any
distinction between the different books. These
writings were all regarded as the documents of the
Divine revelation which had been given to this
people alone and not to others. At the present
time the first inquiry in the study of these books
deals historically with the religious development
of the Israelites. This religion was not of a strictly
uniform nature, but is characterized by a devel-
opment and a growth, and in the centuries which
are covered by the OT books it has passed through
many changes.


trends among the people and very different degrees
in the extent of their religious knowledge. The
common people were at times still entangled in
crude heathen ideas, while the bearers of a higher
Divine light ranked vastly above them. And even
in those times, when these enlightened teachers
secured full recognition, there occurred relapses
into lower forms of religion on the part of the masses,
esp. because the influence of the nations surround-
ing Israel at all times made itself felt in the religious
life and thoughts of the latter. And even when the
correct teachings were accepted by the people, a
malformation of the entire religion could readily
occur through a petrifaction of the religious life.
It is the business of the science of the history of
religion to furnish a correct picture of this develop-


ment, which in this article can be done only in the -


form of a sketch.

One of the recent results of the science of the
history of religion is the knowledge that the religion
of Israel itself, and not merely the corruptions ‘of
this religion, stood in a much closer connection with
other religions than had in former times been sup-
posed. The wealth of new data from the history of
oriental nations lately secured has shown that it is
not correct to regard the religion of Israel as an
isolated phenomenon, but that considerable light
is thrown upon it from analogous facts from sur-
rounding regions. Of especial importance in this
respect is the study of Assyr and Bab antiquities,
with their rich and illustrative monuments, and,
by the side of these, also those of Egypt; and,
further, although these are indeed much smaller
in number, the inscriptions and monuments of a
number of peoples situated much nearer to Israel
and ethnologically more closely connected with
them, such as the Moabites, Aramaeans, Arabians,
Canaanites, Phoenicians, and others. For later
times, Parsiism is an esp. important factor.

These antiquities have shown that between the
religion of Israel and the religions of these nations
there existed such close connections that a relation-
ship between them cannot be denied. It is indeed
true that these similarities are mostly of a formal
nature, but they nevertheless point to similar con-
ceptions of the Divine Being and of the relation of
man to this Being. We find such connecting links in
the cultus, in the traditions concerning the creation
of the world, concerning the earliest history of man-


Then, too, in the different periods.
of this development there were various religious -


kind, ete; further, in the conception of what is
legally right and of the customs of life; in the ideas
concerning death and the world beyond; concerning
the souls of men and the supernatural spiritual
world, and elsewhere. These analogies and related
connections have appeared so pronounced to some
savants, especially Assyriologists, that they are
willing to find in the religion of the Israelites and
Jews only a reflection of the Bab, or of what they
call the “religion of the ancient Orient.’? But over
against this claim, a closer and deeper investigation
shows that a higher world of thought and ideals
at all times permeates the Israelitish religion and
gives to it a unique character and a Divine truth,
which is lacking in all other religions and which
made Israel’s religion capable of becoming the basis
of that highest Divine revelation which through
Christ came forth from it. We will here briefly
sketch the progress of the development of this
religion, and then formulate a summary of those
characteristics which distinguish it from the other

religions.
Il. Historical Outline.—(1) The traditional view.
—tThe sources for this period are meager. Yet
what has been reported concerning


1. Pre- the religion of the period of the Pa-
Mosaic triarchs is enough to give us a picture
Religion of of their conception of the Deity. And
the Ances- this picture is more deserving of accept-
tors of ance than is the representation of the
Israel matter by the traditional dogmatics


of the church and also that of those

modern scholars who are under the spell of the evo-
lutionary idea, and who undertake to prove in the
Bib. history of Israel the complete development
from the lowest type of fetishism and animism to
the heights of ethical monotheism. The views of
the old church teachers were to the effect that the
doctrine concerning the one true God had been
communicated by God to Adam in its purity and
perfection, and by him had been handed through
an unbroken chain of true confessors of the faith
(Seth, Noah, etc), down to Abraham. But this
view does not find confirmation in the Bib. record.
On the contrary, in Josh 24 2.15, it is even ex-
pressly stated ot the ancestors of Abraham that they
had worshipped strange gods in Chaldaea. And
the ancestors of the people, Abraham, Jacob, and
others, do not appear on the stage of history with a
teachable creed, but themselves first, learn to know
gradually, in the school of life, the God whom they
serve, after He has made Himself known to them in
extraordinary manifestations. Abraham does not
yet know that Jeh does not demand any human
sacrifices. Jacob still has the narrow view, that
the place where he has slept is the entrance portal
to heaven (Gen 28 16.17). Omnipresence and
omniscience are not yet attributes which they asso-
ciate with their idea of the Divinity. They still
stand on a simple-minded and primitive stage, as
far as their knowledge of the living God is concerned.
(2) The modern view.— Over against this, modern
scholars describe pre-Mosaic Israel as yet entirely
entangled in Sem heathen ideas, and even regard the
religion of the people in general, in the post-Mosaic
period down to the 8th cent. BC, as little better
than this, since in their opinion the Jeh-religion
had not thoroughly permeated the ranks of the
common people, and had practically remained the
possession of the men, while the women had con-
tinued to cultivate the ancient customs and views.
W. R. Smith and Wellhausen have pointed to cus-
toms and ideas of the pre-Islamic Arabs, and 8.1.
Curtiss to such in the modern life of oriental tribes,
which are claimed to have been the property of the
most ancient Sem heathen tribes, and these scholars
use these as the key for the ancient Israelitic rites


Israel, Rel. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1532


and customs. But even if much light is thrown
from these sources on the forms of life and cultus
as depicted by the Scriptures, much caution must
be exercised in the use made of this material. In
the first place, neither those Arabs of the 6th cent.
AD, nor their successors of today, can be regarded
as ‘‘primitive Semites.” In the second place, it is a
question, even if in the earliest period of Israel such
customs are actually found, what they really signified
for the tribe of Abraham. Weare here not speaking
of a prehistoric religion, but of the religion of that
tribe that came originally from Ur of the Chaldees,
and migrated first by way of Haran to Canaan, and
then to Egypt. In this tribe such primitive cus-
toms, perhaps, had long been spiritualized. For these
Hebrews cannot be regarded as being as uncivilized
as are the New Zealanders, or the Indians of North
America, or those Bedouins who have never left
the desert; for they had lived in Babylonia for a
long period, even if, while there, they had with-
drawn themselves as much as possible from the more
cultured life of the cities. The patriarchs were in
touch with the civilization of the Babylonians. We
do not, indeed, want to lay special stress on the fact
that they lived in Ur and in Haran, two cities of
the moon-god, the worship of which divinity shows
monotheistic tendencies. But the history of the
family of Abraham, e.g. his relation to Sarah and
Hagar, shows indisputable influence of Bab legal
ideas. Probably, too, the traditions concerning the
beginnings of history, such as the Creation, the
Deluge, and the like, were brought from Babylon
to Canaan by the tribe of Abraham.

(3) A higher conception of the Deity; ’ilu, ’él.—
But this tribe had come to Babylonia from North-
ern Arabia. It is a very important fact that the
oldest Arabian inscriptions, namely the Minaean
and the Sabaean, lead us to conclude that these
tribes entertained a relatively high conception of
the Deity, as has been shown by Professor Fritz
Hommel. The oldest Arabian proper names are
not found combined with names of all kinds of gods,
but with the simple ilu, ’é, or God, or with "ii,
“my God.” Then, too, God is often circumscribed
by the nouns expressing relationship, such as ’abh2,
“my father,’ or ’ah2, “my brother,” or ’ammi, “my
uncle,” and others, which express an intimate rela-
tionship betwecn man and his God. Correspond-
ing to these are also the old Sem proper names in
Canaan, as also the name Abraham, i.e. ’Abhi-
ram, “my father is exalted,” or Ishmael, and many
others. We accordingly must believe that the an-
cestors of Abraham immigrated into Babylon with a
comparatively highly developed religion and with
a uniform conception of God. Here their faith
may have been unfavorably influenced, and it is
not impossible that the religious disagreement
between the patriarch and his neighbors may have
been a reason for his migration. Abraham himself
is regarded by the Canaanites as a “friend of God,”
who stands in an intimate relationship with his
God, and he is accordingly to be regarded, not
merely as a secular, but also as a religious tribal
head, an Imdm, a prophetical personality. _

(4) Totemism; animism, ete.—Still less is it cor-
rect. to ascribe to this tribe the lowest religious stage
possible, namely that of fetishism or of totemism
(worship of demons or worship of animals) and the
like. Some think they find evidences of the wor-
ship of animals in Israel. The fact that some
Israelites were regarded as descendants of Leah
(“wild cow”[?]), others of Rachel (‘‘mother sheep”),
is claimed to refer to the fact that these animals
were totems of the tribe, i.e. were worshipped as
ancestors. But for this claim there is no scintilla
of proof. These names of women, esp. in the case
of a nomadic tribe, can be explained in a much more


simple way. The calves that appear in later timcs
as images of Jeh are just as little a proof for
the claim that calves were worshipped by the an-
cestors of Israel as divinities. We read nothing of
such an image before the sojourn in Egypt, and
after that time this image was always regarded
symbolically. The fact, again, that from the days
of Moses, and without a doubt earlier than this,
certain animals were not allowed to be eaten, does
not justify the conclusion which Professor B. Stade
and others have drawn from it, viz. that these ani-
mals were in olden times regarded as divine (tabu),
and for that reason were not permitted to be eaten,
and only afterward were avoided as “unclean.”
The list of unclean animals in Lev 11 and Dt 14
speaks for an altogether different reason for regard-
ing them as unclean. It is not at all thinkable that
these many, and as a rule unclean and low class of
animals, were at one time accorded divine honor,
while the higher and cleaner class had been ex-
cluded from this distinction. We have accordingly
no reason for finding animal worship here. On the
other hand, it is self-evident, in the case of such an
old nomadic tribe, that man stood in a more familiar
relationship to his animals, and for this reason the
slaughter of these was a more significant matter
than was afterward the case. This was done only


‘on extraordinary occasions, and it readily was ac-


corded areligious consecration. Seealso ToTEMism.

The idea is also emphatically to be rejected, that
in the pre-Mosaic period mere animism prevailed
in Israel—the worship of spirits and of demons. It
has been tried in vain to show that in the most
primitive period of Israel’s religion the worship of
ancestors occupied a prominent place. As Pro-
fessor Emil Kautzsch has emphasized, the argu-
ments which have been drawn from the mourning
customs of the Israelites in favor of this claim (as
this is done by F. Schwally, Das Leben nach dem

Tode, nach den Vorstellungen des alten Israel und
des Judentums, Giessen, 1892) are altogether inade-
quate, as is also the appeal to the marriage with a
deceased wife’s sister, as though the purpose of the
institution was to secure for the deceased who had
died without issue somebody who would attend to
his worship. Because of the strongly developed
mundane character of the religious life in Israel,
it is natural that it was regarded as a calamity if
there was no issue who kept alive the memory of
the departed in the tribe. But even if the argu-
ment from the mourning customs of Israel were
more convincing than is actually the case, and that
gifts, such as food, oil, and the like, were placed in
the tomb of the departed, as was often done by the
Canaanites, yet this would be in the ancient Israel-
itish religion a matter of subordinate importance,
which could readily be explained on the ground of
natural feelings. 1t could never be made to appear
plausible that all religions had grown out of such
a cultus. lf the teraphim are to be regarded as
having been originally images of ancestors, which is
quite plausible, then they would indeed represent a
continuous ancestral cultus, as the people evidently
kept these images in their houses in order to attract
to themselves blessings, to avert misfortunes and
to secure oracles. But these dolls, modeled after
the form of human beings, already in the period of
the Patriarchs were regarded as a foreign element
and in contradiction to the more earnest religious
sentiments (cf Gen 31 19; 35 2.4).

_ That Israel, like all ancient peoples, did at one
me pass through an “animistic” stage of religious
development could best be proved, if at all, from
their conception of the soul. Among the purifi-
cations those are esp. necessary which are demanded
by the presence of a dead body in the same room
with the living, as the living are defiled by the soul


1533


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


of the deceased in leaving the body (Nu 19 14).
Even the uncovered vessels are defiled by his soul-
substance (19 15). This, however, is a biological
conception, which has nothing to do with the con-
ception of the Deity.

Or are those perhaps right, who think that the
primitive Israelites had accepted animism in this
sense, that they did not as yet worship any actual
divinities, but only a multitude of spirits or demons,
be these ghosts of departed human beings or the
spirits of Nature, local numina? In favor of this
last-mentioned view, appeal is made to this faet,
that in the ancient Sem world loeal divinities with
very circumseribed spheres of power are very often
to be met with, esp. at springs, trees, oases, at which
a demon or divinity is regarded as having his abode,
who is described as the ba‘al or master in this place;
cf sueh loeal names as Baal-tamar, Baal-hermon,
and others. Such local spirits would then be the
’élohim, out of which would grow more mighty
divinities of whole cities and countries. To these
it would be necessary yet to add those spirits which
were worshipped by individual tribes, partly spirits
of ancestors, who also eould have grown into higher
divinities, while the rest of the mass of deities, good
naga had to content themselves with a lower
rank.

As against this, we must above all consider the
fact that in ancient Israel the demons played a very
subordinate r6le. The contrast in this regard with
Babylonia is phenomenal. It is probably the ease
that at all periods in Israel there existed a belief in
unclean spirits, who perhaps lived in the desert (cf
the EY YYW , s*‘trim), or in the demoniacs, and could
otherwise, too, do much harm. But they are
not described as having much influence on man’s
life. How few indications of such a view can be
found and how little most of these indications prove
we can see in the work of H. Duhm, Die bésen
Geister im AT, Tiibingen, 1906. After the Bab exile,
and still more after the longer sojourn of the Israel-
ites in Babylon, their imagination was to a much
greater degree than before saturated by the faith
in spirits. Then the closer study of such Sem
bealim teaches us that they were not originally con-
eeived in such a narrow sense. They are very
often of a solar nature, celestial powers who have
their abode at a particular place, and there produce
fertility, but in this special function represent a
general power of Nature. Thesameis the ease with
the tribal divinities. These are by no means
merely the personifications of the small power of a
particular tribe, but claim to be absolute beings,
which shows that they are regarded as higher di-
vinities which the tribe has appropriated and
adapted to its own political ideas. We accordingly
have no right to think that such a divinity was to
be regarded as really confined to a particular hill,
or even to a certain stone or tree where it was wor-
shipped. The rock or stone or tree divinities of
the ancient Arabs are celestial powers, who have
only taken their abode at these places, even, if
popular superstition did actually identify them with
sueh stones or trees.

It is therefore a misconception of the actual
state of affairs when the conclusion is drawn that
stone-worship is meant when Jacob erects a stone
monument, the mag¢cébhah at Bethel, and anoints
it with oil, and when this is understood to be a low
type of fetishism. Stones are to the present day,
for the wandering tribes, the signs by which impor-
tant, localities, esp. sacred places, are designated.
The symbolical significance of such stones may be
quite different, as also the relation which a divinity
is thought to sustain to such a stone monument.
For this reason, too, the judgment of the Bible con-


Israel, Rel. of


cerning such objects is quite different. Only then,
when they are symbols of idolatry, as the hamma-
nim, i.e. representations of the sun-god, ba‘al
hammédn, are they everywhere rejected in the OT.
In the same way a mighty tree, esp. if it is found
near a spring of water, is in the Orient, by its very
nature, a proof of the life-produeing God. Such a
tree naturally suggests that it is a place where
divine life can be felt. Trees that have been made
saered by manifestations of the divinities or have been
eonsecrated by the memory of a great personality,
esp. the oak, the terebinth, the palm, were regarded
as favorite places beneath which the divinity was
sought. Only in that case, as was indeed common
in Canaan, when the unhallowed powers of Nature
were here adored, was this custom reprehensible
in the eyes of the prophets. The ’'déshérim, too, are
of a decidedly heathen eharaeter, as these trunks of
trees were symbols of the goddess Ashera. Further,
it was a favorite custom to worship the divinities
on the high places, for the reason that they were
regarded as in or attached to the heavens. Only
because of the heathen worship which was prac-
tised on these béméth were they, in later times, so
hateful to the prophets.

(5) Conception of God—In answer to the ques-
tion, what ideas the patriarchs, the pre-Mosaie
leaders of the people of Israel, entertained concern-
ing God, attention must first of all be drawn to the
faet that God spoke to some of these personally,
be this in one form of manifestation or in another.
These men heard the word of God with their own
ears, and that, too,in the most important moments
of their lives. In the case of Abraham, these reve-
lations are fundamental for him and for his people.
The prophetie factor, which goes through the entire
history of Israel and constitutes the life-principle
that fills its religion and causes its further develop-
ment, is at the very first beginnings the source
whence the knowledge of God is taken. This pre-
supposes a personal God; and, as a matter of fact,
a fixed personality is demanded by the character of
such a God. His “I” impresses itself upon man
with absolute power and demands his serviee en-
tirely. This “I’’ constantly remains the same, and
everywhere evinces the same power, be this in
Haran or in Canaan or in Egypt, and whether it
manifests itself to Abraham or to Isaac or to Jacob.
This oneness is not formulated as a didactic propo-
sition, but as a living reality: only this God existed
for His adherents. These appeal to Him at all
times with equal success. The manifestations of
this God may be of a different kind at different
times. He is even entertained, on one occasion, as
a personal guest by His friend Abraham, together
with two companions (Gen 18 1 ff). On another
occasion (Gen 16 17) Abraham beholds Him in
symbolical form as a burning and fiery furnace
(probably to be regarded as similar to the movable
altar discovered by Sellin in Taanach). But these
are to be regarded as special favors shown by God.
In general it was the rule that God could not be
seen without the beholder suffering death. Then,
too, the conviction is very old, that what man sees
in the case of such theophanies cannot have been
God Himself, but that He had manifested Himself
through a subordinate agent, an angel (this is par-
tieularly the ease in the document E in Gen). This
angel, however, has no significance in himself, but
is only the creature-veil, out of which God Himself
speaks in the first person. In the most elementary
manner this formal limitation of God appears in
Gen 11 5, where He goes to the trouble of deseend-
ing from heaven in order to look at something on
earth; and in 18 21, when He desires to_go to
Sodom personally, in order to convince Himself
that what He has intended to send upon this city


Israel, Rel. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1534


is also the right thing. It is indeed possible to find
in the first instance some traits of irony, and possibly
in the second case the epic details may have added
something. However, God is no longer spoken of
in such a human way in the post-Mosaic times.
This shows that the document J at this place con-
tains material that is very old. All the more is it
to be noted what exalted conceptions of God pre-
vail already in these narratives. He dwells in
heaven (11 5; 19 24), something that has without
reason been claimed not to have been the idea enter-
tained in the older period. He is the God of the
world, who exercises supremacy over all the nations.
He rules with justice, checks pride, avenges injus-
tice, and that, too, not only in a summary manner
on whole countries, but also in such a way that He
takes into consideration every individual and saves
the one just man out of the midst of the mass of
sinners (18 25; 19). Jn short, He is already the
true God, although yet incompletely and primi-
tively grasped in His attributes.

This God, ruling with omnipotent power in Na-
ture and history, has entered into a special relation-
ship with the tribe of Abraham. He has become
the Covenant-God of the patriarch, according to
the testimony of the old document J in Gen 165.
We accordingly find here already the consciousness
that that God who rules over the world has entered
into a special relationship with one small nation or
tribe. This fact appears also in this, that Abram
(Gen 14) acknowledges the highest God of the
priest-king Melchizedek (Gen 14 20 ff) as his God,
as the founder of heaven and of earth, and identifies
Him with his own Covenant-God Jeh.

(6) Cultus ——As far as the cultus is concerned,
it can be stated that at this period it was still of a
simple, but solemn and dignified character. The
people preferred to worship their God at such places
where He had manifested Himself, usually on a
high place, on which an altar had been erected.
There were no images of the Divinity extant. As
the word MATA, mizbeh, “altar,” shows, the sacri-
fices were usually bloody. Human sacrifice had
already in the days of Abraham been overcome by
the substitution of an animal, although in olden
times it may have been practised, perhaps, as the
sacrifice of the firstborn; and in later times, too,
through the influence of the example of heathen
nations, it may have found its way into Israel now
and then. Both larger and smaller animals were
sacrificed, as also fowls. The idea that prevailed
in this connection was that God, too, enjoyed the
food which served man as his sustenance, although
God, in a finer way, experienced as a pleasure only
the scent of the sacrifices, as this ascended in the
flame and the smoke (Gen 8 21). But the mam
thing was the blood as the substratum of the soul.
The fruits of the field, esp. the first-fruits, were also
offered. Of liquid offerings, it is probable that in
primitive times water was often brought, as this
was often a costly possession; and in Canaan, oil,
which the inhabitants of this country employed
extensively in their sacrifices (Jgs 9 9, something
that is confirmed also by recent excavations); also
wine (Jgs 9 13). As the ancient burnt or whole
sacrifices (Gen 8 20) give expression to reverence,
thankfulness, the prayer for protection or the
granting of certain favors, the people from the very
beginning also instituted sacrificial feasts, which
gave expression to the covenant with God, the
communion with the Covenant-God. In this act
the sacrifice was divided between God and those
who sacrificed. The latter ate and drank joyously
before God after the parts dedicated to Him had
been sacrificed, and esp. after the blood had been
poured around the altar. The idea that this was
the original form of the sacrifice and that gift-


sacrifices were introduced only at a later period
when agriculture had been introduced is not con-
firmed by historical evidences. That man felt
himself impelled, by bringing to his God gifts of the
best things he possessed, to express his depend-
ence and gratitude, is too natural not to have been
from the beginning a favorite expression of religious
feeling. In connection with the sacrifices the name
of God was solemnly called upon. J even says
that this was the name Jeh (Gen 4 25), while E
and P tell us that this name came into use only
through Moses. ; : as
According to P (Gen 17 10 ff), circumcision was
already introduced by Abraham in his tribe as
the sign of the covenant. There are good reasons
why the introduction of this custom is not like that
of so many other ceremonies attributed to Moses.
The custom was without doubt of an older origin.
From whatever source it may have been derived
in its earlier ethnological stage, for the Israelites
circumcision is an act of purification and of conse-
cration for connection with the congregation of
Jeh. A special priesthood, however, did not yet
exist in this period, as the head of the family and
of the tribe exercised the priestly functions and
rights (cf Gen 35 1 ff), although the peoples in-
habiting Canaan at that time had priests (Gen
14 18).
(1) The covenant-idea.—Israel claims that its
existence as a nation and its special relation to Jeh
begins with its exodus from Egypt


2. The and with the conclusion of the cove-
Mosaic nant at Mt. Sinai (ef Am 3 2; 9 7).
Covenant As the preparation for this relation
with goes back to one individual, viz.
Jehovah Abraham, thus it is Moses through


whom God delivered His people from
bondage and received them into His covenant (see
concerning Moses as a prophet and mediator of the
covenant, IskaEL, History or). It is a matter of
the highest significance for the religion of Israel
that the relation of this people to Jeh was not one
which existed by the nature of things, as was the
ease with the other oriental tribal and national
religions, but that it was the outgrowth of a his-
torical event, in which their God had united Him-
self with them. The conception of a covenant,
upon which Jeh entered as a matter of free choice
and will, and to which the people voluntarily gave
their assent, is not an idea of later date in the reli-
gious history of Israel, which grew out of the pro-
phetic thoughts of the 8th and 7th cents. BC, as
has been claimed, but is found, as has been made
prominent by Professor Fr. Giesebrecht (Die
Geschichtlichkeitt des Sinaibundes, 1900), already
in the oldest accounts of the conclusion of the
covenant (E, J), and must be aseribed to the Mosaic
age. This includes the fact, too, that this cove-
nant, which unites Jeh with Israel, could not be of
an indissoluble character, but that the covenant
was based on certain conditions. The superficial
opinion of the people might often cause them to
forget this. But the prophets could, in later times,
base their proclamations on this fact. Further,
the thought is made very prominent that this
covenant imposed ethical duties. While the di-
vinities of other nations, Egyp, Bab, Phoen, de-
manded primarily that their devotees should erect
temples in their honor and should bring them an
abundance of sacrifices, in Israel the exalted and
ethical commandment is found in the forefront.
The covenant relation to the God of Israel can
legitimately be found only where the relation to
one’s fellow-man is normal and God-pleasing
(Decalogue).
(2) The Covenant-God, Jehovah—The special
revelation which Moses received is characterized


1535


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Israel, Rel. of


by the word Jehovah ( Yahweh) as a name for God.
This name, according to the well-authenticated
report of Ex 6 3 (P), which is supported also by
E, had not been “known” to the fathers. This
does not necessarily mean that nothing had been
known of this name. Bab prayers often speak of
an “unknown god,” and in doing this refer to a
god with whom those who prayed had not stood
in personal relation. The God of the fathers ap-
peared to Moses, but under a name which was not
familiar to the fathers nor was recognized by them.
Tn agreement with this is the fact that only from
the time of Moses proper names compounded with
some abbreviation of Jeh, such as Jah, Jahu, Jeho,
are found, but soon after this they became very
common. Accordingly, it would be possible that
such names were in scattered cases found also
before the days of Moses among the tribes of Israel,
and it is not impossible that this name was familiar
to other nations. The Midianites esp., who lived
originally at Mt. Sinai, have been mentioned in
this connection, and also the Kenites (Stade, Budde),
some scholars appealing for this claim to the influ-
ence which, according to Ex 18, Jethro had on the
institutions of Moses. However, the matters men-
tioned here refer only to legal procedure (cf vs 14
ff). We nowhere hear that Moses took over the
Jeh-worship from this tribe. On the contrary,
Jethro begins only at this time (Ex 18 11) to wor-
ship Jeh, the God of Moses, and the common sacri-
ficial meal, according to ver 12, did not take place
in the presence of Jeh, but, accommodating it to
the guest, in the presence of Elohim. Then we
nowhere hear that the Kenites, who lived together
with the Israelites, ever had any special prominence
in the service of Jeh, as was the case, e.g., with the
Median Magi, who had charge of the priesthood
among the Persians, or with the Etruscans among
the Romans, who examined the entrails. Yet the
Kenites would necessarily have enjoyed_ special
authority in the Jeh-cultus, if their tribal God had
hecome the national God of Israel. The only
thing that can be cited in favor of an Arabian ori-
gin of the name of Jeh is the Arab. word-form,
3, hawah, for WT, hayah. On the other hand,
a number of facts indicate that Ja or Jau as a name
for God was common in Syria, Philistia and Baby-
lonia; cf Joram, son of the king of Hamath (2 8
8 10), and Jaubidi, the king of this city, who was
removed by Sargon. In these cases, however,
Tsraelitish influences may have been felt. Fried-
rich Delitzsch claims to have discovered the names
Jahve-ilu and Jahum-ilu on inscriptions as early
as the times of Hammurabi.’ But his readings
are sharply attacked. However this may be, the
name God as proclaimed by Moses was not only
something new for Israel, but was also announced
by him (possibly also with a new pronunciation,
Yahweh instead of Yahu) with a new signification.
At any rate, the explanation in Ex 3 14 (E), “I Am
Tuatl Am,” for doubting which we have no valid
reasons, indicates a depth in the conception of God
which far surpasses the current conceptions of the
Syrian and the Bab pantheon. It would, perhaps,
be easier to find analogous thoughts in Egyp specula-
tions. But this absolute God of Moses is not the
idea of speculative priests, but is a popular God who
claims to control all public as well as private life.
(3) Monotheism of Moses.—Attempts have been
_ made to deny the monotheistic character of this
God, and some have thought that the term “monol-
atry” would suffice to express this stage in man’s
knowledge of God, since the existence of other gods
was not denied, but rather was presupposed (ef
passages like Ex 16 11), and it was only forbidden
to worship any god in addition to Jeh (20 3).
However, this distinction is fundamental, and


separates, in kind, the religion of Moses from that
of the surrounding nations. For among these latter,
the worship of more than one divine being at the
same time was the rule. The gods of the Phoeni-
cians, the Aramaeans, and the Babylonians are,
like those of the Egyptians, beings that spontane-
ously increase in number. They are divided into
male and female groups of two, while in Heb there
is not even a word extant for goddess, and the idea
of a female companion-being to Jeh is an impossi-
bility, Then, too, it is characteristic of the ethnic
god that he is multiplied into many b«'altm, and
does not feel it asa limitation or restriction when
kindred divinities are associated with him. How-
ever, the Jeh of Moses does not suffer another being
at His side, for the very reason that He claims to be
the absolute God. Passages like Ex 15 11, too,
purpose chiefly only to express His unique char-
acter; but if He is without any equals among the
gods, then He is the only one who can claim to be
God; and it is in the end only the logical dog-
matic formulation of the facts in the case. when we
are told in Dt, “Jeh he is God; there is none else
besides him” (4 35.39; 6 4; cf Ps 18 32). This
does not exclude the fact that also in later times,
when monotheism had been intelligently accepted,
mention is still made of the gods of the heathen as
of real powers (cf, e.g. Jer 49 1). This was rather
the empirical method of expression, which found its
objective basis in the fact that the heathen world
was still in possession of some real spiritual power.
Most of all, the popular faith or the superstition
of the people could often regard the gods of the
other nations as ruling in the same way as Jeh did
in Israel (cf, e.g. 2 Ch 28 23). But the idea that
the faithful worshippers of Jeh after the days of
Moses ever recognized as equal and of the same rank
with their own God the gods of the heathen must
be most emphatically denied, as also the claim that
these Israelites assigned to Jeh only restricted
pone over a small territory. This surely would

ave been in flat contradiction to the well-known
history of the Mosaic period, in which Jeh had
demonstrated His superiority over the famous gods
of Egypt in so glorious a manner. Cf on this point
James Robertson, Harly Religion, 4th ed, 297 ff
(against Stade).

(4) Impossibility of representing Jeh by an image.
—The 2d principle which the Mosaic Decalogue
establishes is that Jeh cannot be represented by
any image. In this doctrine, too, there is a con-
scious contrast to the nations round about Israel
(in addition to Ex 20 4, cf Dt 5 8; also Ex 24
17). That in the last-mentioned passage only
molten images are forbidden, while those hewn of
stone or made of wood might be permitted, is an
arbitrary claim, which is already refuted by the
fact that the Mosaic sanctuary did not contain any
image of Jeh. The Ark of the Covenant was indeed
a visible symbol of the presence of God, but it is
a kind of throne of Him who sits enthroned invisibly
above the cherubim, as has been shown above, and
accordingly does not admit of any representation of
God by means of an image. This continued to be
the case in connection with the central sanctuary,
with the exception of such aberrations as are already
found in Ex $2 and which are regarded as a viola-
tion of the Covenant, also at the time when the
sanctuary was stationed at Shiloh. The fact that
at certain local cults Jeh-images were worshipped
is to be attributed to the influence of heathen sur-
roundings (cf on this point J. Robertson, loc. cit.,


215 ff).

(5) Ethical character of the God of Moses.—A
further attribute of the God of Moses, which exalts
Him far above the ethnic divinities of the surround-
ing peoples, is His ethical character. This appears


Israel, Rel. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1536


in the fact that His principles inculcate fundamental
ethical duties and His agents are chiefly occupied
with the administration of legal justice. Moses
himself became the lawgiver of Isracl. The spirit
of this legislation is deeply ethical. Only we must
not forget that Moses cannot have originated these
ordinances and laws and created them as some-
thing absolutely new, hut that he was compelled
to build on the basis of the accepted legal customs
of the people. But he purified these legal usages,
which he found in use among the people, through
the spirit of his knowledge of God, protected as
much as possible the poor, the weak, the enslaved,
and elevated the female sex, as is shown by a
comparison with related Bab laws (CH). Then,
too, we must not forget that the people were com-
paratively uneducated, and esp. that a number of
crude classes had joined themselves to the people
at that time, who had to be stringently handled
if their corrupt customs were not to infect the whole
nation. The humane and philanthropic spirit of
the Mosaic legislation appears particularly pro-
nounced in Dt, which, however, represents a later
reproduction of the Mosaic system, but is entirely
the outcome of Mosaic principles. Most embar-
rassing for our Christian feeling is the hardness of
the Mosaic ordinances in reference to the heathen
Canaanites, who were mercilessly to be rooted out
(Dt 7 2; 20 16f). Here there prevails a concep-
tion of God, which is found also among the Moab-
ites, whose King Mesha, on his famous monument,
boasts that he had slain all the inhabitants of the
city of Kiriath-jearim as “a spectacle to Chemosh,
the god of Moab.” According to Dt 7 2 ff, the
explanation of this hardness is to be found in the
fact that such a treatment was regarded as a Di-
vine judgment upon the worshippers of idols, and
served at the same time as a preventive against the
infection of idolatry.

(6) The theocracy.—The vital principle of the
organization which Moses gave to his people, Jos
‘(CAp, II, 16) has aptly called a theocracy, be-
cause the lawgiver has subordinated all relations
of life to the government of his God. It is entirely
incorrect when Wellhausen denies that there is a
difference between theocracy and hierarchy. Not
the priesthood, but Jeh alone, is to rule all things
in Israel, and Jeh had many other organs or agents
besides the priests, esp. the prophets, who not
rarely, as the representatives of the sovereign God,
sharply opposed themselves to the priests. The
theocratical principle, however, finds its expression
in this, that public and private life, civil and crim-
inal law, military and political matters were all
controlled by religious principles.

(7) The Mosaic cultus—As a matter of course,
Moses also arranged the cultus. He created a holy
shrine, the tabernacle, which contained the Ark of
the Covenant, and in its general arrangements
became the model of the sanctuary or temple built
in later times. He appointed sacred seasons, in
doing which he connected these with previously
customary festival days, but he gave sharper di-
rections concerning the Sabbath and gave to the old
festival of spring 2 new historical significance as
the Passover. Moses further appointed for this
sanctuary a priestly family, and at the same time
ordained that the tribe to which this family be-
longed should assume the guardianship of the
sanctuary. The lines separating the rights of the
priests and of the Levites have often been changed
since his time, but the fundamental distinctions in
this respect go back to Moses. In the same way
Moses has also, as a matter of course, put the sacred
rites, the celebrations of the sacrifices, the religious
institutions and ceremonies, into forms suitable
to that God whom he proclaimed. This does not


T


mean that all the priestly laws, as they are now
found recorded in the Pent, were word for word
dictated by him. The priests were empowered to
pronounce Térah, i.e. Divine instruction, on this
subject, and did this in accordance with the direc-
tions received through Moses. Most of these in-
structions were at first handed down orally, until
they were put into written form in a large collec-
tion. But in the priestly ordinances, too, there is
no lack of traces to show that these date from the
period of Moses and must at an early time have
een put into written form. :
(1) Decay of religion in Canaan.—Upon the in-
tense religious feeling produced by the exodus from
Egypt and the events at Mt. Smai,


3. The there followed a relapse, in connection
Religion of with which it appears that in this
Israel Mosaic generation the cruder tenden-
before the cies were still too pronounced to en-
8th Cent. dure the great trial of faith demanded
BC by the conquest of the land of Canaan.


In the same way, the heroic struggles
of Joshua, carried on under the directions of Jeh
and resultmmg in the conquest of the country, were
followed by a reaction. The zeal for battle weak-
ened; the work of conquest was left unfinished; the
people arranged to make themselves at home in the
land before it had really been won; peace was con-
cluded with the inhabitants. This decay of theo-
cratic zeal and the occupation of the land by the
side of and among the Canaanites had a direful
influence on the Jeh-religion as it had been taught
the people by Moses. The people adopted the
sanctuaries of the country as their own, instead of
rooting them out entirely. They took part in the
festivals of their neighbors and adopted their
customs of worship, including those that were bane-
ful. The local Baals, in whose honor harvest and
autumn festivals were celebrated as thanksgiving
for their having given the products of the earth, were
in many places worshipped by the Israelites. The
possibility of interpretig the name Baal in both a
good and bad sense favored the excuse that in doing
this the people were honoring Jeh, whom in olden
times they also unhesitatingly called their Baal,
as their Lord and the master of the land and of the
people. By the side of the Jeh-altars they placed
the Asherah, the sacred tree, really as a symbol of
the goddess of this name; and the stone pillars
(hammanim), which the original inhabitants had
erected near their sanctuaries, were also held in
honor, while the heathen ideas associated with them
thereby found their way into the religious conscious-
ness of the people. Sorcery, necromancy, and
similar superstitions crept in. And since, even as
it was, a good deal of superstition had continued to
survive among the people, there came into existence,
in the period of the Judges, a type of popular reli-
gion that was tinged by a pronounced heathenism
and had but little in common with the theocratical
principles of Moses, although the people had no
intention of discarding the God of Moses. Char-
acteristic of this religious syncretism during the
time of the Judges was the rise of the worship of
images dedicated to Jeh in Dan (Jgs 17 and 18)
and probably also at Ophrah (8 27), as also human
sacrifices (ch 11).

(2) The theocratic kingdom —But during this
period pronounced reactions to the true worship of
Jeh were not lacking. The heroes who appeared
on the arena as liberators from the yoke of the op- ©
pressors recalled the people to Jeh, as was done like-
wise by the prophets and prophetesses. Samuel,
the greatest among this class, was at the same time
a prophet and reformer. He again brought the
people together and tried to free them from the con-
tamination of heathenism, in accordance with the


1537


Mosaic ordinances, and at the same time prepared
for a new future by the establishment of colonies of
prophets and by the establishment of the kingdom.
This latter innovation seemed to be at variance
with the principles of a strict theocracy. It is the
merit of Samuel that he created the theocratic king-
dom, by which the anointed of Jeh himself was to
become an important agent of the supreme rule of
Jeh. It is indced true that the first king, Saul, did
not realize this ideal, but his successor, David, ap-
reciated it all the more. And even if David was
ar from realizing the ideal of a theocratic king, he
nevertheless continued to be the model which
prophecy tried to attain, viz. a king who was per-
sonally and most intimately connected with Jeh,
and who, as the servant of Jeh, was to realize en-
tirely in his own person the mission of the people
to become the servants of Jeh, and was thus to
furnish the guaranty for the harmony between
Israel and their God, and bring rich and unalloyed
blessings upon the land.

(3) Religious ideals of the Psalms since David.—
In this way the covenant-relation became a personal
one through “the anointed one of Jeh.”’ In general,
religion in Israel became more personal in character
in the days of the earlier kings. Before this time
the collective relation to God prevailed. Only as
a member of the tribe or of the nation was the indi-
vidnal connected with Jeb, which fact does not
exclude the idea that this God, for the very reason
that He rules according to ethical principles, also
regards the individual and grants him His special
protection and requites to him good or evil accord-
ing to his deeds. The Heb hymns or “psalms,”
which David originated, give evidence of a more
intimate association of the individual with his God.


The very oldest of these psalms, a number of which
point to David as their author, are not liturgical congre-
gational hymns, but were originally individual prayer-
songs, which emanated from percna experiences, but
were, in later times, employed for congregational use.
The prejudice, that only in later times such expressions
of personal piety could be expected, is refuted by anal-
ogous cases among other nations, esp. by the much
more ancient penitential and petitionary prayers of the
Babylonians, in which, as a rule, the wants of the indi-
vidual and not those of the nation constitute the con-
tents. These Bab penitential prayers show that among
this people, too, the feeling of guilt as the cause of mis-
fortune was very, vivid, and that they regarded repent-
ance and confession as necessary in order to secure the
forgiveness of the gods. However, the more exalted
character of the Israelitish conception of God appears
jn a most pronounced way in this comparison, since the
Babylonian feels his way in an uncertain manner in
order to discover what god or goddess he may have
offended, and not rarely tries to draw out the sympathy
of the one divinity over against the wrath of another.
But much more can, this difference be scen in this, that
the heathen singer is concerned only to get rid of the
evil or the misfortune that oppresses him. The com-
munion with his god whose favor he seeks to regain is in
itself of no value for him. In David's case the matter
is altogether different, as he knows that he is bound to
Jeh by a covenant of love (Ps 18 2), and_ his heart
delights in this communion, more than it does in all
earthly possessions (Ps 4 8); and this is even more so
in the case of the author of Ps 73 25-26. Such words
would, for good reasons, be unthinkable in the case of
a Bab psalmist.


In the times of those earliest kings of Isracl,
which, externally, constituted the most flourishing
period in their history, unless tradition is entirely
at fault, the spiritual world of thought also was
enriched by the Wisdom literature of the Proverbs,
the earliest examples of which date back to Solomon.


(4) Wisdom literature since Solomon.—This hokhmah,
or Wisdom literature, is marked hy the peculiarity that
it ignores the special providential guidance of Israel and
their extraordinary relation to their God, and confines
itself more to the general revelation of God in Nature
and in the history of mankind, but in doing this regards
the fear of God as the beginning of wisdom, and at all
times has the practical purpose of exhorting to a moral
and God-pleasing life, 'The idea that this cosmopolitan
tendency is to he attributed to Gr influences, and accord-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Israel, Rel. of


ingly betrays a later period as the time of Its origin, is
to he rejected, as far as Prov and Job are concerned.
The many passages in Prov that speak of conduct
over against the king show a preéxilic origin. The
universalistic character of this literature must he ex-
plained on other grounds, It resulted from this, that this
roverh-wisdom is not the sole, exclusive property of
srael and was not first cultivated among them, but was
derived from abroad. The Edomites were esp. con-
spicuous in this respect, as the Book of Job shows, in
which the Israelitish author introduces as speakers
masters of this art from this tribe and others adjoining
it. We can also compare the superscriptions in Prov
30 1; 31 1, in which rouns ot proverbs from Arabian
principalities are introduced. Accordingly, this wisdom
was regarded as a common possession of Israel and of
their neighbors. This is probably the reason why the
authors of this class of literature refrain from natlonal
reference and reminiscences. That the liberal-minded
Solomon was the one to introduce this proverb-wisdom,
or at any rate cultivated it with special favor, is in
itself probable, and is confirmed hy the fact that the
Queen of Sheba (South Arabia) came to Jerus in order
to listen to his wisdom. But this also presupposes
that in her country a similar class of wisdom was culti-
vated. This was also the case in Egypt in very early
antiquity, and in Egyp literature we have collections of
proverhs that remind us of the proverbs of Solomon
(ct Transactions of the Third International Congress of
the History of Religions, Oxford, 1908, I, 284 ff; see
Wispom).


(5) The sanctuary on Mt. Zion. —The kingdom of
David and of Solomon not only externally marks the
highest development of the history of Israel, but
intellectually, too, prepared the soil out of which
henceforth the religious life of the nation drew its
sustenance. It was esp. under David a significant
matter, that at this time the higher spiritual powers
were in harmony with the political. This found its
expression in the Divine election of David and his
seed, which was confirmed by prophetical testament
(2 8 7). Hand in hand with this went the selec-
tion of Mt. Zion as the dwelling-place of Jeh.
David, from the beginning, was desirous of establish-
ing here the theocratical center of the people, as he
had shown by transferring the Ark of the Covenant
to Jerns. In the same way Solomon, by the erec-
tion of the Temple, sought to strengthen and suit-
ably equip this central seat. As a matter of course,
the sacred shrines throughout the land did not
thereby at once lose their significance. But the
erection of the sanctuary in Jerus was not at all
intended +o establish a ‘royal chapel’’ for the king,
as Wellhausen has termed this structure, but it
claimed the inheritance of the tabernacle in Shiloh,
and the prophets sanctioned this claim.

(6) Religion in the Kingdom of Ephraim.—The
division of the kingdom after the death of Solomon
which, as it was, had not been too large, proved
politically disastrous. It also entailed a retro-
gression in religious matters. The centralizing
tendencies of the preceding reigns were thwarted.
Jeroboam erected other sacred shrines; esp. did he
make Bethel a “king’s sanctuary” (Am 7 13). At
the same time he encouraged religious syncretism.
It is true that the gold-covered images of heifers
(by the prophets, in derision, called ‘‘calves’’) were
intended only to represent the Covenant-God Jeh.
However, this representation in the form of images,
an idea which the king no doubt had brought back
with him from his sojourn in Egypt, was a conces-
sion to the corrupt religious instincts in the nation,
and gave to the Ephraimitic worship an inferior
character in comparison with the service in the
Temple in Jerus,where no images were to be found.
But in other respects, too, the arbitrary conduct of
the king in the arrangement of the cultus proved
to be a potent factor in the Northern Kingdom from
the beginning. The opposition of independent
prophets was suppressed with all power. Never-
theless, the prophetic agitation continued to be a
potent spiritual factor, which the kings themselves
could not afford to ignore.

This proved to be the case particularly when the


Israel, Rel. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1538


dynasty of Omri, who established a new capital
city, Samaria, openly favored the introduction of
Phoen idolatry. Ahab’s wife, Jezebel, even suc-
ceeded in having a magnificent temple erected in
the new capital to her native Baal, and in crushing
the opposition of the prophets who were faithful to
Jeh. It now became a question of life and death,
so far as the religion of Jeh was concerned. The
struggle involved not only certain old heathen cus-
toms in the religion of the masses, dating back to
the occupation of Canaan, but it was the case of an
invasion of a foreign and heathen god, with a clearly
defined purpose. His voluptuous worship was not
at all in harmony with the serious character of the
Mosaic religion, and it seriously menaced, in a people
naturally inclined to sensuality, the rule of the
siringent and holy God of Mt. Sinai. The tricky
and energetic queen was already certain that she
had attained her purpose, when an opponent arose
in the person of Elijah, who put all her efforts to
naught.

(7) Elijah and Elisha.—In his struggle with the
priests of Baal, who deported themselves after the
manner of modern dervishes, we notice particularly
the exalted and dignified conception of God inl kK
18. When in this chapter Jeh and Baal are con-
trasted, the idea of Elijah is by no means that these
gods have in their own territory the same rights as
Jeh in Canaan and Israel. Elijah mocks this Baal
because he is no God at all (18 21), and the whole
worship of the priests convinces him that they are
not serving a real and true God, but only the prod-
uct of their imagination (18 27). This is mono-
theism, and certainly not of a kind that has only
recently been acquired and been first set up by Eli-
jah, but one that came down from the days of
Moses. Elijah proves himself to be a witness and
an advocate of the God of Sinai, who has been
betrayed in a treacherous manner. The fact that
he inflicts a dire and fateful punishment on the idol-
atrous priests of Baal is also in perfect agreement
with the old, stringent, Mosaic, legal code. Only
such severity could atone for the fearful crime
against the God of the country and of the covenant,
and could save the people from apostasy. How-
ever, the theophany at Mt. Sinai (1 K 19 11 ff)
shows clearly that not His external and fearful
power, but His calm and deep character was felt
by Elijah to be the distinguishing mark of his God.
His successor, Elisha, after the storm had cleared
the religious atmosphere in the country, in the per-
formance of his prophetic duties was able again to
show forth more emphatically the fatherly care and
the helpful, healing love of his God.

In general, the political retrogression of the nation
and the opposition of those in power, which the
prophets and the faithful worshippers of Jeh in later
times were compelled to experience often enough,
served greatly to intensify and to spiritnalize their
religion. The unfortunate situation of the present,
and the weaknesses and failures in the actual state
of the theocracy, directed their eyes to the future.
The people began to study the wonderful ways of
God in dealing with His people, and they began to
look to the end of these dealings. A proof of this
is found in the comprehensive accounts contained
in the old history of the covenant-people as recorded
in the Pentateuchal documents E and J, which were
composed during this period. Whether these ex-
tend beyond and later than the period of Joshua or
not, can remain an open question. In any case, there
existed written accounts also concerning the times
of the Judges, and concerning the history of Samuel,
David and Solomon, which in part were written
down soon after the events they record, and which,
because of their phenomenal impartiality, point to
an exceptionally high prophetic watchtower from


which the ways of God with His people were ob-
served.

(1) The writing prophets —The spiritual develop-

ment of the deeper Israelitish religion was the

business of the prophets. At the

4, Develop- latest, from the 8th cent. BC, and


ment of probably from the middle of the 9th,
Israel’s we have in written form their utter-
Religion ances and discourses. Larger collec-
from the _ tions of such prophecies were certainly
8th Cent. left by Amos and Hosea, These
BC to the prophets stood entirely on_the basis
Exile of the revelations which by Moses had

been made the foundation of Israel’s
religion. But in contrast to the superficial and


mistaken idea of the covenant of Jeh entertained
by their contemporaries, these prophets make clear
the true intentions of this covenant, and at the
same time, through their new inspiration, advance
the religious knowledge of the people.

(2) Their opposition to the cultus——This appears
particularly in their rejection of the external and
unspiritual cultus of their age. Over against the
false worship of God, which thinks to satisfy God
by the offering of sacrifices, they proclaim the true
worship, which consists above all things in the ful-
filment of the duties of the law and of love toward
their fellow-men. They denounce as a violation of
the covenant not only idolatry, the worship of
strange gods, and the heathen symbols and customs
which, in the course of time, had crept into the serv-
ice of Jeh, but they declare also that the religion
which is based solely on the offering of sacrifices is
worthless, since God, who is in no way dependent
on any services rendered by men, does not care
for such sacrifices, but is concerned about this,
that His commands be observed, and that these
consist above all things in righteousness, upright-
ness in the dealings of man with man, and in mercy
on the poor, the weak, the defenceless, who cannot
secure justice for themselves. (Cf, e.g. 1S 15
22; Hos 6 6; Isa 1 11 ff; Jer 7 21 ff, and other
passages equally pointed. See on this subject,
J. Robertson, Early Religion, etc, 440 ff.) Such
a transfer of the center of religion from the cultus
to practical ethical life has no analogy whatever
in other Sem and ancient religions. Yet it is not
something absolutely new, but is a principle that
has developed out of the foundation laid by Moses,
while it is in most pronounced contrast to the com-
mon religious sentiments of mankind. The pro-
phetic utterances that condemn the unthinking
and the unconsecrated cultus must not be misunder-
stood, as though Isaiah, Jeremiah and others had
been modern spiritualists, who rejected all external
forms of worship. In this case they wonld have
ceased to be members of their own people and
children of their own times. What they absolutely
reject is only the false trust put in an opus operatum,
i.e. a mechanical performance of religious rites, which
had been substituted for the real and _ heartfelt
exercise of religion. Then, too, we are not justified
in drawing from passages such as Jer 7 22 the
conclusion that at this time there did not yet exist
in written form a Mosaic sacrificial code. Such
a code is found even in the Book of the Covenant,
recognized by critics as an older Pent document
(Ex 20-23, 34), and the fact that the Sabbath
commandment is found in the Decalogue does not
prevent Isaiah from writing what he has penned in
113.14. That at this period, already, there were
extant many written ordinances is demanded by
Hos 8 12, and the connection shows that cultus-
ordinances are meant. We must accordingly take
the prophet’s method of expression into considera-
tion, which delights in absolute contrasts in cases
where we would speak relatively. But this is not


1539


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Israel, Rel. of


intended to weaken the boldness of the prophetic
thoughts, which purpose to express sharp opposi-
tion to the religious ideas current at that time.

(8) Their preaching of the judgment.—The con-
ception of God and Divine things on the part of the
popes was the logical development of the reve-
ations in the days of Moses, and after that time,
concerning the nature and the activity of God.
The God of the prophets is entirely a personal and
living God, i.e. He enters into the life of man. His
holiness is exaltation above Nature and the most
pronounced antagonism to all things unclean, to
sin. Sin is severely dealt with by God, esp., as has
already been mentioned, the sin of showing no love
and no mercy to one’s neighbor. Because they are
saturated with this conviction of the absolute
holiness of God, the preéxilic prophets proclaim
to their people more than anything else the judg-
ment which shall bring with it the dissolution of
both kingdoms and the destruction of Samaria and
of Jerus, together with its temple. First, its de-
struction is proclaimed to the Northern Kingdom;
later on to the Southern. In doing this, these in-
spired men testify that Jeh is not inseparably bound
to His people. Rather He Himself calls the de-
stroyer to come, since all the nations of the world
are at His command.

(4) Their Messianic promises—~However, the
prophets never conclude purely negatively, but
they always see on the horizon some rays of
hope, which promise to a “remuant’’ of the people
better times. A ‘day of Jeh” is coming, when He
will make His final settlement with the nations,
after they have carried out His judgment on His
people. Then, after the destruction of the gentile
world, He will establish His rule over the world.
This fundamental thought, which appears again
and again with constantly increasing clearness, often
takes the form that a future king out of the house
of David, in whom the idea of the “anointed of
Jeh”’ has been perfectly realized, will first establish
in Judahb-Israel a pure rule of God, and then also
gain the supremacy of the world. Some critics
have claimed that all of these Messianic and
eschatological predictions date from the post-
exilic period. In recent years a reaction against
this view has set in, based on the belief that in
Egypt and Babylonia also similar expectations
are found at an early period. These promises,
when they are more clearly examined, are found to
beso intimately connected with the other prophecies
of Isaiah, Hosea, and others, that to separate them
would be an act of violence. In their most mag-
nificent character, these pictures of the future are
found in Isa, while in Jer their realization and
spiritualization have progressed farther.

(5) Reformations—While the prophets are char-
acterized by higher religious ideas and ideals, the
religion of the masses was still strongly honey-
combed with cruder and even heathen elemenis.
Yet there were not totally wanting among the
common people those who listened to these pro-
phetic teachers. And esp. in Judaea there were
times when, favored by pious kings, this stricter
and purer party obtained the upper hand. This
was particularly the case under the kings Jehosha-
phat, Hezekiah, and Josiah. During the reigns of
these kings the cultus was reformed. Hezekiah
‘and Josiah attacked particularly the local sanc-
tuaries and their heathen worship (called baméth),
and concentrated the sacrificial cultus in Jerus.
In doing this they were guided by the faithful priests
and prophets and by the ancient Mosaic directions.
Josiah, who, more thoroughly thau others, fought
against the disintegration of the Jeh-cultus, found
his best help in the newly discovered Book of the
Law (Dt). That the sacrifices should be made at


one place had been, as we saw, an old Mosaic
arrangement. However, Moses had foreseen that
local altars would be erected at places where special
revelations had been received from Jeh (Ex 20
24-25). In this way the numerous altars at Bethel,
on Carmel, and elsewhere could claim a certain justi-
fication, only they were not entitled to the same
rank as the central sanctuary, where the Ark of
the Covenant stood and where the sons of Aaron
performed their priestly functions. Dt demands
more stringently that all real sacrificial acts shall
be transferred to this central point. This rule
Josiah carried out strictly. The suppression of the
current sacrifices on high places by the fall of the
Northern Kingdom aided in effecting the collapse
of such shrines, while the sanctuary in Jerus,
because it was delivered from the attack of the
Assyrians, won a still greater recognition.

(6) Destruction of Jerusalem.—However, imme-
diately after the death of Josiah, the apostasy from
Jeh again setin. The people thought that they had
been deserted by Him, and they now more than
before sought refuge in an appeal to a mixture of
gods derived from Babylonia, Egypt, Persia and
elsewhere. Ezk 8 and 9 describe this syncretism
which made itself felt even in the temple-house in
Jerus. The people were incapable of being made
better and were ripe for destruction. The temple,
too, which it was thought by many could not be
taken, was doomed to be destroyed from its very
foundations.

(1) Spiritual purification through the Exile—
A mighty change in the religion of Israel was occa-

sioned by the deportation of the


5. The wealthier and better educated Jews
Babylonian to Babylon and their sojourn there for
Exile a period of about 50 years, and by the


still longer stay of a large portion of
the exiles in this country. The nation was thus
cut off from the roots of the native heathendom in
Pal and also from the external organization of the
theocracy. This brought about a purification and
a spiritualization, which proved to be a great bene-
fit for later times, when the political manifestation
of their religious life had ceased, and the personal
element came more into the foreground. Jeremiah
and Ezekiel emphasize, each in his own way, the
value of this religion for the individual. _A spiritual
communion came into being during the Exile, which
found its bond of union in the word of Jeh, and
which insisted on serving God without a temple
and external sacrificial cultus (which, however, was
still found among the exiles in Egypt). Separated
from their homes, they collected all the more dili-
gently the sacred memories and traditions, to which
Ezekiel’s plans for the temple belong. Their sacred
literature, the Téraéh or Law, the prophetical books,
the historical writings, the Pss, and other literature
were collected, and in this way preparations were
made for the following period.

(2) Relations to the gentile world—The most
earnest classes of Jews, at least, absolutely declined
to have anything to do with the Bab religion and
worship. They saw here the worship of images in
its most repulsive and sensual form, and they also
learned its absolute impotency when the haughty
Chaldaean empire was overthrown. Deutero-
Isaiah (Isa 40-66) shows that the Israelites now
become more conscious than ever of the great value
of their own religion with its Creator of heaven and
earth over against this variegated Pantheon of
changeable gods in forms of wood and metal images.
From this time on, the glory of the Creator of the
universe and His revelation in the works of Nature
were lauded and magnified with a new zeal and
more emphatically than ever before. This same
prophet, however, proclaims also the new fact of the


Israel, Rel. of
Issachar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1540


mission-call of Israel among the nations of the world.
This people, he declares, is to become the instru-
ment of Jeh to make the Gentiles His spiritual
subjects. But as this people in its present condi-
tion is little fit for this great service, he sees with
his prophetic eye a perfect “Servant of Jeh,”’ who
carries out this mission, a personal, visible ‘‘Servant
of Jeh,”’ who establishes the rule of God upon earth,
by becoming, in the first place, for Israel a second
Moses and Joshua, but who then, too, wins over the
heathen nations by this message. He accordingly
takes the place of the prophesied future Son of David.
However, He is not a personal ruler, but carries out
His work through mere spiritual power and in low-
liness and weakness. Indeed, His suffering and
death become the atonement to wipe out the guilt
of His people (Isa 53). We can see in this further
development of the deepening and spiritualization
of the eschatological hopes how strongly the un-
accustomed misfortunes and surroundings of the
exiles had influenced them. Notwithstanding all
their antagonism to the aberrations of the heathen
world, the Israelites yet learned that among the
Gentiles there was also some receptivity for the
higher truths. The worshippers of Jeh felt them-
selves more akin to the Persians than to the Baby-
lonians, as the former served without images a god
which was conceived as one and as an exalted
divine being. Thoughts taken from Parsiism are
also found in the later literature of Israel, although
it is not the case that the idea of Satan was first
taken from this source. The doctrine of the resur-
rection of the dead for the judgment also can be
gained from OT premises. However, the religion
of the Babylonians was not without influence on
that of the Jews. It is indeed out of the question
that it was only during the Exile that the Jews took
over the accounts of the Creation and the Deluge
and others similar to the Bab, as these are found in
Gen 1-11. But the development of the angelology
shows the evidences of later Bab and Pers influences.
And esp. does demonology play a more important
role in post-exilic times than ever before, particularly
about the beginnings of the Christian era. Magic
art, too, entered largely into the faith of later
Judaism, and it can be shown that both of these

came from Bab sources.
(1) Life under the law.—The people which
returned from the Exile was a purified congregation
of Jeh, willing to serve Him. They


6. The aimed to reéstablish the theocracy.
Post-exilic This latter had not, indeed, because
Religion of the loss of the political independence


of the people, the same importance as
formerly, but the religious cultus and the religious
life of the people were all the more stringently ob-
served. The post-exilic period is characterized by
religious legalism. The people were exceedingly
zealous in observing the old ordinances, and tried
to find righteousness in the correctness with which
the Mosaic law was observed, as this was now de-
manded by the teachers of this law. The prophet
of the Exile, Ezekiel, had taken the lead in this par-
ticular, and had laid great emphasis on the formal
ordinances, although in connection with this he
also insisted upon real moral earnestness. But it
was an easy matter that in the course of time an
external work-righteousness and petrifaction of
true religion should arise. Yet the later prophets,
Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi, even if they do
ascribe a greater importance to external matters
than the preéxilic prophets did, show that they are
the spiritual heirs of these earlier seers. They
teach a healthy ethical and sanctifying type of
practical religion and continue to proclaim the hopes
for an expansion and spiritualization of the King-
dom of God. The leaders of these times, Zerub-


babel, Ezra, Nehemiah, show a pronouncedly an-
tagonistic attitude toward the neighboring nations
and also toward those inhabitants of the country
who did not live under the law. However, their
intolerance, esp. toward the Samaritans, can be
readily understood from the principle of the self-
preservation of the people of Jeh.

The law came to be the subject of the most care-
ful study, and the teachers of the law collected, even
to the minutest details, the oral traditions with
reference to its meaning and to the proper observ-
ance of the different demands, so that already before
the time of Christ they were in possession of an ex-
tensive tradition, which was afterward put down in
written form in the Mish. The writing of history
was also carefully cultivated. The Books of Ch
show from what viewpoint they described the past;
the temple and the cultus were the center of interest.
In the same way the psalm-poetry, esp. the temple-
song, flourished again. These later hymns are
pretty and regular, but no longer show the bold
spirit of the older pss. In many cases, older songs
are made use of in these later hymns in a new way.
Of the proverb-literature of the later post-exilic
times, the Wisd of Jesus Sirach, or Ecclus, is an
instructive example. Notwithstanding its great
similarity to the old Prov, the prevailing and lead-
ing points of view have become different in char-
acter. The conception of Wisd has assumed a
specifically Jewish and theocratic character.

(2) Hellenism—But the Jewish exclusiveness
found a dangerous opponent, esp. from the days of
Alexander the Great, in the new Hellenism. Hel-
lenistic language, culture, customs and world-
ideas overwhelmed Pal also. While the Pious
(hdsidhim) all the more anxiously fortified them-
selves behind their ordinances, the worldly-minded
gave themselves up fully to the influence that came
from without. In the first half of the 2d cent. BC
there arose, aS a consequence, a bloody struggle
against the inroads of this heathendom, when
Antiochus Epiphanes undertook to suppress the
religion of the Jews, and when the Asmoneans
began their holy war against him.

(3) Pharisees and Sadducees—But within the
people of Israel itself there were found two parties,
one strict and the other lax in the observance of
the law. The leaders of the former were the highly
popular Pharisees, who, according to their name,
were the “Separatists,”’ separated from the common
and lawless masses. They tried to surpass each
other in their zeal for the traditional ordinances
and pious observances. However, among them it
was also possible to find real piety, although in the
NT records, where they are described as taking a
hostile attitude toward the higher and the highest
form of Divine revelation, they appear at their
worst. Their rivals, the Sadducees, were less
fanatical in their observance of the demands of the
law and more willing to compromise with the spirit
of the times. To this party belonged many of the
more prominent priests. But this party evinced
less real religious life than did the Pharisees.

(4) Essenes.—Then, too, in the time of Jesus,
there were not lacking indications of the influence
of foreign religions, as is apparent in the case of
the Essenes. This party advocated dualistic ideas,
as these are later found among the Mandaeans.

(5) Positive connections between Judaism and
Hellenism.—In_Alexandria a friendly exchange of
ideas between Hellenism and Judaism was brought
about. Here the OT was tr‘ into the Gr. This
tr, known as the Septuagint (LXX), shows as yet
but few signs of the Gr spirit; rather, a pronounced
influence of legal and ritualistic Judaism. On the
other hand, apologetical opposition to Hellenism
appears to a more marked degree, among others,


1541


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Israel, Rel. of
Issachar


in the apocryphal work known as ‘‘Wisd of Solo-
mon,” in which we find a positive defence of wisdom
as the principle of revelation over against the Epi-
curean world-wisdom of Hellenism. In doing this,
the book leans on Platonism and Stoicism. The
hokhmah, or wisdom of the old Jewish lit., has been
Hellenized. Philo goes still farther in adapting
Judaism to Gr taste and to humanism. A more
liberal conception of inspiration also appears in the
reception of contemporaneous literary products
into the OT Canon, even of some books which had
originally been written in the Gr language. The
means observed in adapting national Hebraism to
Hellenistic universalism was the allegorical method
of interpretation, which Philo practised exten-
sively and which then passed over to the Christian
chureh Fathers of the Alexandrian school. This
school constitutes the opposite extreme to the rab-
binical, which clung most tenaciously to the letter
of the sacred texts.

(6) Apocalyptic literature —A unique phenomenon
at the close of the Bib. and in the earliest post-Bib.
period is, finally, the Apocatypric LiTERATURE
(q.v.). Since the days of the Maccabees we find the
custom in certain Jewish circles, by using the old
prophecies and adapting them to the events of the
times, of drawing up a systematic picture of the
future. Theauthorship of these writings was usually
ascribed to one of the ancient saints, e.g. to Enoch,
or Abraham, or Moses, or Elijah, or Solomon, or
Baruch, or Ezra, or others. The model of these
Apocalypses is the Book of Dal, which, on the basis
of older visions, in the times of the oppression by
Antiochus Epiphanes, pictures, in grand simplicity,
the development of the history of the world down
to the final triumph of the Kingdom of God over
the kingdoms of the world.

HI. Conclusion.—When we consider this whole
development, it cannot be denied that the religion
of Israel passed through many changes. It grew
and purified and spiritualized itself out of its own
inherent strength; but it also suffered many re-
lapses, when hindering and corrupting influence
gained the upper hand. But it received from with-
out not only degenerating influences, but_also much
thatinspired and developed its growth. Its original
and native strength also shows itself in this, that
without losing its real character it was able to ap-
propriate to itself elements of truth from without
ae assimilate these.

If we ask what the specific and unique character
of this religion was, by which it was distinguished

from all other religions of antiquity,
1. The and by reason of which it alone was
Living and capable of producing from itself the
Holy God highest revelation in Christ, it must be

answered that its uniqueness lies, most
of all, in its conception of God and of Divine things,
and of God’s relation to the world. The term
“monotheism” but inadequately expresses this
peculiarity; for monotheistic tendencies are found
also in other nations, and in Israel monotheism often
shows itself in a strongly corrupted form. The
advantage of Israel lies in its close contact. with the
living God. From the beginning of Israel’s history
a strictly personal God gave testimony of Himself
to different personalities with a decision which
demanded absolute submission; and, in addition,
this was a holy God, who elevated mankind above
Nature and above themselves, a God who stood in
the most absolute contrast to all that was impure or
sinful, but at the same time was wonderful in His
grace and His mercy to the sinner. This direct
revelation of God to specially chosen bearers of the
Divine truth goes through the entire history of
Israel. Through this factor this religion was being
constantly purified and unfolded further. The


Israelites learned to conceive God in a more spirit-
ual, correct, and universal manner, the more they
advanced in experience and culture. But this God
did not thereby become a mere abstract being,
separated from mankind, as was the case with sa
many nations. He always continued to be a living
God who takes an active partin the livesofmen. We
need notice only those prophets who describe the
greatness of God in the grandest way, such as
Hosea, Isaiah, Deutero-Isaiah, who depict also the
personal life of God in the boldest way through
anthropomorphisms. c

In agreement with this, too, we find that this
religion demands the personal subjection of men to

God, As was the case with all the
2. Relation religions of antiquity, that of the OT,
of Man to too, was originally rather a tribal and
This God a national religion than one of the indi-
vidual. This brought with it the

demand for the external observance of the tribal
customs in the name of religion. However, the
traditional customs and legal ordinances had already
been sifted and purified by Moses. And, as a matter
of necessity, in a religion of such a pronounced
personal nature, the personal relation of the indi-
vidual to God must become more anc more a matter
of importance. This idea became deeper and more
spiritual in the course of time and developed into
a pure love for God. It did not prevent this reli-
gion from becoming petrified, even during the Exile,
when the doctrines and the cultus were most cor-
rectly observed. But the vital kernels found em-
bedded in the revelation of God constantly proved
their power of rejuvenation. And at that very
time when the petrified legalism of Pharisaism
attained its most pronounced development, the
most perfect fruit of this religion came forth from
the old stem of the history of Israel, namely Christ,
who unfolded Judaism and converted it into the
religion of salvation for the entire world.

Lirserature.—Of the lit. on the religion of Israel we
may yet make per cala mention of the following: The
textbooks on OT Theology by Oehler, 1891 (also ET),
of Dillmann, 1895. The Kuenen-Wellhausen school is
Peleg re by Kuenen, De Godsdienst van Israel, 1869
{also ET); Stade, Biblische Theologie des AT, 1905;
Marti, Theologie des AT, 1903; Smend, Lehrbuch der AT
Religionsgeschichte, 1899; cf also the works of Robertson
Smith, esp. his lectures on The Religion of the Semites.
Against this radical school, see, in addition to the work
of Dillmann, James Robertson, Early Religion _of Israel,
1893. On thesubject of Semitism in general, S. I. Curtiss,
Ursemitische Religion im Volksleben des heutigen Orients,
1903 (also ET); Baethgen, Beitrdge zur, semitischen Reli-
gionsgeschichte, 1880; M. J. Lagrange, Etudes sur les reli-
gions sémitiques, 1905. The relation of Israel to the Assyr
and Bab religions is discussed by Hugo Winckler in several
works; cf also Fritz Hommel, Alttestamentliche Ueberlie-
ferungen, 1897 (also ET); Sayce, The Higher Criticism and
the Verdict of the Monuments, 1895; Alfred Jeremias, Das
AT im Lichte des alten Orients, 1906; a good brief summary
is found in Sellin, Die AT Religion im Rahmen der andern
Altorientalischen, 1908. Full details are givenin Kautzsch,
“ Religion of Israel," in HDB, extra vol, 1904. For the
last centuries before Christ see particularly, Schiirer,
Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes_im Zeitalter Jesu Christi,
1907 (also ET). The modern Jewish standpoint is repre-
sented by Montefiore, Lectures on the Origin and Growth
of Religion as Illustrated by the History of the Ancient
Hebrews, 1892.

é C. von ORELLI

ISRAELITE, iz’ri-el-it, ISRAELITISH, iz'ra-
el-it-ish: Belonging to the tribes of Isrart (q.v.).
Occurs 4 t in the NT: of Nathanael (Jn 1 47);
used by Paul (Rom 9 4; 11.1; 2 Cor 11 22).


ISSACHAR, is’a-kér CUDWW, yissals*]khar;
LXX, Swete ‘Iocaydp, Issachdr; Tisch., Isséchar,
so also in the NT, Treg. and WH):

(1) The 9th son of Jacob, the 5th borne to him
by Leah (Gen 30 17f). His birth is in this passage
connected with the strange story of Reuben and
his mandrakes, and the name given him is ap-
parently conceived as derived from ’tsh sakhar, “‘a


Issachar
Ittai


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1542


hired workman.’ There is a play upon the name
in this sense in Gen 49 15, ‘He bowed his shoulder
to bear, and became a servant under

1. The taskwork.” Wellhausen (Test der Bich.
Name Sam., 95) thinks that the second ele-
ment of the name may dencte a deity;
and Sokar, an Egyp god, has been suggested. The
name in that case would mean “worshipper of Sokar.”’
Practically nothing is preserved of the personal his-
tory of this patriarch beyond his share in the common
actions of the sons of Jacob. Four sons were born
to him before Jacob’s family removed to Egypt
(Gen 46 13). In that land he died and was buried.
At Sinai the tribe numbered 54,000 men of war
over 20 years of age (Nu 1 29). At the end of the
wanderings the numbers had grown to


2. The 64,300 (Nu 26 25). In the days of
Tribe David, the Chronicler puts the figures

at 87,000 (1 Ch 7 5). See Num-
BERS. The place of Issachar in the desert-march


was with the standard of the tribe of Judah (along
with Zebulun) on the E. side of the tabernacle (Nu
2 5), this group forming the van of the host (10
14f). The rabbis say that this standard was of
3 colors, sardine, topaz and carbuncle, on which
were inscribed the names of the 3 tribes, bearing
the figure of a lion’s whelp (Tg, pseudo. Jon. on Nu
2 3). The captain of the tribe was Nethanel ben-
Zuar (Nu 1 8, etc). Later this place was held
by Igal ben-Joseph, the tribal representative among
the spies (Nu 13 7). The prince chosen from
Issachar to assist in the division of the land was
Paltiel ben-Azzan (34 26). The position of I. at
the strange ceremony near Shechem was on Mt.
Gerizim, “‘to bless the people’ (Dt 27 12).
Sixteen cities of Issachar are mentioned in Josh
19 17 ff, but the only indications of boundaries are
Tabor in the N. and Jordan in the E.
3. The We gather elsewhere that the territory
Tribal of this tribe marched on the N. with
Territory Zebulun and Naphtali (19 11.33); on
the W. with Manassch and possibly
Asher (17 10); and on the 8. with Manasseh (ver
11). It does not seem to have had any point of
contact with the sea. The portion of Issachar,
therefore, included the plain of Esdraelon, Tabor,
the hill of Moreh, and the slopes E. to the Jordan.
The fortresses along the 8. edge of the plain were
held by Manasseh. Tola, a man of Issachar, held
Shamir, a stronghold in Mt. Ephraim (Jgs 10 1).
To Manasseh was given Beth-shean with her
“towns” (Josh 17 11). No reliable line can be
drawn for the S. border. The district thus indi-
cated was small; but it embraced some of the most
fruitful land in Pal. By the very riches of the soil
Issachar was tempted. “He saw a resting-place
that it was good, and the land that it was pleasant;
and he bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a
servant under taskwork” (Gen 49 15). ‘The
mountain” in Dt 33 19 may possibly be Tabor,
on which, most likely, there was an ancient sanc-
tuary and place of pilgrimage. This would _cer-
tainly be associated with a market, in which Issa-
char and Zebulun, the adjoining tribes, would be
able to enrich themselves by trade with the pil-
grims from afar. Issachar took part in the battle
with Sisera (Jgs 5 15). To Israel Issachar gave
one judge, Tola (Jgs 10 1), and two kings, Baasha
and his son (1 K 16 27, etc).
Of the 200 “heads” of the men of Issachar who
came to David at Hebron it is said that they were
“men that had understanding of the
4. Men of times, to know what Israel ought to
Issachar do” (1 Ch 12 32). According to the
Tg, this meant that they knew how to
ascertain the periods of the sun and moon, the
intercalation of months, the dates of solemn feasts,


and could interpret the signs of the times. A com-
pany from Issachar came to the celebration of the
Passover when it was restored by Hezekiah (2 Ch
30 18). Issachar has a portion assigned to him
in Ezekiel’s ideal division of the land (48 25); and
he appears also in the list in Rev (7 7).

(2) A Korahite doorkeeper, the 7th son of Obed-
edom (1 Ch 26 5). W. Ewine


ISSHIAH, is-shi’a (W7W , yishshiyahd, “Jeh
exists”; AV Ishiah):

(1) Mentioned among David’s heroes, a great-
grandson of Tola (1 Ch 7 3).

(2) Mentioned among the men who came to
David at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 6; AV “Jesiah’’).

(3) A member of the priesthood of the house of
Rehabiah (1 Ch 24 21; AV “Jesiah’’).

(4) Another Levitical priest of the house of
Uzziel (1 Ch 23 20; 24 25).


ISSHIJAH, is-shi’ja (7"W", yishshiyah, “Jeh
lends”; AV Ishijah): A man of the household of
Harim, named among those who, at Ezra’s command,
were induced to put away their “strange wives’’


(Ezr 10 31). Also called ‘“Aseas” (1 Esd 9 32).


ISSUE, ish’t:

(1) (M240, maledheth, O'NENT, ce’éea’zm;
onéppo, spérma, ‘“‘seed’’): Offspring, descendants
(Gen 48 6; Isa 22 24; Mt 22 25 AV).

(2) (YBN, zirmah; RB, yaca’ [vb]; piers,
rhisis): A gushing of fluid (semen, Ezk 23 20;
water, 47 8; blood, Lk 8 48). See next article.


ISSUE (OF BLOOD) (2°, zdbh, ANT, zubh;
pots, rhisis, atudppoos, haimérrhoos): When used
as a description of a bodily affection the word
signifies: (1) A discharge, the consequence of un-
cleanness and sin (Lev 15 2ff; Nu 5 2). As
such it was one of the judgments which were to
afflict the family of Joab (2 S 3 29); (2) a hemor-
rhage, either natural (Lev 12 7, where the word
used is makér, lit. a “fountain’’), or the consequence
of disease (Mt 9 20; Mk 6 25; Lk 8 48).


ISSUES, ish’iz (MINIM, taca’ath, lit. “out-
goings’): (1) Ways of escape (Ps 68 20 AV);
(2) free moral choices (Prov 4 23).

ISTALCURUS, is-tal-ki’rus (Iotadkoipos, [s-
talkotiros): 1 Esd 8 40, corresponding to Zabbud
in Ezr 8 14. In Swete’s text the name is Istakal-
kos.

ISUAH, is’t-a. See Isuvau.

ISUI, is’ti-i.


ISVAH, is’va.


See Isuv1,
See Isuvan.


ITALA, it’a-la, VERSION. See Latin VERSION,
Tue OLD; VULGATE.


ITALIAN, i-tal’yan, BAND. See Bano.


ITALY, it’a-li (Iradta, Jialia): At first confined
as a name to the extreme southern part of the
Italian peninsula in the region now called Calabria,
whence its application was gradually extended.
In Gr usage of the 5th cent. BC, the name was
applied to the coasts as far as Metapontum and
Posidonia, being synonymous with Oenotria. The
Oenotrians are represented as having assumed the
name of Italians (Itali) from a legendary ruler
Italus (Dionysius, 1.12.35; Vergil, Aen. 1.583). The
extension of Rom authority seems to have given


1543


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Issachar
Ittai


this name an ever-widening application, since it was
used to designate their allies generally. As early
as the time of Polybius the name Italy was some-
times employed as an appellation for all the country
between the two seas (Tyrrhenian and Adriatic)
and from the foot of the Alps to the Sicilian Straits
(Polyb. 1.6; ii.14; 11.39.54), although Cisalpine
Gaul was not placed on a footing of complete
equality with the peninsula as regards administra-
tion until shortly after the death of Julius Caesar.
From the time of Augustus the term was used in
pepateally its modern sense (Nissen, Italische

andeskunde, I, 57-87).

The name Italy occurs 3tin the NT: Acts 18 2,
Aquila “lately come from Italy,’’ because of the
expulsion of the Jews from Rome under Claudius;
Acts 27 1, the decision that Paul be sent to Italy;
He 13 24, salutation from those “of Italy.’ The
adj. form is found in the appellation, ‘Italian band”
(cohors Italica, Acts 10 1).

The history of ancient Italy, in so far as it falls
within the scope of the present work, is treated
under Rome (q.v.). GrorcE H. ALLEN


ITCH (O17 ,", hares; Yopa, psdra): Only in Dt 28
27, where it probably refers to the parasitic skin
disease of that name which is very common in Pal.
It is due to a small mite, Sarcoptes scabiei, which
makes burrows in the skin and somctimes causes
extensive crusts or scabs, attended with a severe
itching. It is very easily communicated from per-
son to person by contact, and can be cured only by
destruction of the parasite. This disease disquali-
fied its victims for the priesthood (Lev 21 20).


ITHAT, ith’a-i.


ITHAMAR, ith’a-mar (Wat, ‘tthamar, “land”
or “island of palms’: Gesenius; or ‘father of
Tamar,” "&, ’%, being perhaps for "28, abhi: Cook
in EB—though both derivations are uncertain):
The 4th son of Aaron (Ex 6 23; 28 1; 1 Ch 6 3),
Eleazar being the 3d, Nadab and Abihu the 1st and
2d. While Nadab and Abihu were prematurely
cut off for offering strange fire before the Lord
(Lev 10 1.2; Nu 3 4; 26 61), and Eleazar was
appointed chief of the tribe of Levi (Ex 6 23.25)
and ultimately succeeded Aaron (Ex 28 1), Ithamar
was made the treasurer of the offerings for the
Tabernacle (Ex 38 21), and superintendent of the
Gershonites and Merarites in the service of the
Tabernacle (Nu 4 28.33). In the time of Eli the
high-priesthood had come to be in his family, but
how, and whether before Eli’s day or first in Eli’s
person, is not told and need not be conjectured.
W.R. Smith in ZB (art. “Eli’’), on the strength of
1S 2 27.28, holds that the priesthood was origi-
nally in Eli’s line; but the words ‘the house of thy
father’ do not necessarily mean only the house
of Ithamar, but may, and most probably do, refer
to Aaron and his descendants, of whom Ithamar
was one. Nor does the cutting off of Eli’s family
from the priesthood and the setting in their place
of “a faithful priest,’’ who should do everything
according to Jeh’s will and walk before Jeh’s
anointed forever, find its complete fulfilment in the
deposition of Abiathar or Ahimelech, his son, and
the installation of Zadok in the time of Solomon
(1 K 2 35; 1 Ch 29 22; see Zapox). A de-
scendant of Ithamar, Daniel by name, is mentioned
among the exiles who returned from Babylon (Ezr
8 2). T. WHITELAW


ITHIEL, ith’i-el (OXMMN , Uhv él, “God is’’):

(1) A son of Jeshaiah of the tribe of Benjamin,
mentioned among the inhabitants of Jerus in Nehe-
miah’s day (Neh 11 7).


See Irrar.


(2) The name is perhaps also found in the oracle
of Agur (Prov 30 1). See IrHimn anp Ucat.


ITHIEL AND UCAL (2x) SS°ON, ‘zthi’al
w°ukhal): Names of the two men to whom Agur
the son of Jakeh spoke his words (Prov 30 1).
The purport of introducing these persons is strange
and obscure; the margin proposes therefore, by the
use of a different pointing, to read the verse, ‘“The
man said, I have wearied myself, O God, I have
wearied myself, O God, and am consumed,” thus
doing away with the proper hames; a reading which
corresponds not inaptly with the tone of the suc-
ceeding verses. See Acur; Proverss, Book or,
II, 6. Joun FraNKLIN GENUNG


ITHLAH, ith’la (M2, yithlah; AV Jethlah):
An unidentified town in the territory of Dan, named
with Aijalon and Elon (Josh 19 42).


ITHMAH, ith’ma (WAM, yithmah, “purity’’):
A citizen of the country of the Moabites, David’s


deadly enemies, yet mentioned as one of the king’s
heroes (1 Ch 11 46).


ITHNAN, ith’nan (]35", yithnan): A town in
the S. of Judah mentioned along with Hazor and
Ziph (Josh 15 23), apparently the ‘“Ethnan” of Je-
rome (Onom 118 13). Not identified.


_ ITHRA, ith’ra (SM, yithra’, “abundance”):
The father of Amasa, commanding general in the
rebel army of Absalom. It seems that his mother
was Abigail, a sister or half-sister of King David
(1 Ch 2 17). She is called the sister of Zeruiah,
Joab’s mother (2 § 17 25). In this same passage
Ithra is called an “Israelite,”’ but in 1 Ch 2 17;
1 K 2 5.32, we read: ‘Jether the Ishmaelite.”


ITHRAN, ith’ran (}4N", yithran, “excellent’’):

(1) A descendant of Seir the Horite, son of Di-
shon (Gen 36 26; 1 Ch 1 41).

(2) One of the sons of Zophah of the tribe of Asher
(1 Ch 7 37).


ITHREAM, ith’ré-am (D975, yithram, “resi-
due of the people’): The 6th son born to David


at Hebron. His mother’s name was Eglah (2 8 3
5; 1 Ch 3 3).


ITHRITE, ith’rit (NM, yithri, “excellence,”
‘“‘preéminence’’): A family in Israel, whose home
was Kiriath-jearim (1 Ch 2 53). Among the 37
heroes of David, two are mentioned who belonged
to this family, Ira and Gareb (2 8 23 38; 1 Ch
11 40). ;


ITTAH-KAZIN, it-a-ka’zin (PEP WAY, ‘wttah
kagin): Josh 19 13 AV for Eth-kazin. Ittah is |
correctly Eth with Hé locale, meaning “toward
Eth.”


ITTAI, it’4-1, it’] CRS, 'ittay, SN, ithay):

(1) A Gittite or native of Gath, one of David’s
chief captains and most faithful friends during the
rebellion of Absalom (2 § 16 11-22; 18 2.4.12).
The narrative reveals David’s chivalrous and un-
selfish spirit in time of trouble, as well as the most
self-sacrificing loyalty on the part of Ittai. He
seems to have but recently left his native city and
joined David’s army through personal attachment
to the king. David rapidly promoted him. Hear-
ing of Absalom’s rebellion and approach to Jerus,
he flees with David. The latter remonstrates,
urges him to go back and join Absalom, as he is a
foreigner and in exile. His interests are in the


Ituraea
Jaare-oregim


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1544


capital and with the king; there is no reason why
he should be a fugitive aud perhaps suffer the loss
of everything; it would be better for him, with his
band of men, to put himself and them at the service
of Absalom, the new king. ‘Mercy and truth be
with thee,” says David in his magnanimity. Ittai,
with a double oath, absolutely refuses to go back,
but will stand by David until the last. Remon-
strance being useless, the monarch orders him
across the river, doubtless glad that he had such a
doughty warrior and faithful friend by his side.
On mustering his hosts to meet Absalom, David
makes Ittai a chief captain with the intrepid Joab
and Abishai. He doubtless did his part in the
battle, and as nothing more is said of him it is pos-
sible that he fell in the fight.
(2) A Benjamite, one of David’s 30 mighty men
(2 8 23 29; 1 Ch il 31, “Ithai’’).
J. J. ReEEvE
ITURAEA, it-i-ré@’a (Irovpala, Iiouraia): The
term occurs only once in Scripture, in the definition
of Philip’s territory: tés Itouratas kai


1. The Trachonitidos chéras, which AV ren-
Word an ders: “‘of Ituraea and of the region of
Adjective Trachonitis,” and RV: ‘the region


of Ituraea and Trachonitis” (Lk 3 1).
Sir W. M. Ramsay has given reasons for the belief
that this word was certainly never used as a noun
by any writer before the time of Eusebius (Hzpos,
1894, IX, 51 ff, 143 ff, 288 ff). It must be taken
as an adj. indicating the country occupied by the
Ituraeans.
The descent of the Ituraeans must probably be
traced to Jetur, son of Ishmael (Gen 25 15), whose
progeny were clearly numbered among
2. The the Arabian nomads. According to
Ituraeans Eupolemus (c 150 BC), quoted by
Eusebius (Praep. Evang. IX, 30), they
were associated with the Nabataeans, Moabites
and Ammonites against whom David warred on the
E. of the Jordan. They are often mentioned by
Lat writers; their skill in archery seems greatly to
have impressed the Romans. They were skilful
archers (Caesar, Bell. Afr. 20); a lawless (Strabo,
xvi.2.10) and predatory people (Cicero, Philipp.
ii.112). In the Lat inscriptions Ituracan soldiers
have Syrian names (HJP, I, ii, 326). They would
therefore be the most northerly of the confederates
opposed to David (supra), and their country may
naturally be sought in the neighbor-


3. Indica- hood of Mt. Hermon. There is
tions of nothing to show when they moved
Their from the desert, to this district. Aris-
Territory tobulus made war against the Itu-


raeans, compelled many of them to be
circumcised, and added a great part of their terri-
tory to Judaea, 140 BC (Ant, XII, xi, 3). Dio
Cassius calls Lysanias “king of the IJturaeans’’
(xlix.32), and from him Zenodorus leased land which
included Ulatha and Paneas, 25 BC. The capital
of Lysanias was Chalcis, and he ruled over the land
from Damascus to the sea. Jos speaks of Soemus
as a tetrarch in Lebanon (Vita, 11); while Tacitus
calls him governor of the Ituraeans (Ann. xii.23).
The country of Zenodorus, lying between Tracho-


nitis and Galilee, and including Paneas and Ulatha, |


Augustus bestowed on Herod, 20 BC (Ant, XV,
x, 3). In defining the tetrarchy of Philip, Jos names
Batanea, Trachonitis and Auranitis, but says
nothing of the Ituraeans (Ant, XVII, xi, 4; BJ,
ll, vi, 3). Paneas and Ulatha were doubtless in.
cluded, and this may have been Ituraean territory
(LJP, I, ti, 333). It seems probable, therefore,
that the Ituraeans dwelt mainly in the mountains,
and in the broad valley of Coele-Syria; but they
may also have oecupied the district to the 8.E. of
Hermon, the modern Jédar. It is not possible to


define more closely the Ituraean country; indeed
it is not clear whether St. Luke intended to indicate
two separate parts of the dominion of Philip, or
used names which to some extent overlapped.

It has been suggested that the name Jédiur may
be derived from the Heb "07, y*tur, and so be
equivalent to Ituraea. But the derivation is im-
possible. W. Ewina


IVAH, i’va. See Ivvag.


IVORY, i'vé-ri ({1] JW, shen, “tooth” [tr4 “ivory,”
1 K 10 18; 22 39; 2 Ch 917; Ps 46 8; Cant
514; 7 4: Esk 276.15; Am3 15; 6 4]; [2]
DATIW, shenhabbim; LXX d8évres. Aehdvrevor,
odéntes elephdntinoi, “elephants’ teeth” [I K 10
22; 2 Ch 9 211; [8] éehdvrivos, elephdntinos, “of
ivory” [Rev. 18 12]): Shén occurs often, meaning
“tooth” of man or beast. In the passages cited
it is tr? in EV “ivory” (cf ‘‘crag,” 15 14 4.5;
“cliff,” Job 39 28 bis; ‘“flesh-hook of three teeth,’
IS 2 13). Shenhabbim is thought to be a con-
tracted form of shen ha-ibbim, i.e. ha, the art., and
4bbim, pl. of ’ibbah or *ibba’; cf Egyp ab, ebu, ‘‘ele-
phant,” and cf Lat ebur, “ivory’’ (see Liddell and
Scott, s.v. @dgas). On the other hand, it may be
a, question whether bim is not a sing. form connected
with the Arab. fil, “elephant.” If the word for
“elephant” is not contained in shenhabbim, it occurs
nowhere in the Heb Bible.

Ivory was probably ob-
tained, as now, mainly from
the African elephant. It
was rare and expensive.
It is mentioned in connec-
tion with the magnificence
of Solomon (1 K 10 18.22),
being brought by the ships
of Tarshish (2 Ch 9 17.21).
An “ivory house” of Ahab
is mentioned in 1 K 22
39. It is mentioned among the luxuries of Israel
in the denunciations of Amos (3 15; 6 4). It
occurs in the figurative language of Ps 45 8; Cant
5 14; 74. It is used for ornamentation of the
ships of the Tyrians (Ezk 27 6), who obtain it with
ebony through the men of Dedan (ver 15). It is
among the merchandise of Babylon (Rev 18 12).

We do not learn of the use of elephants in war
until a few centuries before the Christian era. In
I Macc 8 6, there is a reference to the defeat of
Antiochus the Great, “having an hundred and
twenty elephants,” by Scipio Africanus in 190 BC.
1 Mace 1 17 speaks of the invasion of Egypt by
Antiochus Epiphanes with an army in which there
were elephants. 1 Macc 6 28-47 has a detailed
account of a battle between Antiochus Eupator and
Judas Maccabaens at Bethsura (Beth-zur), There
were 32 elephants. Upon the “beasts”? (@npla,
théria) there were “‘strong towers of wood’’; “There
were also upon every one two and thirty strong
men, that fought upon them, beside the Indian that
ruled him.”

In Job 40 15, AVm has for “behemoth,’’ “the
elephant, as some think.” ALFRED Ety Day


IVORY, TOWER OF (jm 539%, mighdal ha-
shén): In Cant 7 4 the neck of Shulammite is com-
pared in whiteness and stateliness to a (or the)
tower of ivory. The def. art. may suggest that the
comparison is with some actual tower in or near
Jerus; but more probably the language is simply
a figure.


IVVAH, iv’a (AY, ‘iwwah; ’AB&, Abd [= Add],
Aud, Aud, 2 K 18 34, Oi800, Oudot, 2 K 19 13,


Elephants’ Tusks Brought
to Thothmes III.


1545


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ituraea
Jaare-oregim


apparently due to a misreading): The name is
wanting in the MT and LXX of Isa 36 19.

Ivvah was a eity apparently conquered by the
Assyrians, and is mentioned by them, in the vs
quoted, with Hamath and Arpad, Sepharvaim and
Hena. It has been assimilated with the Avva of
2 K 17 24 ag one of the places whence Sargon
brought captives to Samaria, and identified with
Hit on the Euphrates, between Anah and Rama-
dieh, but this seems improbable, as is also the sug-
gestion that it is Emma, the modern ‘Imm, between
Antioeh and Aleppo. Hommel (Expos T, April,
1898, 330) upholds the view that Hena and Ivvah,
or, as he prefers to read, Avvah, are not places at
all, but the names of the two chief gods of Hamath,
Arpad and Sepharvaim. This would be eonsistent
with 2 K 18 34; but 19 13: ‘Where is the king
.... of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah?” and
17 31, where the gods of Sepharvaim are stated to
be Adrammeleeh and Anammeleeh, raise serious
difficulties. In all probability, the identification of
Ivvah depends upon the eorreet loealization of the
twofold Sepharvaim, of whieh Hena and Ivvah
may have been the names. The identifieation of
Sepharvaim with the Bab Sip(p)ar is now praeti-
cally abandoned. See SEPHARVAIM.

T. G. Pincurs

IVY, i/vi (ktoeds, kissds): The only mention of
the word in all the sacred writings is in 2 Mace
6 7 in connection with the oppression of the Jews
by Antiochus Epiphanes: ‘On the day of the king’s
birth every month they were brought by bitter
constraint to eat of the saerifiees; and when the
feast of Baechus (Dionysus) was kept, the Jews
were compelled to go in procession to Dionysus,
carrying ivy,” this plant (Hedera helix) being sacred
to the Gr god of wine and of the eulture of the vine
(ef Eur. Bacchae, passim). It was of ivy or of
pine that the “corruptible crown” of the famous
Isthmian games was made (1 Cor 9 25).

: J. HurcHison
TVAR, é-yir’. See Iyvar.


IYE-ABARIM, i-yé-ab’a-rim (OMIZIT MY, ‘iyé
hé-‘ibhartm, “the heaps of the Abarim’; AV
Tje-abarim; in Nu 21 11 LXX reads B, Kadyhel,
Chalglet): A place in the journeyings of Israel
named after Oboth, said to be “in the wilderness
which is before Moab, toward the sunrising’ (Nu
21 11), “in the border of Moab” (33 44). The
indieations of position here given are not sufficient
to guide to any identification, and, so far, nothing
has been discovered in the distriet to help us.
Called simply ‘Iyim” (AV “Tim”) in Nu 33 45.


TYIM, i’yim (DY, ‘tytm, “‘heaps’’—the form of
which, "9, ‘tyé, is the constr.):

(1) A short form of the name Iye-abarim (Nu
33 45).


JAAKAN, ja’a-kan.


JAAKOBAH, ja-a-ko’ba, ja-ak’o-ba (MPI,
ya‘dkobhah, for meaning ef Jacos, I, 1, 2): 1 Ch
4 36, a Simeonite prince.


JAALA, ja’a-la, j3-a’la (Nd, ya‘dla’, meaning
unknown, Neh 7 58) and JAALAH (71293, ya-
‘dlah, “mountain goat” [?], Ezr 2 56): The name


of a family of returned exiles, “ehildren of Solomon’s
servants” =“Jeeli”’ in 1 Esd 5 33.


JAALAM, ja’a-lam: AV for Jauam (q.v.).


See BEEROTH-BENE-JAAKAN.


(2) A town in the territory of Judah (Josh 15
29; EV wrongly “Iim’’). It lay in the extreme
ar ‘toward the border of Edom.” It is not iden-
tified. :


TYYAR, é-yir’ (WS, ’iydr; *Idp, Idr): The 2d
month of the Jewish year, corresponding to May.
It is not mentioned in the Bible. See CaLenpar.


IZEHAR, iz’é-hiar, i’zé-har (Nu 3 19 AV).
IzHaR.


IZHAR, iz/har (WIE, yichar, “the shining one”):

(1) The father of Korah (Nu 16 1), deseended
from a Kohathite Levite of this name, whose de-
scendants formed a family, in the tribe of Levi (Ex
6 18.21; Nu 3 19.27; 1 Ch 6 18.38).

(2) A descendant of Judah, whose mother’s
name was Helah. ARVm gives the name Zohar
(1 Ch 4 7).


IZHARITES, iz’har-its ("WX., yichdri): The
deseendants of Izhar, son of Kohath, and grandson
of Levi (Nu 3 19.27). In David's reign some of
these were ‘‘over the treasures of the house of Jeh”’
(1 Ch 26 23), others “were for the outward busi-
ness over Israel, for officers and judges’’ (ib, ver 29).


IZLIAH, iz-li’a yen, yizlv’ah, “Jeh delivers’’;
AV JEZLIAH): A son of Elpaal, of the tribe of
Benjamin (1 Ch 8 18).


IZRAHIAH, iz-ra-hi’a (TTI, yizrahyah, “Teh
appears, or shines’’):

(1) A descendant of Issachar, grandson of Tola,
only son of Uzzi (1 Ch 7 3).

(2) The leader of the singing at the purification
of the people, on the oeeasion of Nehemiah’s refor-
mation; here rendered ‘“‘Jezrahiah” (Neh 12 42).


IZRAHITE, iz’ra-hit (TM, yierah, ‘ising,
shining’): Shamhuth, the captain of the 5th
monthly course (1 Ch 27 8), is called an ‘‘Tzra-
hite.”’” The name may be derived from the town
or family of Izrah, but more likely is a eorrup-
tion ee the word ‘“Zerahite,’’ deseendant of Zerah of
Judah.


See


IZRI, iz‘ri ("E", yicri, “creator,” ‘“former’’):
A man of the “sons of Jeduthun,” leader of the
fourth band of musicians, who served in the sane-
tuary (1 Ch 26 11). Identical with Zeri (ver 3).


IZZIAH, iz-i’a (M49, yizeiyah, “Jeh unites”;
AV Jeziah): One of the faithful Jews who put
away their foreign wives. He belonged to the
family of Parosh (Ezr 10 25; 1 Esd 9 26, “Ted-
dias’’).


JAANAI, ja’a-ni: AV for Janat (q.v.).


JAAR, jaar (122, ya‘ar, “forest’”’ or “wood”’):
Is only once taken as a proper name (Ps 132 6
RVm), “We found it in the field of Jaar.”” It may
be a shortened form of the name Kiriath-jearim,
where the ark had rested 20 years. See Kirrats-
JEARIM.


JAARE-OREGIM, ja’a-ré-6r'Gjim, -ér’e-gim
(DAN WIT), ya‘dré’Gr'ghim): In2 8 21 19, given
as the name of a Bethlehemite, father of Elhanan,
who is said to have slain Goliath the Gittite (cf


Jaareshiah


Jechin aad Boaz THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1546


1§ 17). The name is not' likely to be a man’s
name; the second part means “weavers” and occurs
also as the last word of the verse in the MT, so it is
probably a scribal error here due to repetition. The
first part is taken to be (1) an error for 97, ya‘ir
(see JarR), which is to be read in the || section in
1 Ch 20 5; (2) in2 S 23 24 Elhanan is the son of
Dodo, also a Bethlehemite, and Klostermann would
read here Dodai as the name of Elhanan’s father. -
Davin Francis RoBERTS
JAARESHIAH, ja-ar-é-shi’a (WWII1, ya‘dresh-
yah, meaning unknown): In 1 Ch 8 27, a Benja-
mite, “son” of Jeroham. AV has “Jaresiah.”’
JAASAI, ja’a-si, JAASAU, ja’a-sé. See Jaasu.
JAASIEL, ja-a’si-el Ox wy, ya‘dst’ al, “God
makes” [?]): In 1 Ch 11 47, a Mezobaite, one of
“the mighty men of the armies,” and probably=
“Jaasiel” of 1 Ch 27 21, ‘the son of Abner,’ and
a Benjamite tribal prince of David’s. AV ‘‘Jasiel.”


JAASU, j4’a-stii (RV and Kethibh, Mwy, ya‘dst,
meaning uncertain); JAASAI(RVm and Keré, WY,
ya‘dsdy), and JAASAU (AV): In Ezr 10 37, one of
those who had married foreign wives. LXX tr* the


consonantal text as a vb., kat epoiésan, “and they
did.’ 1 Esd 9 34 has ‘‘Eliasis.”


JAAZANIAH, ja-az-a-ni’a (INTS7, ya’dzan-
yaha, in 2 IX 26 23; Ezk 8 11; TQINT, ya’dzan-
yah, in Jer 36 3; Ezk 11 1, “Jeh hears”):

(1) In 2 K 26 23, “son of the Maacathite,”’ and
one of the Judaean “captains of the forces’ who
joined Gedaliah, the Bab governor appointed by
Nebuchadrezzar over Judah, at Mizpah. He is the
“Jezaniah” of Jer 40 8; 42 1. Though not men-
tioned by name, he was presumably one of those
captains who joined Johanan in his attack on Ish-
mael after the latter had slain Gedaliah (Jer 41 11-
18). He is also the same as Azariah of Jer 43 2, a
name read by LXX B in 42 1 also. Jer 43 5
relates how Johanan and his allies, Jaazaniah(=
Azariah) among them, left Judah with the remnant,
and took up their abode in Egypt.

(2) In Jer 36 3, son of Jeremiah (not the prophet),
and a chief of the Rechabite clansmen from whose
“staunch adherence to the precepts of their ances-
tor” Jeremiah ‘points a lesson for his own country-
men’? (Driver, Jer, 215).

(3) In Ezk 8 11, son of Shaphan, and one of the
seventy men of the elders of Israel whom Ezekiel
saw in a vision of Jerus offering incense to idols.

(4) In Ezk 11 1, son of Azzur, and one of the
25 men whom Ezekiel saw in his vision of Jerus, at
the E. door of the Lord’s house, and against whose
iniquity he was commanded to prophesy (11 1-13).

Davip Francis Rosperts

JAAZER, ja’a-zér (“°TD2, ya‘dzér). See Jazun.


JAAZIAH, ja-a-zi’a (UTS2, ya'dziyaha, “Jeh
strengthens”): In 1 Ch 24 26.27, a Levite, “son”
of Merari. But the MT is corrupt. LXX B reads
Ofed (Ozeid), which some take to suggest Uzziah
(cf 27 25); see Curtis, Crit. and Exeget, Comm. on
the Books of Ch, 274-75; Kittel, ad loc.


JAAZIEL, ja-a’zi-cl ONT, yade?ad, “God
strengthens’): In 1 Ch 15 18, a Levite, one of the
musicians appointed to play upon instruments at
the bringing up of the ark by David. Kittel and
Curtis, following LXX ’OfejA (Ozetél), read “Uz-
ziel,”’ the name they adopt for Aziel in ver 20, and
for Jeiel in 16 5.


JABAL, ja’bal (227, yabhal, meaning uncertain):
In Gen 4 20, a son of Lamech by Adah. He is
called ‘the father of those who dwell in tents and
[with] herds. 80 Gunkel, Gen’, 52, who says that
the corresponding word in Arab. means “the herds-
man who tends the camels.” Skinner, Gen, 120, says
that both Jabal and Jubal suggest Sah, yobhal, which
in Phoen and Heb “means primarily ‘ram,’ then
‘ram’s horn’ as a musical instrument, and finally
“oyous music’ (in the designation of the year of
Jubilee).”” See also Skinner, Gen, 103, on the sup-
posed connection in meaning with Abel.

Davin Francis Roserts

JABBOK, jab’ok (p33, yabbok, “luxuriant
river’): A stream in Hastern Pal first named in
the history of Jacob, as crossed by the patriarch
on his return from Paddan-aram, after leaving
Mahanaim (Gen 32 22 ff). On the bank of this


The Jabbok (Nahr ez-Zerka).
river he had his strange conflict with an unknown
antagonist. The Jabbok was the northern bound-
ary of the territory of Sihon the Amorite (Nu 21
24). It is also named as the border of Ammon (Dt
3 16). It is now called Nahr ez-Zerkd, ‘‘river of
blue,” referring to the clear blue color of its water.
It rises near to ‘Ammdn—Rabhath Ammon—and
makes a wide circuit, flowing first to the E., then
to the N.W., until it is joined by the stream from
Wady Jerash, at which point it turns westward, and
flows, with many windings, to the Jordan, the
confluence being just N. of ed-Damiyeh. It drains
a wider area than any other stream E. of the Jordan,
except the Yarmik. The bed of the river is in a
deep gorge with steep, and in many places precipi-
tous, banks. It is a great cleft, cutting the land of
Gilead in two. It is lined along its course by a
Inxuriant growth of oleander which, in season,
lights up the valley with brilliant color. The length
of the stream, taking no account of its innumerable
windings, is about 60 miles. The mouth of the
river has changed its position from time to time.
In the lower reaches the vegetation is tropical.
The river is fordable at many points, save when in
full flood. The particular ford referred to in Gen
32 cannot now be identified. W. Ewine


JABESH, ja’besh (2, yabhesh): A short form
of JABESH-GILEAD: (q.v.).


JABESH-GILEAD, ja’besh-gil’é-ad (I9>a wa),
yabhésh gil‘ddh; or simply W721, yabhish, “dry”):
A city E. of the Jordan, in the deliverance of which
from Nahash the Ammonite Saul’s military prowess
was first displayed (1 S 11 1ff). At an earlier time
the inhabitants failed to share with their brethren in
taking vengeance upon Benjamin. ‘This laxity was
terribly punished, only 400 virgins being spared
alive, who afterward became wives to the Benja-
mites (Jgs 21). The gratitude of the inhabitants
to Sanl was affectingly proved after the disaster to


1547


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Jaareshiah


Jachin and Boaz


that monarch on Gilboa (1 S 31). David, hearing
of their deed, sent an approving message, and sought
to win their loyalty to himself (2 S 2 4 if). Robin-
son (BR, II, 39) thought it might be represented
by ed-Deir, about 6 miles from Pella. (Fa@hil), on the
southern bank of Waédy Yabis. The distance from
Pella agrees with the statement of Onom (s.v.).
Others (Oliphant, Land of Gilead, 2771; Merrill,
East of Jordan, 430, etc) would identify it with the
ruins of Meriamin, about 3 miles 8.E. of Pella, on
the N. of Wady Yabis. The site remains in doubt;
but the ancient name still lingers in that of the
valley, the stream from which enters the Jordan
fully 9 miles 8.E. of Beisan. W. Ewina


JABEZ, (var,
(“height’’]):

(1) Place: An unidentified town probably in the
territory of Judah, occupied by scribes (1 Ch 2
55). For an ingenious reconstruction of the passage
see EB, s.v.

(2) Person: The head of a family of Judah, noted
for his “honorahle”’ character, though “his mother
bare him with sorrow’ (1 Ch 4 9.10), ya‘bé¢ being
interpreted as if it stood for ya‘gébh, “he causes
pain.” The same play upon words recurs in his
prayer, ‘‘that it be not to my sorrow!” His request
was granted, “and the sorrow implied by his omi-
Hous coal was averted by prayer” (Dummelow,
in loc.).


JABIN, ja’bin (7937, yabhin, “one who is intelli-
gent,” ‘‘discerning.” The word may have been a
hereditary royal title among the northern Canaan-
ites. Cf the familiar usage of par‘dh melekh mig-
rayim):

(1) “The king of Hazor,”’ the leading city in
Northern Pal, who led an alliance against Joshua.
He was defeated at the waters of Merom, his city
was taken and he was slain (Josh 11 1-9).

(2) “The king of Canaan, that reigned [or had
reigned] in Hazor.” It is not clear whether he
dwelt in Hazor or Harosheth, the home of Sisera,
the captain of his host at the time of the story nar-
rated in Jgs. He oppressed Israel in the days pre-
ceding the victory of Deborah and Barak. To the
Israelites he must have been but a shadowy figure
as compared with his powerful captain, Sisera, for
the song makes no mention of him and there is
nothing to indicate that he even took part in the
battle that freed Israel (Jgs 4 2.7.17.23.24 bis; Ps
83 9.10). Exta Davis Isaacs


ja’ bez ya'bég, “sorrow”


JABNEEL, jab’né-el, JABNEH, jab/ne ON?23,
yabhn’ él, “God is builder’; LXX AcBva, Lebnd,
Swete reads Lemnd, Apoc "lapvia, Jamnia, "Tapvela,
lamneia):

(1) A town on the northern border of the land
assigned to Judah, near the western sea, mentioned
in connection with Ekron (Josh 16 11). The
place ig now represented by the modern village of
Yebna which stands upon a hill a little to. the 8. of
the Nahr Rubin, about 12 or 13 miles 8. of Jaffa,
on the road from there to Askelon, and about 4
miles from the sea. It had a port, now called Mina
Rubin, a short distance 8. of the mouth of the river,
some remains of which still exist. Its harbor was
superior to that of Jaffa (PEFS, 1875, 167-68).
It does not occur in the Heb text of the OT except
in the passage mentioned, but it appears under the
form “Jabneh” (7937, yabhneh) in 2 Ch 26 6, as
is evident from the mention of Gath and Ashdod
in connection with it. LXX reads Teuvd (Gemnd,
Jabneh) where the Heb reads MAT), wa-yammah,
“even unto the sea,’”’ in Josh 15 46, where Ekron
and Ashdod and other cities and villages are men-


tioned as belonging to Judah’s inheritance. Jos
(Ant, V, i, 22) assigns it to the tribe of Dan. We
have no mention of its being captured by Joshua
or occupied by Judah until the reign of Uzziah who
captured it and demolished its wall, in connection
with his war upon the Philis (2 Ch 26 6). The
position of J. was strong and was the scene of many
contests, both in the period of the monarchy and
that of the Maccabees. It is mentioned frequently
in the account of the wars of the latter with the
Syrians. It was garrisoned by the Seleucid kings,
and served as a base for raiding the territory of
Judah. When Judas Maccabaeus defeated Gor-
gias and the Syrians he pursued them to the plains
of J., but did not take the fortress (1 Macc 4 15).
Gorgias was there attacked by the Jewish generals
Joseph and Azarias, contrary to Judas’ orders, who
were repulsed with loss (6 56-60; Jos, Ant, XII,
viii, 6). Apollonius occupied it for King Deme-
trius (1 Mace 10 69); and Cendebeus for Antio-
chus, and from there harassed the Jews (15 40).
Judas burned the port and navy of J. (2 Mace 12
8-9). It was taken by Simon in 142 BC (Jos, Ant,
XII, vi, 7; BJ, I, ii, 2), together with Gazara and
Joppa, but was restored to its inhabitants by Pom-
pey in 62 BC (Ant, XIV, iv, 4), and was rebuilt by
Gabinius in 57 BC (BV, I, viii, 4). It was restored
to the Jews by Augustus in 80 AD. Herod gave
it to his sister Salome and she bequeathed it to
Julia, the wife of Augustus (Ani, XVIII, ii, 2;
BJ, II, ix, L). The town and region were pros-
perous in Rom times, and when Jerus was besieged
by Titus the Sanhedrin removed to J., and it after-
ward became the seat of a great rabbinical school
(Milman, Hist Jews, II, 411-12), but was sup-
pressed in the persecution under Hadrian. An-
tonius allowed it to be revived, but it was again
suppressed because of hostile language on the part
of the rabbis (ib, 451-52). The Crusaders built
there the castle of Ibelin, supposing it to be the site
of Gath. It was occupied by the Saracens, and
various inscriptions in Arab. of the 13th and 14th
cents. have been found there (SWP, II, 441-42).
(2) A town of Naphtali mentioned in Josh 19
33, and supposed to be the site of the modern
Yemma, S.W. of the sea of Galilee (SWP, I, 365).
It is the Kefr Yama of the Talm. H. Porter


JACAN, ja’kan (129772, ya‘kdn, meaning not
known; AV Jachan): A chief of a family descended
from Gad (1 Ch 6 13).


JACHIN, jakin ([32, yakhin, “he will estab-
lish’’):

(1) The 4th son of Simeon (Gen 46 10; Ex 6
15; Nu 26 12). In 1 Ch 4 24 his name is given
as “Jarib” (cf AVm, RVm). ‘“Jachinites,” the
patronymic of the family, occurs in Nu 26 12.

(2) Head of the 21st course of priests in the time
of David (1 Ch 24 17). It is used as a family
name in 1 Ch 9 10, and as such also in Neh 11 10,
where some of the course are included in the list
of those who, having returned from Babylon, will-
ingly accepted the decision of the lot, and abandoned
their rural retreats to hecome citizens and guardians
of Jerus (vs 1 f). JAMES CRICHTON


JACHIN, ja’kin, AND BOAZ (7°39, yakhin,
“the shall establish’; T22, bd‘az, “in it is strength,”
1K 7 15-22; 2 K 26 16.17; 2 Ch 3 15-17; Jer
52 17): These were the names of the two bronze
pillars that stood before the temple of Solomon.
They were not used in supporting the building;
their appearance, therefore, must have been solely
due to moral and symbolic reasons. What these
are it is not easy to say. The pillars were not


Jacimus
Jacob


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1548


altar pillars with hearths at their top, as supposed
by W. R. Smith (Religion of the Semites, 191, 468);
rather they were “‘pillars of witness,” as was the
pillar that witnessed the contract between Jacob
and Laban (Gen 31 52). A difficulty arises about
the height of the pillars. The writers in K and Jer
affirm that the pillars before the porch were 18
cubits high apiece (1 K 7 15; Jer 52 21), while
the Chronicler states that they were 35 cubits (2 Ch
3 15). Various methods have been suggested of
reconciling this discrepancy, but it is more probable
that there is a corruption in the Chronicler’s num-
ber. On the construction of the pillars and their
capitals, see TeMpLE. At the final capture of Jerus
they were broken up and the metal of which they
were composed was sent to Babylon (2 K 26 13.
16). In Ezekiel’s ideal temple the two pillars are
represented by pillars of wood (40 49).
W. Saaw CaLpecotr

JACIMUS, ja’si-mus (Ani, XII, ix, 3). See Are

CIMUS.


JACINTH, ja’sinth. See Hyacryrg; Srongs,
Precious.

JACKAL, jak’él:

(1) DRE, tannim, “jackals,” AV ‘‘dragons’”’; cf
Arab. wes; tindn, “wolf”;


ow


and cf P 3M, tannin,


Arab. uns , tinnin, “sea monster” or “monster,”
ERV “dragon” (Job 712m; Ps 74 13; 148 7;
Isa 27.1; 619; Jer 51 34), “serpent”? (Ex 7


9.10.12; Dt 32 33; Ps 91 13), AV ‘‘whale” (Gen
1 21; Job 7 12); but PRN, tannin, “jackals,” AV
“sea monsters” (Lam 4 3), “‘jackal’s well,’ AV
“dragon well” (Neh 2 13), and tannim, “monster,”
AV and ERV “dragon” (Ezk 29 3; 32 2).

(2) B™N, ’tyim, “wolves,” AV “wild beasts of
the islands’; cf "&, ’7, pl. OWN, tym, “island”;
also MEN , ’ayyah, “a ery,” Vv ITS, ’dwah, “to cry,”


“to howl’; Arab. er , ‘auwa’, “to bark” (of dogs,


wolves, or jackals); ss! als "ibn 'dwa’, collo-


quially wails, wowt, “jackal.”


(3) BMX, ciytm, “wild beasts of the desert.”

(4) EIN, ’ohim, “doleful creatures.”

“Jackals” occurs as a tr of tannim, AV “dragons,”
in Job 30 29; Ps 44 19; Isa 13 22; 3413; 35
7; 48 20; Jer 9 11; 10 22; 14 6; 49 33; 51 37;
of the fem. pl. form tanndth in Mal 1 3, and of
tannin in Neh 213 and Lam 4 3. Tannim is
variously referred to a root meaning ‘“‘to howl,”
and to a root meaning “‘to stretch out,” trop. “to
run swiftly, ie. with outstretched neck and limb
extended” (Ges.). Either derivation would suit
“wolf” equally as well as “jackal.” The expression
in Jer 10 22, “‘to make the cities of Judah a deso-
lation, a dwelling-place of jackals,” seems, however,
esp. appropriate of jackals. The same is true of
Isa $4 13; Jer 9 11; 49 33, and 61 37. :

The jackal (from Pers shaghdl), Canis aureus, is
found about the Mediterranean except in Western
Europe. It ranges southward to Abyssinia, and
eastward, in Southern Asia, to farther India. It is
smaller than a large dog, has a moderately bushy
tail, and is reddish brown with dark shadings above.
It is cowardly and nocturnal. Like the fox, it is
destructive to poultry, grapes, and vegetables, but
is less fastidious, and readily devours the remains of
others’ feasts. Jackals generally go about in small
companies. Their peculiar howl may frequently
be heard in the evening and at any time in the night.
It begins with a high-pitched, long-drawn-out cry.


This is repeated two or three times, each time in a
higher key than before. Finally there are several
short, loud, yelping barks. Often when one raises
the cry others join in. Jackals are not infrequently
confounded with foxes. They breed freely with


ora a
Jackal (Canis aureus).


While tannim is the only word tr4 “jackal” in EV,
the words ’iyim, ciyim, and ’ohim deserve atten-
tion. They, as well as tannim, evidently refer to
wild creatures inhabiting desert places, but it is
difficult to say for what animal each of the words
stands. All four (together with bendth ya'dnah
and s*‘irim) are found in Isa 13 21.22: “But wild
beasts of the desert [¢tyim] shall lie there; and their
houses shall be full of doleful creatures [’ohim];
and ostriches [b°ndth ya‘dénah] shall dwell there, and
wild goats [s*‘tr7m] shall dance there. And wolves
[’tytm] shall cry in their castles, and jackals [tannim]
in the pleasant palaces.”

In AV ‘tytm (Isa 18 22; 34 14; Jer 50 39) is trd
‘wild beasts of the islands" (cf ‘tyim, ‘‘islands"’). Vm
has merely the transliteration iim, RV ‘‘wolves,”” RVm
“howling creatures."’ Gesenius suggests the jackal,
which is certainly a howler. While the wolf has a
hlood-curdling howl, it is much more rarely heard than
the jackal.

Ciyim (Ps 72 9; 74 14; Isa 13 21; 23 13; 34 14;
Jer 50 39) has been considered akin to czyah, ‘drought’
(ct ‘eree ciyah, ‘‘a dry land" [Ps 63 1}), and is tr? in RV
as follows: Ps 72 9, ‘‘ they that dwell in the wilderness";
74 14, ‘‘the people inhabiting the wilderness”: Isa
23 13, ‘‘them that dwell in the wilderness,’’ RVm ‘the
beasts of the wilderness"; Isa 13 21; 34 14; Jer 50
39, ‘wild beasts of the desert.'' There would be some
difficulty in referring ¢tyim in Ps 72 9 to beasts rather
than to men, but that is not the case in Ps 74 14 and
Isa 23 13. ‘‘ Wild cats'' have been suggested.

‘Ohim, ‘‘doleful creatures."’ perhaps onomatopcetic,
occurs only in Isa 13 21. The tr ‘“‘owls"’ has been sug-
gested, and is not unsuitable to the context.


It is not impossible that tannim and ’iyim may


be different names of the jackals. "Iyim, ciyim,
and tannim occur together also in Isa 34 13.14,
and ’tyim and ¢giyim in Jer 60 39. Their similarity
in sound may have much to do with their colloca-
tion. The recognized word for “wolf,” z2’ébh (cf
Arab. dhi’), occurs 7 t in the OT. See Dracon;
Wo.F; ZodLoeyr. ALFRED Ety Day


JACKAL’S WELL (PIA PY, ‘én ha-tannin;
LXX has ry tay cundv, pégé tin sukén, “fountain
of the figs’; AV dragon well): A well or spring in
the valley of Hinnom between the “Gate of the Gai”
and the Dung Gate (Neh 2 13). No such source
exists in the Wady er Rabdbi (see Hinnom) today,
although it is very probable that a well sunk to the
rock in the lower parts of this valley might strike
a certain amount of water trickling down the valley-
bottom. G. A. Smith suggests (Jerus, I, ch iv)
that this source may have arisen as the result of an


1549


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jacimus
Jacob


earthquake, hence the name “dragon,” and have
subsequently disappeared; but it is at lcast as
likely: that it received its name from the jackals
which haunted this valley, as the pariah dogs do
today, to consume the dead bodies which were
thrown there. See Hinnom; Jackat.
E. W. G. MastermMsn
JACOB, ja’kub:


I. Name
1, Form and Distribution
2. Etymology and Associations
II. Piace in tHe PatTRiarcHat Succession
1. As Son of Isaac and Rebekah
2. As Brother of Esau
8. As Father of the Twelve
Ill. Broeraray
1. With Isaac in Canaan
2. To Aram and Back
3. In Canaan Again
4, Last Years in Egypt
CaaRACTER AND BELIEFS
1. Natural Qualities
2. Stages of Development
3. Attitude toward the Promise
4. How Far a '‘ Type” of Israel
V. Rersrences Outsipe or Genesis
1. In the OT
2. In the NT
VI. Mopsrn Inrzerprerations or Jacos
1. Personification of the Hebrew Nation
2. God and Demi-Go
3. Character of Fiction
i Name.—Apy (5 t DIPYY, ya'dkabh; ‘laxsp, Iakdb,
is in form a vb. in the Kal impf., 3d masc. sing. Like
some 50 other Heb names of this same
1. Form and form, ne has ne: subject for the vb. ae
istri ion pressed. ut there are a number of inde-
Dismibuuge endent indications that Jacob belongs
to that large class of names consisting of a vb. with some
Divine name or title (in this case "£1) as the subject,
from which the common abbreviated form is derived
by omitting the subject. (a) In Bab documents of the
period of the Patriarchs, there occur such personal names
as Ja-ku-bi, Ja-ku-ub-ilu (the former doubtless an ab-
breviation of the latter), and Aq-bu-@ (cf Aq-bi-a-hu),
according to Hilprecht a syncopated form for A-qu(?)
-bu(-f), like Agq-bi-ili alongside of A-qa-bi-ili; all of
which may he associated with the same root Spy,
‘akabh, as appears in Jacob (see H. Ranke, Early Bab
Personal Names, 1905, with annotations by Professor
Hilprecht as editor, esp. pp. 67, 113, 98 and 4). (b) In
the list_of places in Pal conquered by the Pharaoh Thut-
mose III appears a certain J‘qb'r, which in Egyp char-


acters represents the Sem letters DRApD. ya &kébh-'él,


and which therefore seems to show that in the earlier
half of the 15th cent. BC (so Petrie, Breasted) there was
a place (not a tribe; see W. M. Miller, Asien und
Europa, 162 ff) in Central Pal that bore a name in some
way connected with ‘‘Jacoh.'’ Moreover, a Pharaoh of the
Hyksos period hears a name that looks like ya‘dékabh-' él
(Spiegelbere, Orientalische Literaturzeitung, VII, 130).
(c) In the Jewish tractate Pirké 'Abhoth, iii.1, we read
of a Jew named ‘Akabhydh, which is a name composed of
the same verbal root as that in Jacoh, together with the
Divine name Yahz@ (i.e. Jeh) in its common abbreviated
form. It should be noted that the personal names
‘Akkibh and Ya'dkobhah (accent on penult) also occur
in the OT, the former borne by no less than 4 different
persons; also that in the Palmyrene inscriptions we find
a person named 3PYMY, a name in which this same vb.
539 is preceded by the name of the god ‘Ate, just as
in ‘Akabhyah it is followed hy the name Yahi. :
Such being the form and distribution of the name, it


remains to inquire: What do we know of its etymology
and what were the associations it con-


IV.


5 « veyed to the Heb ear? :
2 syel The vh. in all its usages is capahle of
ogy an deduction, by simple association cf ideas,


Associations from the noun “heel."’ ‘‘To heel’ might

mean: (a) ‘‘to take hold of by the heel”
(so prohably Hos 12 3: cf Gen 27 36); (b) ''to follow
with evil intent,” ‘to aD aa or in general ''to de-
ceive” (so Gen 27 36; Jer,9 4, where the parallel,
‘yo ahout with slanders,’’ is interesting because the
word so tr4 is akin to the noun “foot,’’ as "supplant"
is to heel’); (c) '‘to follow with good intent," whether
as a slave (cf our Eng. ‘‘to heel,” of a dog) for service,
or as a guard for protection, hence ‘‘to guard” (so in
Ethiopic), ‘to keep guard over"’ and thus ‘to restrain"’
(so Job 37 4): (d) “to follow,” ‘to succeed,” ‘‘to take
the place of another’’ (so Arab., and the Heb noun ap?


cs
‘gkebh, ‘‘consequence,”’ ‘‘recompense,’’ whether of
reward or punishment). | 2 :

Among these four significations, which most commends
itself as the original intent in the use of this vb. to form
a proper name? The answer to this question depends


upon the degree of strength with which the Divine name
was felt to be the subject of the vb. As Jacob-el, the
simplest interpretation of the name is undouhtedly, as
Baethgen urges (Beitrdge zur sem. Religionsgeschichte,
158), ‘‘God rewardeth" ([d] above), like Nathanacl,
‘*God hath given," etc. But we have already seen that
centuries before the time when Jacob is said to have heen
born, this name was shortened by dropping the Divine
subject; and in this shortened form it would he more
likely to call up in the minds of all Semites who used it,
associations with the primary, physical notion of its
root ({a] above). Hence there is no ground to deny that
even in the patriarchal peed this familiar personal
name Jacob lay ready at hand—a name ready made, as
it were—tfor this child, in view of the peculiar circum-
stances of its birth; we may say,indeed, one could not
escape the use of it. (A parallel case, perhaps, is Gen
88 28.30, Zerah; cf Zerahiah.) The associations of this
root in everyday use in Jacob’s family to mean ‘‘to
supplant" led to the fresh realization of its appropriate-
ness to his character and conduct when he was grown
([b] above). This construction does not interfere with
a connection between the patriarch Jacob and the
** Jacob-els’’ referred to above (under 1, [b]), should that
connection on other grounds appear probable. Such a
longer form was perhaps for every “Jacob” an alter-
native form of his name, and under certain circumstances
may have been used by or of even the patriarch Jacob.


Il. Place in the Patriarchal Saccession.—In the
dynasty of the “heirs of the promise,’ Jacob takes
his place, first, as the successor of
1. AsSon Isaac. In Isaac’s life the most sig-
of Isaac and nificant single fact had been his mar-
Rebekah riage with Rebekah instead of with
a woman of Canaan. Jacob therefore
represents the first generation of those who are
determinately separate from their environment.
Abraham and his household were immigrants in
Canaan; Jacob and Esau were natives of Canaan
in the second generation, yet had not a drop of
Canaanitish blood in their veins. Their birth was
delayed till 20 years after the marriage of their
parents. Rebekah’s barrenness had certainly the
same effect, and probably the same purpose, as that
of Sarah: it drove Isaac to Divine aid, demanded
of him as it had of Abraham that ‘faith and pa-
tience”’ through which they ‘inherited the promises”
(He 6 12), and made the children of this pair also
the evident gift of God’s grace, so that Isaac was
the better able “by faith” to “bless Jacob and Esau
even concerning things to come” (He 11 20).
These twin brothers therefore share thus far the
same relation to their parents and to what their
parents transmit to them. But here


2. As the likeness ceases. “Being not yet
Brother born, neither having done anything
of Esau good or bad, that the purpose of God


according to election might stand, not
of works, but of him that calleth, it was said unto
{Rebecca], The elder shall serve the younger”
(Rom 9 11.12). In the Gen-narrative, without
any doctrinal assertions either adduced to explain
it, or deduced from it, the fact is nevertheless made
as clear as it is in Malor Rom, that Esau is rejected,
and Jacob is chosen as a link in the chain of in-
heritance that receives and transmits the promise.
With Jacob the last person is reached who, for
his own generation, thus sums up in a single indi-
vidual ‘‘the secd” of promise. He
3. As becomes the father of 12 sons, who are
Father of the progenitors of the tribes of the
the Twelve ‘peculiar people.” It is for this
reason that this people bears his
name, and not that of his father Isaac or that of
his grandfather Abraham. The “children of
Israel,”’ the “house of Jacob,” are the totality of
the seed of the promise. The Edomites too are
children of Isaac. Ishmaelites equally with Israel-
ites boast of descent from Abraham. But the
twelve tribes that called themselves ‘Israel’ were
all descendants of Jacob, and were the only de-
scendants of Jacob on the agnatic principle of
family-constitution.


Jacob


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1550


Hl. Biography.—The life of a wanderer (Dt 26
5 RVm) such as Jacob was, may often be best di-
vided on the geographical principle. Jacob’s
career falls into the four distinct periods: that of
his residence with Isaac in Canaan, that of his
residence with Laban in Aram, that of his inde-
pendent life in Canaan and that of his migration
to Egypt.

_ Jacob’s birth was remarkable in respect of (a)
its delay for 20 years as noted above, (b) that condi-
tion of his mother which Jed to the


1. With Divine oracle concerning his future
Isaac in greatness and supremacy, and (c) the
Canaan unusual phenomenon that gave him


his name: “he holds by the heel”
(see above, I, 2). Unlike his twin brother, Jacob
seems to have been free from any physical pecul-
iarities; his smoothness (Gen 27 11) is only predi-
cated of him in contrast to Esau’s hairiness.
These brothers, as they developed, grew apart in
tastes and habits. Jacob, like his father in his
quiet manner of life and (for that reason perhaps)
the companion and favorite of his mother, found
early the opportunity to obtain Esau’s sworn
renunciation of his right of primogeniture, by taking
advantage of his habits, his impulsiveness and his
fundamental indifference to the higher things of
the family, the things of the future (25 32). It
was not until long afterward that the companion-
scene to this first “‘supplanting” (27 36) was en-
acted. Both sons meanwhile are to be thought of
simply as members of Isaac’s following, during all
the period of his successive sojourns in Gerar, the
Valley of Gerar and Beersheba (ch 26). Within
this period, when the brothers were 40 years of
age, occurred Esau’s marriage with two Hittite
women. Jacob, remembering his own mother’s
origin, bided his time to find the woman who should
be the mother of his children. The question
whether she should be brought to him, as Rebekah
was to Isaac, or he should go to find her, was settled
at last by a family feud that only his absence could
heal. This feud was occasioned by the fraud that
Jacob at Rebekah’s behest practised upon his father
and brother, when these two were minded to nullify
the clearly revealed purpose of the oracle (25 23)
and the sanctions of a solemn oath (26 33). Isaac’s
partiality for Esau arose perhaps as much from
Esau’s resemblance to the active, impulsive nature
of his mother, as irom the sensual gratification
afforded Isaac by the savory dishes his son’s hunt-
ing supplied. At any rate, this partiality defeated
itself because it overreached itself. The wife, who
had learned to be eyes and ears for a husband’s
failing senses, detected the secret scheme, counter-
plotted with as much skill as unscrupulousness,
and while she obtained the paternal blessing for
her favorite son, fell nevertheless under the painful
necessity of choosing between losing him through
his brother’s revenge or losing him by absence from
home. She chose, of course, the latter alternative,
and herself brought about Jacob’s departure, by
pleading to Isaac the necessity for obtaining a
woman as Jacob’s wife of a sort different from the
Canaanitish women that Esau had married. Thus
ends the first portion of Jacob’s life.
It is no young man that sets out thus to escape
a brother’s vengearice, and perhaps to find a wife
at length among his mother’s kindred.
2. To Aram It was long before this that Esau at
and Back the age of forty had married the Hit-
tite women (cf 26 34 with 27 46).
Yet to one who had hitherto spent his life subor-
dinate to his father, indulged by his mother, in awe
of a brother’s physical superiority, and “dwelling
in tents, a quiet [domestic] man” (25 27), this
journey of 500 or 600 miles, with no one to guide,


counsel or defend, was as new an experience as if
he had really been the stripling that he is sometimes
represented to have been. All the most significant
chapters in life awaited him: self-determination,
love, marriage, fatherhood, domestic provision and
administration, adjustment of his relations with
men, and above all a personal and independent
religious experience. :

Of these things, all were to come to him in the 20
years of absence from Canaan, and the last was to
come first; for the dream of Jacob at Beth-el was of
course but the opening scene in the long drama of
God’s direct dealing with Jacob. Yet it was the
determinative scene, for God in His latest and fullest
manifestation to Jacob was just ‘‘the God of Beth-el”
(35 7; 48 3; 49 24).

With the arrival at Haran came love at once,
though not for 7 years the consummation of that
love. Its strength is naively indicated by the
writer in two ways: impliedly in the sudden output
of physical power at the well-side (29 10), and
expressly in the patient years of toil for Rachel’s
sake, which “seemed unto him but a few days for
the love he had to her” (29 20). Jacob is not pri-
marily to be blamed for the polygamy that brought
trouble into his home-life and sowed the seeds of
division and jealousy in the nation of the future.
Although much of Israel’s history can be summed
up in the rivalry of Leah and Rachel—Judah and
Joseph—yet it was not Jacob’s choice but Laban’s
fraud that introduced this cause of schism. At the
end of his 7 years’ labor Jacob received as wife not
Rachel but Leah, on the belated plea that to give
the younger daughter before the elder was not the
custom of the country. This was the first of the
“ten times” that Laban “changed the wages” of
Jacob (81 7.41). Rachel became Jacob’s wife 7
days after Leah, and for this second wife he ‘‘served
7 other years.” During these 7 years were born
most of the sons and daughters (37 35) that formed
the actual family, the nucleus of that large caravan
that Jacob took back with him to Canaan. Dimah
is the only daughter named; 30 21 is obviously in
preparation for the story of ch 34 (see esp. 34 31).
Four sons of Leah were the oldest: Reuben, with
the right of primogeniture, Simeon, Levi and Judah.
Next came the 4 sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, the
personal slaves of the two wives (cf ABRaHaM, IV,
2); the two pairs of sons were probably of about the
same age (cf order in ch 49). Leah’s 5th and 6th
sons were separated by an interval of uncertain
length from her older group. And Joseph, the
youngest son born in Haran, was Rachel’s first
child, equally beloved by his mother, and by his
father for her sake (33 2; cf 44 20), as well as
because he was the youngest of the eleven (87 3).

Jacob’s years of service for his wives were fol-
lowed by 6 years of service rendered for a stipulated
wage. Laban’s cunning in limiting the amount of
this wage in a variety of ways was matched by
Jacob’s cunning in devising means to overreach his
uncle, so that the penniless wanderer of 20 years
before becomes the wealthy proprietor of countless
cattle and of the hosts of slaves necessary for their
care (32 10). At the same time the apology of
Jacob for his conduct during this entire period of
residence in Haran is spirited (81 36-42); it is
apparently unanswerable by Laban (ver 43); and
it 1s confirmed, both by the evident concurrence of
Leah and Rachel (vs 14-16), and by indications in
the narrative that the justice (not merely the par-
tiality) of God gave to each party his due recom-
pense: to Jacob the rich returns of skilful, patient
industry; to Laban rebuke and warning (vs 5-13.
24.29.42),

The manner of Jacob’s departure from Haran
was determined by the strained relations between


1551


his uncle and himself. His motive in going, how-
ever, is represented as being fundamentally the
desire to terminate an absence from his father’s
country that had already grown too long (31 30;
cf 30 25)—a desire which in fact presented itself
to him in the form of a revelation of God’s own pur-
pose and command (31 3). Unhappily, his clear
record was stained by the act of another than him-
self, who nevertheless, as a member of his family,
entailed thus upon him the burden of responsibility.
Rachel, like Laban her father, was devoted to the
superstition that manifested itself in the keeping
and consulting of t*raéphim, a custom which, whether
more nearly akin to fetishism, totemism, or ancestor-
worship, was felt to be incompatible with the wor-
ship of the one true God. (Note that the ‘‘teraphim”
of 31 19.34f are the same as the ‘‘gods” of vs 30.32
and, apparently, of 35 2.4.) This theft furnished
Laban with a pretext for pursuit. What he meant
to do he probably knew but imperfectly himself.
Coercion of some sort he would doubtless have
brought to bear upon Jacob and his caravan, had
he not recognized in a dream the God whom Jacob
worshipped, and heard Him utter a word of warning
against the use of violence. Laban failed to find
his stolen gods, for his daughter was as crafty and
ready-witted ashe. The whole adventure ended in
a formal reconciliation, with the usual sacrificial and
memorial token (31 43-55).

After Laban, Esau. One danger is no sooner
escaped than a worse threatens. Yet between
them lies the pledge of Divine presence and pro-
tection in the vision of God’s host at Mahanaim:
just a simple statement, with none of the fanciful
detail that popular story-telling loves, but the sober
record of a tradition to which the supernatural was
matter of fact. Even the longer passage that pre-
serves the occurrence at Peniel is conceived in the
same spirit. What the revelation of the host of
God had not sufficed to teach this faithless, anxious,
scheming patriarch, that God sought to teach him
in the night-struggle, with its ineffaceable physical
memorial of a human impotence that can compass
no more than to cling to Divine omnipotence (32
22-32). The devices of crafty Jacob to disarm an
offended and supposedly implacable brother proved
as useless as that bootless wrestling of the night
before; Esau’s peculiar disposition was not of
Jacob’s making, but of God’s, and to it alone Jacob
owed his safety. The practical wisdom of Jacob
dictated his insistence upon bringing to a speedy
termination the proposed association with his
changeable brother, amid the difficulties of a jour-
ney that could not be shared by such divergent
social and racial elements as Esau’s armed host
and Jacob’s caravan, without discontent on the one
side and disaster on the other. The brothers part,
not to meet again until they meet to bury their
father at Hebron (35 29).

Before Jacob’s arrival in the S. of Canaan where
his father yet lived and where his own youth had

been spent, he passed through a period


3. In of wandering in Central Pal, somewhat
Canaan similar to that narrated of his grand-
Again father Abraham. To any such nomad,


wandering slowly from Aram toward
Egypt, a period of residence in the region of Mt.
Ephraim was a natural chapter in his book of
travels. Jacob’s longer stops, recorded for us, were
(1) at Succoth, E. of the Jordan near Peniel, (2) at
Shechem and (8) at Beth-el.

Nothing worthy of record occurred at Succoth,
but the stay at Shechem was eventful. Gen 34,
which tells the story of Dinah’s seduction and her
brother’s revenge, throws as much light upon the
relations of Jacob and the Canaanites, as does ch
14 or ch 23 upon Abraham’s relations, or ch 26 upon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jacob


Isaac’s relations, with such scttled inhabitants of
the land. There is a strange blending of moral and
immoral elements in Jacob and his family as por-
trayed in this contretemps. There is the persistent
tradition of separateness from the Canaanites be-
queathed from Abraham’s day (ch 24), together
with a growing family consciousness and sense of
superiority (34 7.14.31). And at the same time
there is indifference to their unique moral station
among the environing tribes, shown in Dinah’s
social relations with them (ver 1), in the treachery
and cruelty of Simeon and Levi (vs 25-29), and in
Jacob’s greater concern for the security of his
possessions than for the preservation of his good
name (ver 30).

It was this concern for the safety of the family
and its wealth that achieved the end which dread
of social absorption would apparently never have
achieved—the termination of a long residence
where there was moral danger for all. For a second
time Jacob had fairly to be driven to Beth-el.
Safety from his foes was again a gift of God (35 5),
and in a renewal of the old forgotten ideals of con-
secration (vs 2-8), he and all his following move
from the painful associations of Shechem to the
hallowed associations of Beth-el. Here were re-
newed the various phases of all God’s earlier com-
munications to this patriarch and to his fathers
before him. The new name of Israel, hitherto so
ill deserved, is henceforth to find realization in his
life; his fathers’ God is to be his God; _his seed is
to inherit the land of promise, and is to be no mean
tribe, but a group of peoples with kings to rule over
them like the nations round about (35 9-12). No
wonder that Jacob here raises anew his monument
of stone—emblem of the “Stone of Israel” (49 24)—
and stamps forever, by this public act, upon ancient
Luz (35 6), the name of Beth-el which he had pri-
vately given it years before (28 19).

Losses and griefs characterized the family life
of the patriarch at this period. The death of his
mother’s Syrian nurse at Beth-el (85 8; cf 24 59)
was followed by the death of his beloved wife
Rachel at Ephrath (35 19; 48 7) in bringing forth
the youngest of his 12 sons, Benjamin. At about
the same time the eldest of the 12, Reuben, for-
feited the honor of his station in the family by an
act that showed all too clearly the effect of recent
association with Canaanites (35 22). Finally,
death claimed Jacob’s aged father, whose latest
years had been robbed of the companionship, not
only of this son, but also of the son whom his par-
tiality had all but made a fratricide; at Isaac’s
grave in Hebron the ill-matched brothers met once
more, thenceforth to go their separate ways, both
in their personal careers and in their descendants’
history (35 29).

Jacob now is by right of patriarchal custom head
of all the family. He too takes up his residence at
Hebron (87 14), and the story of the family fortunes
is now pursued under the new title of ‘‘the gener-
ations of Jacob” (37 2). True, most of this story
revolves about Joseph, the youngest of the family
save Benjamin; yet the occurrence of passages like
ch 38, devoted exclusively to Judah’s affairs, or
46 8-27, the enumeration of Jacob’s entire family
through its secondary ramifications, or ch 49, the
blessing of Jacob on all his sons—all these prove
that Jacob, not Joseph, is the true center of the
narrative until his death. As long as he lives he
is the real head of his house, and not merely a super-
annuated veteran like Isaac. Not only Joseph,
the boy of 17 (37 2), but also the self-willed elder
sons, even a score of years later, come and go at
his bidding (chs 42-45). Joseph’s dearest thought,
as it is his first thought, is for his aged father (43
7.27; 44 19; and esp. 45 3.9.13.23, and 46 29).


Jacob


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1552


It is this devotion of Joseph that results in Jacob’s
migration to Egypt. What honors there Joseph
can show his father he shows him: he


4. Last presents him to Pharaoh, who for
Years in Joseph’s sake receives him with dig-
Egypt nity, and assigns him a home and sus-


tenance for himself and all his people
as honored guests of the land of Egypt (47 7-12).
Yet in Beersheba, while en route to Egypt, Jacob
had obtained a greater honor than this reception by
Pharaoh. He had found there, as ready to respond
to his sacrifices as ever to those of his fathers, the
God of his father Isaac, and had received the gra-
cious assurance of Divme guidance in this mo-
mentous journey, fraught with so vast a significance
for the future nation and the world (46 1-4): God
Himself would go with him into Egypt and give
him, not merely the gratification of once more
embracing his long-lost son, but the fulfilment of
the covenant-promise (15 13-16) that he and his
were not turning their backs upon Canaan forever.
Though 130 years of age when he stood before
Pharaoh, Jacob felt his days to have been “few”
as well as “evil,” in comparison with those of his
fathers (47 9). And in fact he had yet 17 years
to live in Goshen (47 28).

These last, days are passed over without record,
save of the growth and prosperity of the family.
But at their close came the impartation of the an-
cestral blessings, with the last will of the dying
patriarch. After adopting Joseph’s sons, Manas-
seh and Ephraim, as his own, Jacob blesses them,
preferring the younger to the elder as he himself
had once been preferred to Esau, and assigns to
Joseph the “double portion” of the firstborn—that
“‘preéminence” which he denies to Reuben (48 22;
49 4). In poetry that combines with the warm
emotion and glowing imagery of its style and the
unsurpassed elevation of its diction, a lyrical fervor
of religious sentiment which demands for its author
a personality that had passed through just such a
course of tuition as Jacob had experienced, the last
words of Jacob, in ch 49, mark a turning-point in
the history of the people of God. This is a trans-
lation of biography into prophecy. On the assump-
tion that it is genuine, we may confidently aver
that it was simply unforgetable by those who heard
it. Its auditors were its theme. Their descend-
ants were its fulfilment. Neither the one class nor
the other could ever let it pass out of memory.

It was “by faith,” we are well reminded, that
Jacob “‘blessed” and ‘‘worshipped” ‘‘when he was
dying” (He 11 21). For he held to the promises
of God, and even in the hour of dissolution looked
for the fulfilment of the covenant, according to
which Canaan should belong to him and to his seed
alter him. He therefore set Joseph an example, by
“giving commandment concerning his bones,” that
they might rest in the burial-place of Abraham and
Isaac near Hebron. To the accomplishment of
this mission Joseph and all his brethren addressed
themselves after their father’s decease and the 70
days of official mourning. Followed by a “very
great company” of the notables of Egypt, including
royal officials and representatives of the royal
family, this Heb tribe carried up to sepulture in the
land of promise the embalmed body of the patriarch
from whom henceforth they were to take their
tribal name, lamented him according to custom for
7 days, and then returned to their temporary
home in Egypt, till their children should at length
be “called” thence to become God’s ‘‘son” (Hos
11 1) and inherit His promises to their father Jacob.

IV. Character and Beliefs.—In the course of this
account of Jacob's career the inward as well as the
outward fortunes of the man have somewhat ap-
peared. Yet a more comprehensive view of the


kind of man he was will not be superfluous at this
point. With what disposition was he endowed—
the natural nucleus for acquired characteristics and
habits? Through what stages did he pass in the
development of his beliefs and his character? In
particular, what attitude did he maintain toward
the most significant thing in his life, the promise of
God to his house? And lastly, what resemblances
may be traced in Israel the man to Israel the nation,
of such sort that the one may be regarded as ‘‘typi-
cal” of the other? These matters deserve more
than a passing notice. rH)
From his father, Jacob inherited that domesticity
and affectionate attachment to his home circle
which appears in his life from begin-
1. Natural ningtoend. He inherited shrewdness,
Qualities initiative and resourcefulness from
Rebekah—dqualities which she shared
apparently with her brother Laban and all his
family. The conspicuous ethical faults of Abraham
and Isaac alike are want of candor and want. of
courage. It is not surprising, therefore, to find
the same failings in Jacob. Deceit and cowardice
are visible again and again in the impartial record
of his life. Both sprmg from unbelief. They
belong to the natural man. God’s transformation
of this man was wrought by faith—by awakening
and nourishing in him a simple trust in the truth
and power of the Divine word. For Jacob was not
at any time in his career indifferent to the things of
the spirit, the things unseen and belonging to the
future. Unlike Esau, he was not callous to the
touch of God. Whether through inheritance, or
as a fruit of early teaching, he had as the inesti-
mable treasure, the true capital of his spiritual
career, a firm conviction of the value of what God
had promised, and a supreme ambition to obtain
it for himself and his children. But against the
Divine plan for the attainment of this goal by faith,
there worked in Jacob constantly his natural quali-
ties, the non-moral as well as the immoral qualities,
that urged him to save himself and his fortunes
by “works’—by sagacity, cunning, compromise,
pertinacity—anything and everything that would
anticipate God’s accomplishing His purpose in
His own time and His own way. In short, “the
end justifies the means” is the program that, more
than all others, finds illustration and rebuke in the
character of Jacob.
Starting with such a combination of natural
endowments, social, practical, ethical, Jacob passed
through a course of Divine tuition,


2. Stages which, by building upon some of them,
of Devel- repressing others and transfiguring the
opment remaider, issued in the triumph of


grace over nature, in the transforma-
tion of a Jacob into an Israel. This tuition has
been well analyzed by a recent writer (Thomas,
Genesis, III, 204 f) into the school of sorrow, the
school of providence and the school of grace. Under
the head of sorrow, it is not difficult to recall many
experiences in the career just reviewed: long exile;
disappointment; sinful passions of greed, anger,
lust_and envy in others, of which Jacob was the
victim; perplexity; and, again and again, bereave-
ment of those he held most dear.

But besides these sorrows, God's providence
dealt with him in ways most remarkable, and per-
haps more instructive for the study of such Divine
dealings than in the case of any other character in
the OT. By alternate giving and withholding, by
danger here and deliverance there, by good and evil
report, now by failure of “‘best laid schemes” and
now by success with seemingly inadequate means,
God developed in him the habit—not native to him
as it seems to have been in part to Abraham and to
Joseph —of reliance on Divine power and guidance,


1553


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jacob


of accepting the Divine will, of realizing the Divine
nearness and faithfulness.

And lastly, there are those admirably graded
lessons in the grace of God, that were imparted in
the series of Divine appearances to the patriarch,
at Beth-el, at Haran, at Peniel, at Beth-el again
and at Beersheba. For if the substance of these
Divine revelations be compared, it will be found
that all are alike in the assurance (1) that God is
with him to bless; (2) that the changes of his life
are ordained of God and are for his ultimate good;
and (3) that he is the heir of the ancestral promises.


It will further be found that they may he arranged In
a variety of ways, according as one or another of the
revelations he viewed as the climax. Thus (1), agreeing
with the chronological order, the appearance at Beer-
sheha ae well be regarded as the climax of them all.
Abraham had gone to Egypt to escape a famine (12 10),
but be went without revelation, and returned with bitter
experience of his error. Isaac essayed to go to Egypt
for the same cause (26 1f), and was prevented hy reve-
lation. Jacob now goes to Egypt, but he goes with the
express approval of the God of his fathers, and with the
emmy assurance that the same Divine providence which
ordained this removal (§Q 20) will see that it does not
frustrate any of the promises of God. ‘his was a crisis
in the history of the ‘‘Kingdom of God"' on a par with
events like the Exodus, the Exile, or the Return.

(2) In its significance for his personal history, the
first of these revelations was unique. Beth-el witnessed
Jacob's choice, evidently for the first time, of his fathers’
God as his God. And though we find Jacob later toler-
ating idolatry in his household and compromising his
religious testimony by sin, we never find a hint of his
own unfaithfulness to this first and final religious choice.
This is further confirmed by the attachment of his later
revelations to this primary one, as though this lent them
the significance of continuity, and made possible the unity
of his religious experience. So at Haran it was the
“God of Beth-el’’ who directed his return (31 13); at
Shechem it was to Beth-el that he was directed, in order
that he might at length fulfil his Beth-el vow, by erect-
ing there an altar to the God who had there appeared
to him (35 1); and at Beth-el finally the promise of
former years was renewed to him who was henceforth
to he Israel (vs 9-15).

(3) Though thus punctuated with the supernatural,
the only striking bit of the marvelous in all this biography
is the night scene at Peniel. And this too may justly
be claimed as a climax in Jacoh’s development. There
he first received his new name, and though he deserved
it as little in many scenes thereafter as he had deserved
it hefore, yet the same could be said of many a man who
has ‘‘seen the face of God,” but has yet to grasp, like
Jacob, the lesson that the way to overcome is through
the pel ples but clinging importunity of faith.

(4) Rather than in any of the other scenes, however, it
was at Beth-el the second time that the patriarch
reached the topmost rung on the ladder of development.
As already noticed, the substance of all the earlier reve-
lations is here renewed and combined. It is no wonder
that after this solemn theophany we find Jacob, like
Moses later, ‘enduring as seeing him who is invisible’
(He 11 27), and ‘‘waiting for the salvation’’ (Gen 49
18) of a God ‘who is not ashamed of him, to he called
Boies (He 11 16), but is repeatedly called ‘'the God
of Jacoh.”


Finally, such a comparison of these revelations
to Jacob reveals a variety in the way God makes
Himself known. In the first revelation, naturally,
the effort is made chiefly to impress upon its recip-
ient the identity of the revealing God with the God
of his fathers. And it has been remarked already
that in the later revelations the same care is taken
to identify the Revealer with the One who gave
that first revelation, or else to identify Him, as
then, with the God of the fathers. Yet, m addition
to this, there is a richness and suitability in the
Divine names revealed, which a mechanical theory
of literary sources not only leaves unexplained but
fails even to recognize. At Beth-el first it is Jeh,
the personal name of this God, the God of his fathers,
who enters into a new personal relation with Jacob;
now, of all times in his career, he needs to know God
by the differential mark that distinguishes Him
absolutely from other gods, that there may never
be confusion as to Jeh’s identity. But this matter
is settled for Jacob once for all. Thenceforth one
of the ordinary terms for deity, with or without an
attributive adjunct, serves to lift the patriarch’s


soul into communication with his Divine Inter-
locutor. The most general word of all in the Sem
tongues for deity is ’Hl, the word used in the
revelations to Jacob at Haran (81 13), at Shechem
(86 1), at Beth-el the second time (35 11) and at
Beersheba (46 3). But it is never used alone.
Like Allah in the Arab. language (=the God), so
‘El with the definite article before it serves to des-
ignate in Heb a particular divinity, not deity in
general. Or else ’Hi without the article is made
definite by some genitive phrase that supplies the
necessary identification: so in Jacob’s case, El-
beth-el (85 7; cf 31 13) or El-Elohe-Israel (33 20).
Or, lastly, there is added to ’H? some determining
title, with the force of an adjective, as Shaddai (tr4
“Almighty”’) in 86 11 (cf_48 3). In clear dis-
tinction from this word, ’Hl, with its archaic or
poetic flavor, is the common Heb word for God,
Flohim. But while ’Hléhim is used regularly by
the narrator of the Jacob-stories in speaking, or in
letting his actors speak, of Jacob’s God, who to


-the monotheistic writer is of course the God and


his own God, he never puts this word thus abso-
lutely into the mouth of the revealing Deity. Jacob
can say, when he awakes from his dream, ‘This
is the house of ’Elohkim,’ but God says to him
in the dream, “I am the God [Elohim] of thy
‘ather” (28 17.13). At Mahanaim Jacob says,
“This is the host of ’Hlahim” (32 2), but at
Beersheba God says to Jacob, “I am... . the
God ['Hlahim] of thy father” (46 3). Such are the
distinctions maintained in the use of these words,
all of them used of the same God, yet chosen in
each case to fit the circumstances of speaker, hearer
and situation.


The only passage in the story of Jacob that might
appear to he an exception does in fact hut prove the rule.
At Peniel the angel of God explains the new name of
Israel hy saying, ‘‘Thou hast striven with God ['Elahim]
and with men, and hast prevailed.’’ Here the contrast
with ''men” proves that 'Eléhim without the article is
just. the_right expression, even on the lips of Deity:
neither Deity nor humanity has prevailed against Jacob


Throughout the entire story of Jacob, therefore,
his relations with Jeh his God, after they were once
established (28 13-16), are narrated in terms that
emphasize the Divinity of Him who had thus entered
into covenant-relationship with him: His Divinity
—that is to say, those attributes in which His Divinity
manifested itself in His dealings with Jacob.

From the foregoing, two things appear with
respect to Jacob’s attitude toward the promise of

God. First, with all his faults and
3. Attitude vices he yet was spiritually sensitive;
toward the he responded to the approaches of his
Promise God concerning things of a value wholly

spiritual—future good, moral and
spiritual blessings. And second, he was capable
of progress in these matters; that is, his reaction
to the Divine tuition would appear, if charted, as
a series of elevations, separated one from another,
to be sure, by low levels and deep declines, yet each
one higher than the last, and all taken collectively
lifting the whole average up and up, till in the end
faith has triumphed over sight, the future over
present good, a yet unpossessed but Divinely
promised Canaan over all the comfort and honors
of Egypt, and the aged patriarch lives only to
“wait for Jeh’'s salvation” (49 18).

The contrast of Jacob with Fsau furnishes per-
haps the best means of grasping the significance
of these two facts for an estimate of Jacob’s atti-
tude toward the promise. For in the first place,
Esau, who possessed so much that Jacob lacked—
directness, manliness, a sort of bonhomie, that made
him superficially more attractive than his brother
—Esau shows nowhere any real “sense” for things


Jacob


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1554


spiritual. The author of Hebrews has caught the
man in the flash of a single word, “profane” (6é-
Bydos, bébélos)—of course, in the older, broader,
etymological meaning of the term. Esau’s desires
dwelt in the world of the non-sacred; they did not
aspire to that world of nearness to God, where one
must ‘put off the shoes from off his feet, because
the place whereon he stands is holy ground.’ And
in the second place, there is no sign of growth in
Esau. What we see him in his father’s encamp-
ment, that we see him to the end—so far as appears
from the laconic story. With the virtues as well
as the vices of the man who lives for the present—
forgiving when strong enough to revenge, conde-
scending when flattered, proud of power and
independent of parental control or family tradition
—Esau is as impartially depicted by the sacred his-
torian as if the writer had been an Edomite instead
of an Israelite: the sketch is evidently true to life,
both from its objectivity and from its coherence.
Now what Esau was, Jacob was not. His fault
in connection with the promises of God, the family


tradition, the ancestral blessing, lay not in despising "


them, but in seeking them in immoral ways. Good
was his aim; but he was ready to “do evil that good
might come.” He was always tempted to be his
own Providence, and God’s training was clearly
directed, both by providential leadings and by
gracious disclosures, to this corresponding purpose:
to enlighten Jacob as to the nature of the promise;
to assure him that it was his by grace; to awaken
personal faith in its Divine Giver; and to supple-
ment his “faith” by that “patience” without which
none can “inherit the promises.” The faith that
accepts was to issue at length in the faith that waits.


A nation was to take its name from Jacob-Israel, and
there are some passages of Scripture where it is uncertain
whether the name designates the nation or

4. How Far its ancestor. In their respective relations

“Type”? to God and to the world of men and na-
a _ftype tions, there is a true sense in which the
of Israel father was a ‘‘type" of the children. It
is probahly only a play of fancy that
would discover a parallel in their respective careers,
hetween the successive stages of life in the father's
home (Canaan), life in exile, a return, and a second exile.
But it is not fanciful to note the resemblance hetween
Jacob's character and that of his descendants. With
few exceptions the qualities mentioned ahove (IV, 2)
will be found, mutatis mutandis, to he equally appli-
cable to the nation of Israel. And even that curriculum
in which the patriarch learned of God_may he viewed
as a type of the school in which the Heh people—not
all of them, nor even the mass, but the ‘‘remnant” who
approximated to the ideal Israel of the prophets, the
“servant of Jeh'’—were taught the lessons of faith and
patience, of renunciation and consecration, that appear
with growing clearness on the pages of Isaiah, of Habak-
kuk, of Jeremiah, of Malachi. This is apparently
Hosea's point of view in 12 2-4.12. z :

A word of caution, however, is needed at this point.
There are limits to this equation. Even critics who
regard Jacob under his title of Israel as merely the
eponymous hero, created by legend to be the forefather
of the nation (cf below, VI, 1), must confess that Jacob
as Jacob is no such neutral creature, dressed only in the
colors of his children's racial qualities. There is a large
residuum in Jacob, after all parallelisms have been
traced, that refuses to fit the lines of Heb national char-
acter or history, and his typical relation in fact lies
chiefly in the direction of the covenant-inheritance, after
the fashion of Malachi's allusion (Mal 1 2), interpreted
by Paul (Rom 9 10-13).


V. References Outside of Genesis.—Under his
two names this personage Jacob or Israel is more
frequently mentioned than any other in the whole
of sacred history. Yet in the vast majority of
cases the nation descended from him is intended
by the name, which in the form of “Jacob” or
“Israel” contains not the slightest, and in the form
“children of Israel,’’ “house of Jacob” and the like,
only the slightest, if any, allusion to the patriarch
himself. But there still remain many passages
in both Testaments where the Jacob or Israel of
Gen is clearly alluded to.


There is a considerable group of passages that
refer to him as the last of the patriarchal triumvirate


—Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: so
1. In particularly of Jeh as the “God of
the OT Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,” and of


the covenant-oath as having been
“sworn unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.” And
naturally the nation that is known by his name is
frequently called by some phrase, equivalent to the
formal bené yisra’él, yet through its unusualness
Jending more significance to the idea of their deri-
vation from him: so “‘seed of Jacoh” and (frequently)
“house of Jacob {Israel].’’ But there are a few
OT passages outside of Gen in which so much of
Jacob’s history has been preserved, that from these
allusions alone a fair notion might have been
gathered concerning the Hebrews’ tradition of their
common ancestor, even if all the story in Gen had
been lost. These passages are: Josh 24 3.4.32;
Ps 105 10-23; Hos 12 2-412; Mal12f. Be-
sides these, there are other allusions, scattered a
word here and a sentence there, from all of which
together we learn as follows. God gave to Isaac
twin sons, Esau and Jacob, the latter at birth taking
the former by the heel. God elected Jacob to be
the recipient of the covenant-promise made to his
father Isaac and to his grandfather Abraham; and
this choice involved the rejection of Esau. Jeh
appeared to Jacob at Beth-el and told him the land
of Canaan was to be his and his seed’s after
him forever. Circumstances not explained caused
Jacob to flee from his home in Canaan to Aram,
where he served as a shepherd to obtain a wife
as his wage. He became the father of 12 sons.
He strove with the angel of God and prevailed
amid earnest supplication. His name was by Jeh
Himself changed to Israel. Under Divine pro-
tection as God’s chosen one and representative, his
life was that of a wanderer from place to place;
once only he bought a piece of land, for a hundred
pieces, near Shechem, from Hamor, the father of
Shechem. A famine drove him down to Egypt,
but not without providential preparation for the
reception there of himself and all his family, through
the remarkable fortunes of his son Joseph, sold,
exiled, imprisoned, delivered, and exalted to a posi-
tion where he could dispose of rulers and nations.
In Egypt the children of Jacob multiplied rapidly,
and at his death he made the sons of Joseph the
heirs of the only portion of Canaanitish soil that
he had acquired.

From this it appears, first, that not much that is
essential in the biography of Jacob would have
perished though Gen had been lost; and, second,
that the sum of the incidental allusions outside
Gen resemble the total impression of the narratives
in Gen—in other words, that the Bib. tradition is
self-consistent. And it runs back to a date (Hosea,
8th cent. BC) little farther removed from the events
recounted than the length of time that separates
our own day from the Norman conquest, or the
Fall of Constantinople from the Hegira, or Jesus
Christ from Solomon.

In the NT also there are, besides the references
to Jacob simply as the father of his nation, several

passages that recall events in his life
2. Inthe or traits of his character. These are:
NT Jn 4 5.6.12; Acts 7 12.14-16; Rom
; 9 10-13; He 11 9.20f. Inthe conver-
sation between Jesus and the Samaritan woman it
appears that the Samaritans cherished the association
of Jacob with the ground he bought near Shechem,
and with the well he dug while sojourning there with
his sons and his flocks; they prided themselves on
its transmission to them through Joseph, not to
the hated Jews through Judah, and magnified them-
selves in magnifying Jacob’s “greatness” and calling


1555


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jacob


him “our father.’ Stephen’s speech, as Luke
reports it, includes in its rapid historical flight a
hint or two about Jacob beyond the bare fact of his
lace in the tribal genealogy. Moved by the
amine prevailing in Egypt and Canaan, Jacob
twice dispatches his sons to buy grain in Egypt, and
the second time Joseph is made known to his
brothers, and his race becomes manifest to Pharaoh.
At Joseph’s behest, Jacob and all the family remove
to Egypt. There all remain until their death, but
the “fathers” (Joseph and his brethren; cf Jerome,
Episiola eviii, ed. Migne) are buried in the family
possession near Shechem. (Here emerges one of
those divergences from the OT tradition that are
a notable feature of Stephen’s speech, and that
have furnished occasion for much speculation upon
their origin, value and implications. See comms. on
Acts.) Paul’s interest in Jacob appears in con-
nection with his discussion of Divine election,
where he calls attention to the oracle of Gen 25 23
and to the use already made of the passage by
Malachi (1 2f), and reminds his readers that this
choice of Jacob and rejection of Esau was made
by God even before these twin sons of Isaac and
Rebecca were born. Finally, the author of He,
when charting the heroes of faith, focuses his glass
for a moment upon Jacob: first, as sharing with
Abraham and Isaac the promise of God and the
life of unworldly, expectant faith (He 11 9); and
second, as receiving from Isaac, and at his death
transmitting to his grandsons, blessings that had
value only for one who worships and believes a God
with power over “things to come” (vs 20f).

VI. Modern Interpretations of Jacob.—For those
who see in the patriarchal narratives anything—
myth, legend, saga—rather than true biography,
there is, of course, a different interpretation of the
characters and events portrayed in the familiar
Gen-stories, and a different value placed upon the
stories themselves.


a paet from the allegorizing treatment accorded them
by Philo the Jew and early Christian writers of like
mind (see specimen in AsraHam), these views helong
to modern criticism. To critics who make Heh history
begin with the settlement of Canaan by the nomad
Israelites fresh from the desert, even the Mosaic age
and the Egyp residence are totally unhistorical—much
more so these tales of a pre-Mosaic patriarchal age.
Yet even those writers who admit the broad outlines of
a residence of the tribes in Egypt, an exodus of some
sort, and a founder of the nation named Moses, are for
the most part skeptical of this cycle of family figures
and fortunes in a remote age, with its nomads wander-
ing between Mesopotamia and Canaan, and to and fro
in Canaan, its circumstantial acquaintance with the
names and relationships of each individual through
those 4 long patriarchal generations, and its obvious
foreshadowing of much that the later tribes were on
this same soil to act out cents. later. This, we are told,
is not history. Whatever else it may be, it is not a
reliable account of such memorable events as compel
their own immortality in the memories and through the
written records of mankind.


The commonest view held, collectively of the
entire narrative, specifically of Jacob, is that which
sees here the precipitate from a pure

1. Personi- solution of the national character and
fication of fortunes. Wellhausen, e.g., says (Pro-
the Hebrew legomena’, 316): ‘The material here
Nation is not mythical, but national; there-
fore clearer [viz. than in Gen 1-11]

and in a certain sense historical. To be sure there
is no historical knowledge to be gained here about
the patriarchs, but only about the time in which the
stories concerning them arose in the people of Israel;
this later time with its inward and outward char-
acteristics is here unintentionally projected into the
gray antiquity and mirrored therein like a glorified
phantasm . ... [p. 818] Jacob is more real-
istically drawn than the other two [Abraham and
Isaac].”’ In section IV, 4, above, we observed


that, while many of Jacob’s personal qualitics pre-
figured the qualities of the later Heb people, there
were some others that did not at all fit this equation.
Wellhausen himself remarks this, in regard to the
contrast between warlike Israel and the peaceful
ancestors they invented for themselves. In his
attempt to account for this contrast, he can only
urge that a nation condemned to eternal wars
would naturally look back upon, as well as forward
to, a golden age of peace. (An alternative explana-
tion he states, only to reject.) He fails to observe
that this plea does not in the least alter the fact—his
plea is indeed but.a restatement of the fact—that
this phenomenon is absolutely at variance with his
hypothesis of how these stories of Jacob and the
rest came to be what they are (see Meyer, Die
Israeliten und ihre Nachbarstémme, 250 ff).

This general view, which when carried to its
extreme implications (as by Steuernagel, Die Hin-
wanderung der tsraelitischen Stdmme in Kanaan,

1901) comes perilously near the reduc-
2. God and tio ad absurdum that is its own refuta-
Demi-God tion, has been rejected by that whole
group of critics, who, following Néldeke,
see in Jacob, as in so many others of the patriarchs,
an original deity (myth), first abased to the grade
of a hero (heroic legend), and at last degraded to the
level of a clown (tales of jest or marvel). Adherents
of this trend of interpretation differ widely among
themselves as to details, but Jacob is generally
regarded as a Canaanitish deity, whose local shrine
was at Shechem, Beth-el or Peniel, and whose cult
was taken over by the Hebrews, their own object
of worship being substituted for him, and the out-
standing features of his personality being made
over into a hero that Israel appropriated as their
national ancestor, even to the extent of giving him
the secondary name of Israel. Stade attempted
a combination of this “mythical” view with the
“national” view in the interest of his theory of
primitive animism, by making the patriarch a
‘mythological figure revered as an eponymous
hero.” This theory, in any form, requires the
assumption, which there is nothing to support, that
Jacob (or Jacob-el) is a name originally belonging
to a deity and framed to fit his supposed character.
At first, then, it meant “’HI deceives” or ‘El
recompenses” (so B. Luther, ZATW, 1901, 60 ff;
cf also the same writer, as well as Meyer himself,
in the latter’s Israeliten, etc, 109 ff, 271 ff). Meyer
proposes the monstrosity of a nominal sentence
with the tr, ‘‘ ‘He deceives’ is ’Hl.” Thus the first
element of the name Jacob came to be felt as the
name itself (= “Jacob is God”’), and it was launched
upon its course of evolution into the human per-
sonage that Gen knows. It suffices to say with
regard to all this, that in addition to its being inher-
ently improbable—not to say, unproved—it goes
directly in the face of the archaeological evidence
adduced under I, 1, above. The simple fact that
Jacob(-el) was a personal name for men, of every-
day occurrence in the 2d-3d millenniums BC, is
quite enough to overthrow this whole hypothesis;
for, as Luther himself remarks (op. cit., 65), the
above evolution of the name is essential to the
“mythical” theory: ‘when this alteration took
place cannot be told; yet it has to be postulated,
since otherwise it remains inexplicable, how personal
names could arise out of these formations [like
Jacob-el] by rejection of the ’H1.”
The inadequacy of the two theories hitherto ad-
vanced to account for the facts of Gen being thus
evident, Gunkel and others have ex-
3. Character plicitly rejected them and enunciated
of Fiction a third theory, which may be called
the saga-theory. According to Gun-
kel, ‘‘to understand the persons of Gen as nations


Jacob
Jael


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1556


is by no means a general key to their interpretation” ;
and, “‘against the whole assumption that the prin-
cipal patriarchal figures are originally gods is this
fact first and foremost, that the names Jacob and
Abraham are shown by the Bab to be customary
personal names, and furthermore that the tales
about them cannot be understood at all as echoes
of original myths.” In place of these discredited
views Gunkel (cf also Gressmann, ZATW, 1910,
1 ff) makes of Jacob simply a character in the
stories (marvelous, humorous, pathetic and the
like) current in ancient Israel, esp. on the lips of the
professional story-teller. Whereas much of the
material in these stories came to the Hebrews from
the Babylonians, Canaanites or Egyptians, Jacob
himself is declared to have belonged to the old Heb
saga, with its flavor of nomadic desert life and
sheep-raising. ‘The original Jacob may be the
sly shepherd Jacob, who fools the hunter Esau;
another tale, of the deceit of a father-in-law by his
son-in-law, was added to it—the more naturally
because both are shepherds; a third cycle, about
an old man that loves his youngest son, was trans-
ferred to this figure, and that youngest son received
the name of Joseph at a time when Jacob was identi-
fied with Israel’s assumed ancestor ‘Israel.’ Thus
our result is, that the most important patriarchs
are creations of fiction” (Schriften des AT, 5te
Lieferung, 42).

It is so obvious that this new attitude toward
the patriarchs lends itself to a more sympathetic
criticism of the narrative of Gen, that critics who
adopt it are at pains to deny any intention on their
part of rehabilitating Jacob et al. as historical
figures. “Saga,” we are told, “is not capable of
preserving through so many cents. a picture” of
the real character or deeds of its heroes, even sup-
posing that persons bearing these names once actu-
ally lived; aud we are reminded of the contrast
between the Etzel of saga and the Attila of history,
the Dietrich of saga and the Theodoric of history.
But as against this we need to note, first, that the
long and involved course of development through
which, ex hypothest, these stories have passed before
reaching their final stage (J, 9th cent. BC; Gunkel,
op. cit., 8, 46) involves a very high antiquity for
the earlier stages, and thus reduces to a narrow
strip of time those “so many cents.” that are sup-
posed to separate the actual Jacob from the Jacob
of saga (cf Apranam, VII, 4); and second, that
the presuppositions as to the origin, nature and
value of saga with which this school of criticism
operates are, for the most part, only an elaborate
statement of the undisputed major premise in a
syllogism, of which the minor premise is: the Gen-
stories are saga. Against this last proposition,
however, there lie many weighty considerations, that
are by no means counterbalanced by those resem-
blances of a general sort which any student of
comparative literature can easily discern (see also
Baethgen, op. cit., 158). James Oscar Boyp


JACOB (AP32, ya'dkobh; "ToxoB, Takob):

(1) The patriarch (see preceding art.).

(2) The father of Joseph the husband of Mary
(Mt ‘1 15.16).

(3) Patronymic denoting the Israelites (Isa 10
21; 14 1; Jer 10 16).


JACOB, TESTAMENT OF. See Apocatyprtic
LITERATURE.


JACOB’S WELL (anyh tod ‘IaxoB, pégé tov
Takéb): In Jn 4 3 ff we read that Our Lord “left
Judaea, and departed again into Galilee. And he
must needs pass through Samaria. So he cometh
to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near to the


parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph:
and Jacob’s well was there.” When Jacob came to

Shechem on his return from Paddan-
1. Position aram he encamped “before,’’ i.e. E. of
of Well the city, and bought the land on which

he had spread his tent (Gen 33 18f).
This is doubtless the “portion” (Heb shtkhem)
spoken of in Gen 48 22; although there it is said


Jacob’s Well.


to have been taken with sword and bow from the
Amorites. Where the pass of Shechem opens to
the E., near the northern edge of the valley, lies the
traditional tomb of Joseph. On the other side of
the vale, close to the base of Gerizim, is the well
universally known as Bir Ya'kiub, “the well of
Jacob.” The position meets perfectly the require-
ments of the narrative. The main road from the
8. splits a little to the E., one arm leading westward
through the pass, the other going more directly to
theN. It is probable that these paths follow pretty
closely the ancient tracks; and both would be fre-
quented in Jesus’ day. Which of them He took
we cannot tell; but, in any case, this well lay in
the fork between them, and could be approached
with equal ease from either. See Sycrar.

In the chapter quoted, it is said that Jacob dug
the well (ver 12). The OT says nothing of this.

With the copious springs at ‘Ain
2. Why ‘Askar and Balatd, one might ask
Dug why a well should have been dug here
at all. We must remember that in
the East, very strict laws have always governed
the use of water, esp. when there were large herds
to be considered. The purchase of land here may
not have secured for Jacob such supplies as he
required. There was danger of strife between rival
herdsmen. The patriarch, therefore, may have
dug the well in the interests of peace, and also to
preserve his own independence.

Jew, Samaritan, Moslem and Christian agree in
associating this well with the patriarch Jacob.

This creates a strong presumption in

3. Consen- favor of the tradition: and there is no

sus of good reason to doubt its truth. Stand-

Tradition ing at the brink of the well, over-

i shadowed by the giant bulk of Geri-

zim, one feels how naturally it would be spoken of
as “this mountain,”

For long the well was unprotected, opening among
the ruins of a vaulted chamber some feet below the
surface of the ground. Major Anderson describes
it (Recovery of Jerus, 465) as having “a narrow
opening, Just wide enough to allow the body of a


1557


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jacob
Jael


man to pass through with arms uplifted, and this
narrow neck, which is about 4 ft. long, opens into

the well itself, which is eylindrically
4. Descrip- shaped, and about 7 ft. 6in.in diameter.
tion The mouth and upper part of the well

are built of masonry, and the well
appears to have been sunk through a mixture of
alluvial soil and limestone fragments, till a com-
pact bed of mountain limestone was reached, having
horizontal strata which could be easily worked;
and the interior of the well presents the appear-
ance of having been lined throughout with rough ma-
sonry.” The depth was doubtless much greater
in ancient times; but much rubbish has fallen into
it, and now it is not more than 75 ft. deep. It is
fed by no spring, nor is the water conducted to it
along the surface, as to a cistern. Its supplies
depend entirely upon rainfall and percolation.
Possibly, therefore, the water may never have
approached the brim. The woman says ‘‘the well
is deep.” Pégé, “spring,’ does not, therefore,
strictly apply to it, but rather “tank” or “reser-
voir,” phréar, the word actually used in vs 11f.
The modern inhabitants of Nablés highly esteem
the “light”? water of the well as compared with
the “heavy” or “hard” water of the neighboring
springs. It usually lasts till about the end of May;
then the well is dry till the return of the rain. Its
contents, therefore, differ from the ‘‘living” water
of the perennial spring.

From the narratives of the pilgrims we learn that
at different times churches have been built over the
well. The Moslems probably demolished the last
of them after the overthrow of the Crusaders in
1187. A description of the ruins with drawings,
as they were 30 years ago, is given in PEF, II, 174,
ete. A stone found in 1881 may have been the
original cover of the well. It measures 3 ft. 9 in.X
2 ft. 7 in.X1 ft. 6 in. The aperture in the center
is 13 in. in diameter; and in its sides are grooves
worn by the ropes used in drawing up the water
(PEFS, 1881, 212 ff). ANG

Some years ago the plot of ground containing the
well was purchased by the authorities of the Gr
church, and it has been surrounded by
awall. A chapel has been built over
the well, and a large church is being
erected beside it. W. Ewine


JACUBUS, ja-ki’bus (IdxovBos, Idkoubos; B
reads Iarsoiboos): In1 Esd 9 48=“Akkub” in Neh
8 7, a Levite who helped in the exposition of the
law.


JADA, ja’da (9M, yadha‘, “the knowing one’):
Son of Onam and grandson of Jerahmeel by his wife
Atarab (1 Ch 2 26.28.32).


JADA, ja’dé, ja-da’a (1, yiddd, Kethibh; 72,
yadday, Keré AV; but RV IDDO): In Ezr 10 43,
one of those who had married foreign wives. RVm
has “Jaddai” (=“Edos,” 1 Esd 9 35). See Inno.


JADDAI, jad’, jad’4-i.


JADDUA, jad’t-a, ja-di’a (572,
“known’’): ;

(1) One of the “chiefs of the people” who with
Nehemiah sealed the covenant, thus signifying
their voluntary acceptance of the law and _their
solemn promise to submit to its yoke (Neb 10 21
(Heb 22]).

(2) Son of Jonathan or Johanan, and great-
grandson of Eliashib, the bigh priest in Nehemiah’s
time (Neh 12 11.22). He is the last of the high
priests mentioned in the OT, and held office during
the reign of Darius the Pers, i.e. Darius ITI Codo-


5. Present
Condition


See Ippo; Japau.


yaddiin,


mannus, the last king of Persia (336-332 BC), who
was overthrown by Alexander the Great. It is
doubtless to him that Jos refers in his romantic
account of Alexander’s entrance into Jerus (Ant,
XI, viii, 4f; vii, 2; viii, 7). James Cricuton


JADDUS, jad’us (B, *Ia&Sots, Iaddowvis; A, *Io8-
Sovs, Joddotis): AV has ‘‘Addus’=Barzillai (Kzr 2
61; Neh 7 63). J. was removed from the office
of the priesthood because he could not prove his
right to it after the return to Jerus under Zerub-
babel (1 Esd & 38). He is called Barzillai in the
OT, because he married Augia, the daughter of
Zorzelleus (Barzillai the Gileadite, in the OT). Cf
BaRzi.ial.


JADON, ja’don (j17", yddhon, perhaps “he
will judge” or “‘plead’’): One who helped to rebuild
the wall of Jerus in company with the men of Gibeon
and of Mizpah (Neh 3 7). He is called the “Mer-
onothite,”’ and another Meronothite is referred to
in 1 Ch 27 30, but there is no mention of a place
Meronoth, Jadon is the name given by Jos (Ant,
VIII, viii, 5; ix, 1) to “the man of God” from Judah
who confronted Jeroboam as he burned incense at
the altar in Bethel, and who was afterward deceived
by the lie of the old prophet (1 K 13). Jos may
probably have meant Iddo the seer, whose visions
concerning Jeroboam (2 Ch 9 29) led to his being
identified in Jewish tradition with “the man of
God” from Judah. JAMES CRICHTON


JAEL, ji’el (> , yatél, “a wild or mountain
goat,” as in Ps 104 18; 'IaqA, Jaél): The wife of
Heber the Kenite and the slayer of Sisera (Jgs 4
17-22; 6 2-31). Jael emerges from obscurity by
this single deed, and by the kindest construction
can hardly be said to have reached an enviable
fame. The history of this event is clear. For
years Jabin the king of Canaan had oppressed
Israel. For twenty years the Israelites had been
subject to him, and, in largest measure, the instru-
ment of their subjugation had been Sisera, the king’s
general, the ‘‘man of the iron chariots.”” Deborah,
a prophetess of Israel, by her passion for freedom,
had roused the tribes of Israel to do battle against
Sisera. They defeated him at “‘Taanach by the
waters of Megiddo,’’ but Sisera sought in flight to
save himself. He came to the “oaks of the wander-
ers,’ where the tribe of Heber lived. Here he
sougbt, and was probably invited, to take shelter
in the tent of Jael (4 17-18). There are two
accounts of the subsequent events—one a prose
narrative (4 19-22), the other a poetic one, fnund
in Deborah’s song of triumph (5 24-27). The two
accounts are as nearly in agreement as could be
expected, considering their difference in form.

It is evident that the tribe of Heber was regarded
by both parties to the struggle as being neutral.
They were descendants of Jethro, and hence had
the confidence of the Israelites. Though they had
suffered somewhat at the hands of the Canaanites
they had made a formal contract of peace with
Jabin. Naturally Sisera could turn to the tents of
Heber in Kedesh-naphtali with some confidence.
The current laws of hospitality gave an added ele-
ment of safety. Whether Jael met Sisera and urged
him to enter her tent and rest (4 18), or only in-
vited him after his appeal for refuge, the fact
remains that he was her guest, was in the sanctuary
of her home, and protected by the laws of hospi-
tality. She gave him milk to drink, a mantle for
covering, and apparently acquiesced in his request
that she should stand guard at the tent and deny
his presence to any pursuers. When sleep came to
the wearied fugitive she took a ‘‘tent-pin, and took
a hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him,


Jagur
Jambri


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1558


and smote the pin into his temples” (ver 21), and
having murdered him, goes forth to meet Barak
the Israelitish general and claims the credit for her
deed. Some critics suggest that Sisera was not
asleep when murdered, and thus try to convert
Jael’s treachery into strategy. But to kill your
guest while he is drinking the milk of hospitality
is little less culpable than to murder him while
asleep. There is no evidence that Sisera offered
Jael any insult or violence, and but little proba-
bility that she acted under any spiritual or Divine
suggestion. It is really impossible to justify Jael’s
act, though it is not impossible to understand it or
properly to appreciate Deborah’s approval of the
act as found in 6 24. The motive of Jacl may
have been a mixed one. She may have been a
sympathizer with Israel and with the religion of
Israel. But the narrative scarcely warrants the
interpretation that she felt herself as one called to
render “‘stern justice on an enemy of God” (Exposi-
tor’s Bible). Jael was unquestionably prudential.
Sisera was in flight and Barak in pursuit. Probably
her sympathy was with Barak, but certainly reflec-
tion would show her that it would not be wisdom
to permit Barak to find Sisera in her tent. She
knew, too, that death would be Sisera’s portion
should he be captured—therefore she would kill
him and thus cement a friendship with the con-
queror.

As to Deborah’s praise of Jael (5 24), there is no
call to think that in her hour of triumph she was
either capable of or intending to appraise the moral
quality of Jael’s deed. Her country’s enemy was
dead and that too at the hand of a woman. The
woman who would kill Sisera must be the friend of
Israel. Deborah had no question of the propriety
of meting out death to a defeated persecutor. Her
times were not such as to raise this question. The
method of his death mattered little to her, for all
the laws of peace were abrogated in the times of war.
Therefore Jael was blessed among women by all
who loved Israel. Whether Deborah thought her
also to be worthy of the blessing of God we may not
tell. At any rate there is no need for us to try to
justify the treachery of Jael in order to explain the
words of Deborah. C. E. Scoenx


JAGOR, ja’gur (1737, yaghtr): An unidentified
town on the Edomite frontier of Judah in the S.
(Josh 15 21).


JAH, ja.


JAHATH, ja’hath (M7, yahath, perhaps for
MAM, yahieh, TM, yahdtheh, “he [God] will
snatch up’’):

(1) Son of Reaiah, son of Shobal, a descendant
of Judah, and father of Ahumai and Lahad, the
families of the Zorathites (1 Ch 4 2).

(2) A frequent name for a descendant of Levi:

(a) Son of Libni, son of Gershom, the eldest son
of Levi (1 Ch 6 20.43 [Heb 6 5.28], where “son of
Libni’” is omitted).

(b) Son of Shimei, son of Gershom (1 Ch 23 10f).

(c) One of the “sons” of Shelomoth, a descend-
ant of Izhar, son of Kohath, the second son of Levi
(1 Ch 24 22). .

(d) A descendant of Merari, the third son of Levi,
and an overseer in the repairing of the temple in the
reign of Josiah (2 Ch 84 12). James CricuTon


JAHAZ, jahaz (702, yahag, Isa 15 4; Jer 48
34, MET}, yahdcdh, or NEM, yaheah, Nu 21 23;
Dt 2 32; Josh 13 18; 21 36, AV ‘“‘Jahazah”; Jgs
11 20; Jer 48 21; 1 Ch 6 78, ‘“Jahzah”): This is
the place where in a great battle Israel over-


See Gop, NAMEs OF.


whelmed Sihon king of the Amorites, and then
took possession of all his territory (Nu 21 23,
etc). It is named along with Beth-baal-meon and
Kedemoth (Josh 13 18), with Kedemoth (21 37)
pointing to a position in the S.E. of the Amorite
territory. It was given to Reuben by Moses, and
was one of the cities in the portion of that tribe
assigned to the Merarite Levites. Mesha (MS,
ll. 18 ff) says that the king of Israel dwelt in Jahaz
when at war with him. Mesha drove him out, and
the city passed into the hands of Moab. It is re-
ferred to as a city of Moab in Isa 15 4; Jer 48 21.
34. Cheyne thinks that either Jahaz or Kedemoth
must be represented today by the important ruins
of Umm er-Resés, about 23 hours N. of Dibon
toward the desert (EB, s.v.). No certain identi-
fication is possible. W. Ewing


JAHAZIAH, ja-ha-zi'a: AV for JanzE1au (q.v.).


JAHAZIEL, ja-ha’zi-el (ONIN, yahdzi’ al, “God
sees’’):

(1) In 1 Ch 12 4 (Heb ver 5), one of David's
recruits at Ziklag, a Benjamite or maybe a Judaean.

(2) In 1 Ch 16 6, one of two priests appointed
by David to sound trumpets before the ark on its
journey to Jerus. LXX B, A, read ‘Uzziel.”

(3) In 1 Ch 23 19; 24 23, a Levite, “‘son” of
Hebron, a Kohathite. Kittel, followmg LXX,
reads ‘‘Uzziel.”

(4) In 2 Ch 20 14, an Asaphite, son of Zechariah.
He encouraged King Jehoshaphat of Judah and his
subjects to fight against the Moabite and Ammonite
invaders.

(5) In Ezr 8 5, an ancestor of one of the families
of the Restoration. Read probably ‘‘of the sons of
Zattu, Sheconiah the son of J.,” following 1 Esd
8 32 (=Jezelus). Davip Francis Roperrs


JAHDAI, ja’dé-t, ja/di (“ITP, yahday, “Ich
leads” [?]; Baer reads "3119, yehday): In 1 Ch 2


Whe
47, where six sons of J. are mentioned. ‘The name


has been taken as that of another wife or concubine
of Caleb; more probably Jahdai is a descendant of
Caleb, whose name, in the original connection, has
fallen from the text” (Curtis, Ch, 96).


JAHDIEL, ja/di-el (ONT, yahdvad, “God
gives joy’): In 1 Ch & 24, head of a Manassite
family.


JAHDO, j4’d6 Car, yahdd, meaning uncer-
tain; Kittel suggests “IT?, yahday=Jahdai): In
1 Ch 5 14, a Gileadite.


JAHLEEL, ja’lécl (ONSTM, yahl’al, “wait for
God!’): In Gen 46 14; Nu 26 26, a “son” (ie.
clan) of Zebulun.


JAHLEELITES, jalécl-its, THE (NOMAD, ha-
yahl° elt, coll. with art.): In Nu 26 26, the descend-
ants of the clan of Jahleel.


JAHMAI, ja’ma-i, ja’mi (AT, yahmay, per-
haps="AIN), yahmeyah, “may Jeh protect!’):
In 1 Ch 7 2, head of a clan of Issachar.


JAHWEH, yi’we.
JAHZAG, ji’za. See Janaz.


JAHZEEL, ja’zéel (ONY, yahe’al, “God di-
vides,” “apportions”): In Gen 46 24; Nu 26 48;
and 23 MSSin1 Ch 7 13; and JAHZIEL (EM,
yahdcv él, same meaning ag above): 1 Ch 7 13,
a “son” (clan) of Naphtali.


See Gon, Namus or.


1559


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jagur
Jambri


JAHZEELITES, ja’zé-cl-its, THE ("SNYM7T, ha-
yah” él7, coll. with art.): In Nu 26 48, descendants
of the clan of Jahzeel.


JAHZEIAH, ji-zé’ya, ja’zé-ya (T2TM2, yahe-
yah, ‘Jeb sees’’): In Ezr 10 15, son of Tikvah, and
a contemporary of Ezra. It is disputed whether
he and Jonathan opposed or supported Ezra in
the matter of prosecuting those who had. married
foreign wives = Ezekias, 1 Esd 9 14, or Ezias. See
JONATHAN, 9.


Two translations of the Heb phrase (nist by Thy,


‘amadh ‘al-zo’th) are given: (1) ‘‘stood over this matter,”
ie. supported Ezra; _so AV _(‘‘were employed in this
matter’), and so LXX, 1 Esd 9 14, RVm. This is
supported by ver 4, ‘‘Let now our princes be appolnted
for all the assembly,’’ where the same phrase is found.
(2) RV “stood up against this matter,’ so BDB, Gesenius,
Bertheau, Stade. oth translations can be supported by
ls in Heb. The context is better suited by the former
renderlng.


Davin Francis Roperts
JAHZERAH, ja’zéra, ja-zé’'ra (TVII1, yah-
zérah, meaning unknown): In 1 Ch 9 12, an an-
ogee of Maasai and apparently =‘‘Ahzai”’ of Neh
1 13.


JAHZIEL, ja’zi-el.
JAILOR, jal’ér.


JAIR, ja’ér:

(1) Jair (TR), yar,
giving light”):

(a) Son, i.e. descendant of Manasseh (Nu 32
41; Dt 314; Josh 18 30; 1K 413; 1 Ch 2
22 f). According to 1 Ch 2 21f he was the son
of Segub, son of Hezron, a descendant of Judah, who
married the daughter of Machir, son of Manasseh.
He was thus descended both from Judah and
Manasseh. At the time of the conquest he distin-
guished himself by taking the tent-villages Hav-
VOTH-JAIR (q.v.). The accounts of his exploit are
difficult to harmonize (see ICC on above passages).
Some would identify him with the Jair of Jgs 10 3,
holding that Manasseh’s settlement in Northern
Gilead and Bashan took place, not before Israel's
passage of the Jordan, but after the settlement of
the tribe onthe W. For a criticism of this view see


HGHL, 577, n.
He is said to have had 30


See JAHZEEL.


See Prison.


“he enlightens” or “one


(b) One of the judges.
sons, who rode on 30 ass colts, and who had as many
cities, known as Havvoth-jair (Jgs 10 3.4). One
tradition identifies (a) and (6). Others reconcile
the two narratives by interpreting the word “son”
in a non-literal sense.

(c) The father of Mordecai (Est 2 5). In the
Apoc (Ad Est 11 2) his name is given as “Jairus”’
(‘Idecpos, Ideiros).

(2) Jair (Keré “7, yar, “he arouses”; Ke
thibh "97, ya‘ar; a different name from [1] above):
The father of Elhanan, the giant-slayer (1_Ch 20 5).
In the || passage (2 S 21 19) bis name is given as
“Jaare-oregim,” but the text should be corrected to
Jair, “oregim’”’ (’Or¢ghim) having crept in from the
line below through a copyist’s error.

James CRICHTON

JAIRITE, j8’Gr-it (IN, ya’iri, “of Jair’): In
2S 20 26, Ira the Jairite is ‘chief minister unto
David.” He was a descendant of Jair who was a
Manassite (Nu 32 41, etc) and whose territory was
in Gilead. LXX Lue and Syr suggest “M!, yattir7,
“Jattirite,” i.e. a native of Jattir mentioned in 1 8
30 27 asone of the towns friendly to David when he
was in Ziklag. It is not improbable that a native
of Jattir would be given such a post by David. See
Tra, and cf 2 8 23 38.


JAIRUS, ja’i-rus, j4-i’rns (’Ideupos, Ideiros; 1 Esd
6 31; Ad Est 11 2). See Arrus; Jar.


JAIRUS, ja'i-rus, j4-i’rus ("Idepos, Ideiros): A
tuler in a synagogue near Capernaum whose only
daughter, aged about 12 years, was raised from the
dead by Jesus (Mt 9 18-26; Mk 5 22-43; Lk
8 41-56). The accounts of the miracle are sub-
stantially the same, but vary in detail. According
to Mk and Lk the arrival of Jairus in Capernaum
fell immediately after the return of Jesus from
Gadara, but according to Mt the sequence of events
was that Jesus had returned to Capernaum, had
called Matthew, had joined the feast of the publi-
cans, and had just finished His discourse on fast-
ing when Jairus came to Him. Mt and Mk both
testify to the great faith of Jairus, who besought of
Jesus that He should but lay His hand upon the
maid and she should live. According to Mt she
was already dead when Jairus came to Capernaum;
according to the others she was on the point of
death; but all agree as to her death before the
arrival of Jesus and His followers at her abode.
Mt implies that Jesus alone was present at the
actual raising; Mk and Lk state that Peter, James,
John and the parents were also there. The healing
of the woman with the issue of blood by Jesus on the
way is given by all. C Kerr

JAKAN, ja’kan (7722", ya‘dkan).


aero


JAKEH, ja’ke (M27, yakeh, perhaps from Arab.
root meaning “carefully religious’; Np, yake’,
as if from N"P, 2’): The father of Agur, the author
of the sayings recorded in Prov 301. Nothing is
known of either Jakeh or Agur. The immediate con-
nection in the Heb text of ha-massd’, “the prophecy”
or “burden” (AV “even the prophecy,” RV ‘the
oracle”) with n’um, “oracle”? (AV “spake,” RV
“saith’) is quite exceptional, while the ver is un-
intelligible and the text, as the LXX shows, is evi-
dently corrupt. The best emendation is that which
changes ha-massa’, ‘‘the prophecy,” into ha-massa’t,
“the Massaite,’’ or into mimmassda’, “of Massa”
(RVm), Massa being the name of the country of an
Ishmaelite tribe (cf Gen 25 14; 1 Ch 1 30; Prov
31 1RVm). See Acur. James CricuTon


JAKIM, ja’kim (3°P?, yakim, “he [God] lifteth
up”; ef Ex1aKim):

(1) A Benjamite, a son of Shimei (1 Ch 8 19).

(2) A priest, the head of the 12th of the 24
courses into which the priests were divided (1 Ch
24 12).


JALAM, ja’lam (Dey, ya‘ldm, according to
BDB following LXX ’Iey\ép, Ieglém, in Gen, from
Vv by, ‘alam, meaning “‘to conceal”; according to
Gunkel, Gen’, 390, from ox, ya@él, ‘“mountain-
goat?’; see HPN, 90, n. 5; AV Jaalam): In Gen 36
5.14.18; 1 Ch 1 35, asonof Esau, mentioned as the
2d son by Oholibamah; probably an Edomite clan.


See JAAKAN,


JALON, ja'lon CAS, yalén, meaning unknown):
Jn 1 Ch 4 17, ason of Ezrah, a Judahite.


JAMBRES, jam’bréz. See JaNNes ann JaM-
BRES.


JAMBRI, jam’bri (oi viol "IapBpelv, hoi huiot
lambrein; 1 Mace 9 36-41): The sons of Jambri
are said to have come out of Medeba (originally
Med’ba), a city of the Moabites, and subsequently
a possession of the Amorites, and to have carried
off John, the brother of Jonathan, who succeeded
Judas Maccabaeus as leader of the Jews. The


James


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1560


Israelites got possession of the place and assigned
it to the tribe of Reuben. No mention is made
elsewhere of the Jambri. In Jos (Ant, XIII, i, 2)
they are called “sons of Amaraeus.”


JAMES, jamz (IdxwBos, Fécdbos): English form
of Jacob, and the name of 3 NT men of note:
(1) The Son _of Zebedee, one of the Twelve
Apostles (6 rod ZeBeSalov, ho tov: Zebedatou):
I. In NT.—To the Synoptists alone are we
indebted for any account of this James. He was
the son of Zebedee and the brother of


1. Family John (Mt 421; Mk119; Lk65
Relations, 10). As the Synoptists generally place
etc the name of James before that of John,

and allude to the latter as ‘the brother
of James,” it is inferred that James was the elder


of the two brothers. His mother’s name was
probably Salome, the sister of the mother of Jesus
(ef Mt 27 56; Mk 15 40; Jn 19 25), but this
is disputed by some (cf BRETHREN OF THE LoRD).
J. was a fisherman by trade, and worked along with
his father and brother (Mt 4 21). According to
Lk, these were partners with Simon (5 10), and this
is also implied in Mk (1 19). As they owned
several boats and employed hired servants (Lk 6 11;
Mk 1 20), the establishment they possessed must
have beeu considerable.
The call to J. to follow Christ (Mt 4 18-22; Mk
1 16-20; Lk 5 1-11) was given by Jesus as He
was walking by the sea of Galilee
(Mt 4 18). There He saw ‘James
the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother, in the boat with Zebedee their
father, mending their nets; and hecalled them. And
they straightway left the boat and their father, and
followed him” (Mt 4 21.22). The account of Lk
varies in part from those of Mt and Mk, and con-
tains the additional detail of the miraculous draught
of fishes, at which J. and John also were amazed.
This version of Lk is regarded by some as an
amalgamation of the earlier accounts with Jn 21 1-8.
As the above incident took place after the im-
prisonment of John the Baptist, when Jesus had
departed into Galilee (Mt 4 12; Mk
8. Proba- 1 14), and as there is no mention of J.
tion and among those who received the pre-
Ordination liminary call recorded by John (cf Jn
1 35-51; 3 24, and cf ANDREW), it is
probable that while Peter and Andrew made the
pilgrimage to Bethany, J. and the other partners
remained in Galilee to carry on the business of their
trade. Yet, on the return of Peter and Andrew,
the inquiries of J. must have been eager concerning
what they had seen and heard. His mind and
imagination became filled with their glowing ac-
counts of the newly found ‘‘Lamb of God” (Jn 1
36) and of the preaching of John the Baptist, until
he inwardly dedicated his life to Jesus and only
awaited an opportunity to declare his allegiance
openly. By this is the apparently abrupt nature
of the call, as recorded by the Synoptists, to be ex-
plained. After a pened of companionship and
probationership with his Master, when he is men-
tioned as being present at the healing of Simon’s
wife’s mother at Capernaum (Mk 1 29-381), he
was ordained one of the Twelve Apostles (Mt 10
2; Mk 317; Lk 6 14; Acts 1 13). ;
From this time onward he occupied a prominent
place among the apostles, and, along with Peter
and John, became the special confi-
4, Apostle- dant of Jesus. These three alone of


2. First
Call


ship the apostles were present at the rais-
ing of Jairus’ daughter (Mk 6 37;
Lk 8 51), at the Transfiguration (Mt 17 1-8;


Mk 9 2-8; Lk 9 28-36), and at the Agony in the
Garden of Gethsemane (Mt 26 36-46; Mk 14


32-42). Shortly after the Transfiguration, when
Jesus, having “‘stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusa-
lem” (Lk 9 51), was passing through Samaria, the
ire of J. and John was kindled by the ill reception
accorded to Him by the populace (Lk 9 53). They
therefore asked of Jesus, ‘Lord, wilt thou that
we bid fire to come down from heaven, and con-
sume them?” (Lk 9 54). “But he turned, and re-
buked them” (ver 55). It was probably this hot-
headed impetuosity and fanaticism that won for
them the surname “Boanerges, which is, Sons of
thunder,” bestowed on them when they were or-
dained to the Twelve (Mk 3 17). Yet upon this
last occasion, there was some excuse for their action.
The impression left by the Transfiguration was still
deep upon them, and they felt strongly that their
Lord, whom they had lately beheld “in his glory”
with “countenance altered” and “glistering raiment,”
should be subjected to such tdignities by the
Samaritans. Upon the occasion of Jesus’ last
journey to Jerus (Mk 10 32), the two brothers gave
expression to this presumptuous impetuosity in
a more selfish manner (Mk 10 35-45). Presum-
ing on their intimacy with Jesus, they made the
request of him, “Grant unto us that we may sit,
one on thy right hand, and one on thy left hand, in
thy glory” (Mk 10 37). In the account of Mt
(20 20-28), the words are put in the mouth of their
mother. The request drew forth the rebuke of
Jesus (Mk 10 38), and moved the ten with indig-
nation (Mk 10 40); but by the words of their
Lord peace was again restored (Mk 10 42-45).
After the arrival of Jesus in Jerus, when He “sat
on the mount of Olives over against the temple,”
J. was one of the four who put the question to
Him concerning the last things (Mk 18 3.4). He
was also present when the risen Jesus appeared
for the 3d time to the disciples and the miraculous
draught of fishes was made at the sea of Tiberias
(Jn 21 1-14).
J. was the first martyr among the apostles, being
slain by King Herod Agrippa I about 44 AD,
shortly before Herod’s own death.
5. Death The vehemence and fanaticism which
were characteristic of J. had made him
to be feared and hated among the Jewish enemies
of the Christians, and therefore when ‘Herod the
king put forth his hands to afflict certain of the
church... . he killed J. the brother of John with
the sword” (Acts 12 1.2). Thus did J. fulfil the
prophecy of Our Lord that he too should drink of
the cup of his Master (Mk 10 39).


I. In Apocryphal_Literature.—According to the
“Genealogies of the Twelve Apostles’? (cf Budge, Con-
tendings of the Apostles, II, 49), ‘‘Zebedee was of the
house of Levi, and his wife of the house of Judah. Now,
because the father of James loved him greatly he counted
him among the family of his father Levi, and similarly
because the mother of John loved him greatly, she
counted him among the family of her father Judah.
And they were surnamed ‘Children of Thunder,’ for
they were of both the priestly house and of the royal
house.’ The Acts of St. John, a heretical work of the
2d cent., referred to by Clement of Alexandria in his
Hypotyposis and also by Eusebius (#2, III, 25), gives an
account of the call of J. aud his presence at the Trans-
figuration, similar in part to that of the Gospels, but
giving fantastic details concerning the supernatural
nature of Christ's body, and how its appearances brought
confusion to J. and other disciples (cf Hennecke, Hand-
buch zu den neutestamentlichen Apokryphen, 423-59).
The Acts of St. James in India (cf Budge, II, 295-303)
tells of the missionary journey of J. and Peter to India,
of the appearance of Christ to them in the form of 2
beautiful young man, of their healing a blind man, and
of their imprisonment, miraculous release, and their
conversion of the cone According to the Martyrdom
of St. James (Budge, II, 304-8), J. preached to the I2
trihes scattered abroad, and persuaded them to give
their first-fruits to the church instead of to Herad. The
accounts of his trial and death are similar to that in
Acts 12 1-2.

J. is the patron saint of Spain. The legend of his
preaching there, of his death in Judaea, of the trans-


1561


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


James


Portalon of his body under the guidauce of angels to

tia and of the part that his miraculous appearances

played in the history of Spain, is given in Mrs. Jameson’s
acred and Legendary Art, I, 230-41.


(2) James the son of Alphaeus (6 tod ?AAdalov,
ho tot Alphatou; for etymology, etc, of James, see
ahove): ne of the Twelve Apostles (Mt 10 3;
Mk 3 18; Lk 615; Acts 1138). By Mt and
Mk he is coupled with Thaddaeus, and by Lk and
Acts with Simon Zclotes. As Matthew or Levi is
also called the son of Alphaeus (cf Mt 9 9; Mk 2
14), it is possible that he and James were brothers.
According to the Genealogies of the Apostles (cf
Budge, Contendings of the Apostles, II, 50), James
was of the house of Gad. The Martyrdom of St.
James, the son of Alphacus (cf Budge, ib, 264-66)
records that James was stoned by the Jews for
preaching Christ, and was “buried by the Sanctuary
in Jerus.”

This James is generally identified with James the
Little or the Less, the brother of Joses and son of
Mary (Mt 27 56; Mk 16 40). In Jn 19 25 this
Mary is called the wife of Cleophas (AV) or Clopas
(RV), who is thus in turn identified with Alphaeus.
There is evidence in apocryphal lit. of a Simon, a
son of Clopas, who was also one of the disciples (cf
NaTHANAEL). If this be the same as Simon Ze-
lotes, it would explain why he and James (i.e. as
being brothers) were coupled together in the apos-
tolic lists of Lk and Acts. Some have applied the
phrase “his mother’s sister” in Jn 19 25 to Mary
the wife of Clopas, instead of to a separate person,
and have thus attempted to identify James the son
of Alphaeus with James the brother of Our Lord.
For a further discussion of the problem, see Bretx-
REN OF THE LoRD.

(3) James, ‘‘the Lord’s brother” (6 a8eAdds rod
Kvplov, ho adelphés tou Kurtou):

I. NT References.—This James is mentioned by
name only twice in the Gospels, i.e. when, on the

visit of Jesus to Nazareth, the country-
1. Inthe men of Our Lord referred in con-
Gospels temptuous terms to His earthly
kindred, in order to disparage His
preaching (Mt 13 55; Mk 6 3). As J. was one
of “his brethren,” he was probahly among the
group of Christ’s relatives who sought to interview
Him during His tour through Galilee with the
Twelve (Mt 12 46). By the same reasoning, he
accompanied Jesus on His journey to Capernaum
(Jn 2 12), and joined in attempting to persuade
Him to depart from Galilee for Judaea on the eve
of the Feast of Tabernacles (Jn 7 3). At this
feast J. was present (7 10), but was at this time a
non-heliever in Jesus (cf 7 5, “Even his brethren
did not helieve on him’’).

Yet the seeds of conversion were being sown
within him, for, after the crucifixion, he remained

in Jerus with his mother and brethren,


2.Inthe and formed one of that earliest. band
Epistles of believers who “with one accord

continued stedfastly in prayer” (Acts
1 14). While there, he probably took part in the


election of Matthias to the vacant apostleship
(Acts 1 15-25). J. was one of the earliest wit-
nesses to the resurrection, for, after the risen Lord
had manifested Himself to the five hundred, “he
was seen of James” (1 Cor 15 7 AV). By this
his growing belief and prayerful expectancy received
confirmation. About 37 or 38 AD, J., “the Lord’s
brother” (Gal 1 19), was still in Jerus, and had
an interview there for the first time with Paul,
when the latter returned from his 3 years’ sojourn
in Damascus to visit Cephas, or Peter (Gal 1 18.
19; cf Acts 9 26). In several other passages the
name of J. is coupled with that of Peter. Thus,
when Peter escaped from prison (about 44 AD), he


gave instructions to those in the house of John Mark
that they should immediately inform “James and
the brethren” of the manner of his escape (Acts
1217). By the time of the Jerus convention, ie.
about 51 AD (cf Gal 2 1), J. had reached the posi-
tion of first overseer in the church (cf Acts 16 13.
19). Previous to this date, during Paul’s ministry
at Antioch, he had dispatched certain men thither
to further the mission, and the teaching of these
had caused dissension among the newly converted
Christians and their leaders (Acts 15 1.2; Gal 2
12). The conduct of Peter, over whom J. seems
to have had considerable influence, was the prin-
cipal matter of contention (cf Gal 2 11 ff). How-
ever, at the Jerus convention the dispute was ami-
cably settled, and the pillars of the church, J., John
and Cephas, gave to Paul and Barnabas the right
hand of fellowship (Gal 2 9). The speech of J.
on this occasion (Acts 15 13-29), his sympathy
with the religious needs of the gentile world (ver
17), his desire that formalism should raise no bar-
rier to their moral and spiritual advancement (vs
19.20.28.29), and his Jarge-hearted trihutes to the
“beloved Barnabas and Paul” (vs 25.26), indicate
that J. was a leader in whom the church was blessed,
a leader who loved peace more than faction, the
spirit more than the law, and who perceived that
religious communities with different forms of ob-
servance might still live and work together in com-
mon allegiance to Christ. Once more (58 AD),
J. was head of the council at Jerus when Paul made
report of his labors, this time of his 3d missionary
journey (Acts 21 17 ff). At this meeting Paul
was admonished for exceeding the orders he had
received at the first council, in that he had en-
deavored to persuade the converted Jews also to
neglect. circumcision (Acts 21 21), and was com-
manded to join in the vow of purification (Acts
21 23-26). There is no Scriptural account of the
death of J. From 1 Cor 9 5 it has been inferred
that he was married. This is, however, only a con-
jecture, as the passage refers to those who “lead
about a sister, a wife” (AV), while, so far as we know,
J. remained throughout his life in Jerus.

This J. has been regarded as the author of the
Ep. of Jas, ‘a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus
Christ”; cf Jamus, Eristrz or, Also, for details
concerning his relationship to Christ, cf BrerarENn
or THE Lorn.


I. References in Apacryphal Literature.—J. figures in
one of the miraculons events recorded in the gnostic
“Gospel of the Infancy, by Thomas the Israelite phi-
losopher,"’ being cured of a snake-hite by the infant
Jesus (cf Hennecke, Handbuch zu den neutestamentlichen
Apokryphen, 73). According to the Gospel of the He-
brews (cf ib, 11-21), J. had also partaken of the cup of
of the Lord, and refused to eat till he had seen the risen
Lord. Christ acknowledged this tribute by appearing
to J. first. In the Acts of Peter (cf Budge, Contendings
of the Apostles, JI, 475), it is stated that “‘three days
after the ascension of our Lord into heaven, James, whom
our Lord called _his ‘brother in _ the flesh,’ consecrated
the Offering and we all drew nigh to partake thereof:
and when ten days had passed after the ascension of
our Lord, we all assembled in the holy fortress of Zion,
and we stood up to say the prayer of sanctification, and
we made supplication unto God and hesought Him with
humility, and James also entreated Himeconcerning the
descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Offering.’ The
Preaching of St. James the Just (ef Budge, Ii, 78-81)
tells of the appointment of J. to the bishopric of Jerus,
of his preaching, bealing of the sick and casting out of
devils there. This is confirmed by the evidence of
Clement of Alexandria (Kuseh,, H#, II, ue In the
Martyrdom of St. James the Just (cf Budge, II, 82-89),
it is stated that J., ‘‘the youngest of the sons of Joseph,"
alienated, by his preaching, Piobsata from her husband
Ananus, the governor of _Jerus. Ananus therefore In-
flamed the Jews against J., and they hurled bim down
from off the pinnacle of the temple. egesippus, quoted
by Eusebius (H £, II, 23), and Jos (Ant, XX, ix, 1), testify
to the general truth of this. Jt is thus probable that
James was martyred about 62 or 63 AD.

Besides the ep. which bears his name, J. was also the
reputed author of the Protevangelium Jacobi, a work


James, Ep. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1562


which originated in the 2d cent. and received later addi-
tions (cf Henn, NA, 47-63; also JosperpH, HusBaNnp oF


Mary). ie
C. M. Kerr
JAMES, EPISTLE OF:


I. CwaractTrristics OF THE EristLe
1. Jewis
2. Authoritative
3. Practical
II. Avtrsor or tae Epistis
ItI. Styte or tae Epistie
Plainness
Good Greek
. Vividness
. Duadiplosis
. Figures of Speech
Unlikeness to Paul
. Likeness to Jesus
IV. Dace or tre Epistite
V. History or tae Epistis
VI. Messacs or tos EristLte To Our Times
1. To the Pietist
2. To the Sociologist
3. To the Student of the Life and Character of Jesus
LitERATURE
I. Characteristics of the Epistle-——The Ep. of
Jas is the most Jewish writing in the NT. The
Gospel according to Mt was written
1. Jewish for the Jews. The Ep. to the He is
addressed explicitly to them. The
Apocalypse is full of the spirit of the OT. The Ep.
of Jude is Jewish too. Yet all of these books have
more of the distinctively Christian element in them
than we can find in the Ep. of Jas. If we eliminate
two or three passages containing references to
Christ, the whole epistle might find its place just
as properly in the Canon of the OT as in that of the
NT, as far as its substance of doctrine and contents
is concerned. That could not he said of any other
hook in the NT. There is no mention of the in-
carnation or of the resurrection, the two funda-
mental facts of the Christian faith. The word
“sospel’’ does not occur in the ep. There is no sug-
gestion that the Messiah has appeared and no
presentation of the possibility of redemption through
Him. The teaching throughout is that of a lofty
morality which aims at the fulfilment of the re-
quirements of the Mosaic law. It is not strange
therefore that Spitta and others have thought that
we have in the Ep. of Jas a treatise written by an
unconverted Jew which has been adapted to Chris-
tian use by the interpolation of the two phrases
containing the name of Christ in 11 and 2 1.
Spitta thinks that this can be the only explanation
of the fact that we have here an ep. practically
ignoring the life and work of Jesus and every dis-
tinctively Christian doctrine, and without a trace
of any of the great controversies in the early Chris-
tian church or any of the specific features of its
propaganda. This judgment is a superficial one,
and rests upon superficial indications rather than
any appreciation of the underlying spirit and prin-
ciples of the book. The spirit of Christ is here,
and there is no need to label it. The principles of
this ep. are the principles of the Sermon on the
Mount. There are more ||s to that Sermon in this
ep. than can be found anywhere else in the NT in
the same space. The ep. represents the idealiza-
tion of Jewish legalism under the transforming in-
fluence of the Christian motive and life. It is not
a theological discussion. It is an ethical appeal.
It has to do with the outward life for the most part,
and the life it pictures is that of a Jew informed
with the spirit of Christ. The spirit is invisible
in the ep. as in the individual man. It is the hody
which appears and the outward life with which that
body has to do. The body of the ep. is Jewish,
and the outward life to which it exhorts is that of
a profoundly pious Jew. The Jews familiar with
the OT would read this ep. and find its language
and tone that to which they were accustomed in
their sacred books. Jas is evidently written by a


NIGP 9 BO


Jew for Jews. Itis Jewish in character throughout.
This is apparent in the following particulars: (1)
The ep. is addressed to the 12 tribes which are of
the Dispersion (1 1). The Jews were scattered
abroad through the ancient world. From Babylon
to Rome, wherever any community of them might
be gathered for commercial or social purposes, these
exhortations could be carried and read. Probably


meeting-place is called “your synagogue” ( :
(3) Abraham is mentioned as “our father’ (2 21).
(4) God is given the OT name, “the Lord of Sa-
baoth” (5 4). (5) The law is not to be spoken
against nor judged, but reverently and loyally
obeyed. It is a royal law to which every loyal Jew
will be subject. It is a law of liberty, to be freely
obeyed (2 8-12; 4 11). (6) The sins of the flesh
are not inveighed against in the ep., but those sins
to which the Jews were more conspicuously liahle,
such as the love of money and the distinction which
money may bring (2 2-4), worldliness and pride (4
4-6), impatience and murmuring (5 7-11), and other
sins of the temper and tongue (3 1-12; 4 11.12).
(7) The illustrations of faithfulness and patience and
prayer are found inOT characters, in Abraham (2 21),
Rahab (2 25), Job (6 11), and Elijah (5 17.18). The
whole atmosphere of the ep. is Jewish.

The writer of this ep. speaks as one having
authority. He is not on his defence, as Paul so

often is. There is no trace of apology

2. Authori- in his presentation of the truth. His

tative official position must have been recog-

_ nized and unquestioned. He is as

sure of his standing with his readers as he is of the
absoluteness of his message.

No OT lawgiver or prophet was more certain that he
spoke the word of the Lord. e has the vehemence of
Elijah and the assured meekness of Moses. He has
been called ‘the Amos of the NT,’’ and there are para-
graphs which recall the very expressions used by OS
and which are full of the same Hery eloquence and pro-

hetic fervor. Both fill their writings with metaphors

awn from the sky and the sea, from natural objects
and domestic experiences. Both seem to be country.
bred aud to be in sympathy with simplicity and poverty.
Both inveigh against the luxury and the cruelty of the
idle rich, and both abhor the ceremonial and the ritual
which are substituted for individual righteousness.
Malachi was not the last of the prophets. John the
Baptist was not the last prophet of the Old Dispensation.
The writer of this ep. stands at the end of that prophetic
line, and he is greater than John the Baptist or any who
have preceded him because he stands within the borders
of the kingdom of Christ. He speaks with authority,
as a messenger of God. He belongs to the goodly fellow-
ship of the prophets and of the apostles. He has the
authority of both. There are 54 imperatives in the 108


verses of this ep.


The ep. is interested in conduct more than in
creed. It has very little formulated theology, less
than any other ep. in the NT; but

3. Practical it insists upon practical morality
. throughout. It begins and it closes
with an exhortation to patience and prayer. It
preaches a gospel of good works, based upon love
to God and love to man. It demands liberty,
equality, fraternity for all. It enjoins humility
and justice and peace. It prescrihes singleness
of purpose and stedfastness of soul. It requires
ohedience to the law, control of the passions, and
control of the tongue. Its ideal is to be found in a
good life, characterized by the meekness of wis-
dom. The writer of the ep. has caught the spirit
of the ancient prophets, but the lessons that he
teaches are taken, for the most part, from the Wisdom
lit. of the OT and the Apoc. His direct quotations


1563


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


James, Ep. of


are from the Pent and the Book of Prov; but it
has been estimated that there are 10 allusions to the
Book of Prov, 6 to the Book of Job, 5 to the Book
of Wisd, and 15 to the Book of Ecelus. This Wis-
dom lit. furnishes the staple of his meditation and
the substance of his teaching. He has little or
nothing to say about the great doctrines of the
Christian church.


He has much to say ahout the wisdom that cometh
down from above and is pure, peaceable, gentile, easy
to he entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, without hypocrisy (3 15-17). The whole
ep. shows that the author had stored his miud with the
rich treasure of the ancient wisdom, and his material,
while offered as his own, is both old and uew. The form
is largely that of the Wisdom lit. of the Jews. It has
more parallels with Jesus the son of Sirach than with any
writer of the sacred books.


The substance of its exhortation, however, is to
be found in the Synoptics and more particularly
in the Sermon on the Mount. Its wisdom is the
wisdom of Jesus the son of Joseph, who is the Christ.


These are the three outstanding characteristics of
this ep. In form and on the surface it is the most Jew-
ish and least Christian of the writings in the NT, Its
Christianity is latent and not apparent. Yet it is the
most authoritative in its tone of auy of the epp. in the
NT, unless it be those of the apostle John. John must
have occupied a position of undisputed primacy in the
Christian church after the death of all the other apostles,
when he wrote his epp. It is noteworthy thai the writer
of this ep. assumes a tone of like authority with that of
John. John was the apostle of love, Paul of faith, and
Peter of hope. This writer is the apostle of good works,
the apostle of the wisdom which manifests itself in peace
and PUL, mercy and morality, and in obedience to the
royal law, the law of liberty. In its union of Jewish
form, authoritative tone, and insistence upon practical
morality, the ep. is unique among the NT books.


il. Author of the Epistle.—The address of the
ep: states that the writer is “James, a servant of

od and of the Lord Jesus Christ” (1 1). The
tradition of the church has identified this James
with the brother of Our Lord. Clement of Alex-
andria says that Peter and James and John, who
were the three apostles most honored of the Lord,
chose James, the Lord’s brother, to be the bishop
of Jerus after the Lord’s ascension (Euseb., HEH,
II, 1). This tradition agrees well with all the no-
tices of James in the NT books. After the death
of James the brother of John, Peter was thrown
into prison, and having been miraculously released,
he asked that the news be sent to James and to the
brethren (Acts 12 17). This James is evidently
in authority in the church at this time. In the
apostolical conference held at Jerus, after Peter
and Paul and Barnabas had spoken, this same
James sums up the whole discussion, and his de-
cision is adopted by the assembly and formulated
in a letter which has some very striking |{s in its
phraseology to this ep. (Acts 15 6-29). When
Paul came to Jerus for the last time he reported his
work to James and all the elders present with him
(Acts 21 18). In the Ep. to the Gal Paul says
that at the time of one of his visits to Jerus he saw
none of the apostles save Peter and James the Lord’s
brother (Gal 1 18.19). At another visit he re-
ceived the right hand of fellowship from James and
Cephas and John (Gal 2 9). At a later time cer-
tain who came from James to Antioch led Peter
into backsliding from his former position of toler-
ance of the Gentiles as equals in the Christian
church (Gal 2 12). -

All of these references would lead us to suppose
that James stood in a position of supreme authority
in the mother-church at Jerus, the oldest church of
Christendom. He presides in the assemblies of the
church. He speaks the final and authoritative

»word. Peter and Paul defer to him. Paul men-
tions his name before that of Peter and John. When
he was exalted to this leadership we do not know,


but all indications seem to point to the fact that at
a very early period James was the recognized
executive authority in the chureh at Jerus, which
was the church of Pentecost and the church of the
apostles. All Jews looked to Jerus as the chief
seat of their worship and the central authority of
their religion. Al! Christian Jews would look to
Jerus as the primitive source of their organization
and faith, and the head of the chureh at Jerus would
be recognized by them as their chief authority.
The anthoritative tone of this ep. comports well
with this position of primacy ascribed to James.


All tradition agrees in describing James as a Hehrew
of the Hebrews, a man of the most rigid and ascetic
morality, faithful in his observance of all the ritual regu-
Jations of the Jewish faith. Hegesippus tells us that he
was holy from his mother’s womb. He drank no wine
nor strong drink. He ate no flesh. He alone was per-
mitted to enter with the priests into the holy place, and
he was found there frequently upon his knees begging
forgiveness for the people, and his Imees became hard
like those of a camel in consequence of his constantly
bending them in his worship of God and asking forgive-
uess for the people (Euseb., H#, II, 23). He was called
James the Just. All had confidence in his sincerity and
integrity, and many were persuaded by him to helieve
on the Christ. This Jew, faithful in the observance of
all that the Jews held sacred, aud more devoted to the
temple-worship than the most pious among them, was
a good choice for the head of the Christian church. _The
blood of David flowed in his veins. He had all the Jew’s
Bode in the special privileges of the chosen race. The

ews respected him and the Christians revered him. No
man amoug them commanded the esteem of the entire
population as much as he. f ,
os (Ant, XX, ix) tells us that Ananus the high priest
had James stoned to death, and that the most equitable
of the citizens immediately rose in revolt against such a
lawless procedure, and Ananus was deposed after only
three months’ rule. This testimony of Jos simply sub-
stantiates all that we know from other sources concern-
ing the high standing of James in the whole community.
Hegesippus says that James was first thrown from a pin-
nacle of the temple, and then they stoned_him because
he was not killed by the fall, and he was finally beaten
over the head with a fuller’s cluh; and then he adds
significantly, ‘‘Immediately Vespasian besieged them”
(Euseb., HE, II, 23). There would seem to have been
quite a widespread conviction among hoth the Christians
and the Jews that the afflictions which fell upon the holy
city and the chosen people in the following years were in
part a visitation because of the great crime of the murder
of this just man. We can understand how a man with
this reputation and character would write an ep. so Jew-
ish in form and substance and so insistent in its demauds
for a practical morality as is the Ep. of Jas. Il the
characteristics of the ep. seem explicable on the suppo-
sition of authorship hy James the brother of the Lord.
We accept the church tradition without hesitation.


HI, The Style of the Epistle.-—The sentence con-
struction is simple and straightforward. It re-
minds us of the Eng. of Bunyan and
1. Its DeFoe. There is usually no good
Plainness reason for misunderstanding anything
James says. He puts histruth plainly,
and the words he uses have no hidden or mystical
meanings. His thought is transparent as his life.
It is somewhat surprising to find that the Gr of
the Ep. of Jas is better than that of the other NT
writers, with the single exception of
2. Its Good the author of the Ep. to the Hebrews.
Greek Of course this may be due to the fact
that James had the services of an
amanuensis who was a Gr scholar, or that his own
MS was revised by such a man; but, although un-
expected, it is not impossible that James himself
may have been capable of writing such Gr as this.


It is not the good Gr of the classics, and it is not the
pour and proviucial Gr of Paul. There is more care for
iterary form than in the uncouth Fates of the gentile
apostle, aud the vocabulary would seem to indicate an
acquaintance with the literary as well as the commercial
and the conversational Gr. ‘‘Galilee was studded with
Gr towns, and it was certainly in the power of any Gali-
Jean to gain a knowledge of Gr... .. We may reason-
ably eur ose that our author would not have scrupled
to avail himself of the opportunities within his reach,
80 as to master the Gr language, and learn something of
Gr philosophy. This would be natural, even if we think
of James as impelled only by a desire to gain wisdom and


James, Ep. of


knowledge for himself; but if we think of him also as the
principal teacher of the Jewish believers, many of whom
were Hellenists, instructed in the wisdom of Alexandria,
then the natural bent would take the shape of duty: he
would be a student of Gr in order that he might be a more
effective instructor to his own people’’ (Mayor, The Ep.
of St. James, ccxxxvi). The Gr of the ep. is the studied
Gr of one who was not a native to it, but who had famil-
iarized himself with its literature. James could have
done so and the ep. may be proof that he did.


James is never content to talk tn abstractions.
He always sets a picture before his own eyes and
those of his readers. He has the

3. Its dramatic instinct. He has the secret
Vividness of sustained interest. He is not dis-
cussing things in general but things
in particular. He is an artist and believes in con-
crete realities. At the same time he has a touch
of poetry in him, and a fine sense of the analogies
running through all Nature and all life. The
doubting man is like the sea spume (1 6). The
rich man fades away in his goings, even as the beauty
of the flower falls and perishes (1 11). The syna-
gogue scene with its distinction between the rich
and the poor is set before us with the clear-cut im-
pressiveness of a cameo (2 1-4). The Pecksniffian
philanthropist, who seems to think that men can
be fed not by bread alone but by the words that
proceed magnificently from his mouth, is pilloried
here for all time (2 15.16). The untamable tongue
that is set on fire of hell is put in the full blaze of its
world of iniquity, and the damage it does is shown
to be like that of a forest fire (3 1-12). The picture
of the wisdom that comes from above with its
sevenfold excellences of purity, peaceableness,
gentleness, mercy, fruitfulness, impartiality, sin-
cerity, is worthy to hang in the gallery of the world’s
masterpieces (3 17). The vaunting tradesmen,
whose lives are like vanishing vapor, stand there
before the eyes of all in Jerus (4 13-16). The rich,
whose luxuries he describes even while he denounces
their cruelties and prophesies their coming day of
slaughter, are the rich who walk the streets of his
own city (5 1-6). His short sentences go like shots
straight to the mark. We feel the impact and
the impress of them. There is an energy behind
them and a reality in them that makes them live
in our thought. His abrupt questions are like the
quick interrogations of a cross-examining lawyer
(2 4-7.14.16; 3 11.12; 4 1.4.5.12.14). His prov-
erbs have the intensity of the accumulated and
compressed wisdom of the ages. They are irredu-
cible minimums. They are memorable sayings, trea-
sured in the speech of the world ever since his day.


Sometimes James adds sentence to sentence with the
repetition of some leading word or phrase (1 1-6.19-24;


3 a It ie bhp painful style oF oe who is

~ not altogether at home wit e language

4. Its D _ hich he has chosen as the vehicle of las
diplosis thought. It is the method by which a, dis-


cussion could, be continued indefinitely.
Nothing but the vividness of the imagery and the inten-
sity of the thought saves James from fatal monotony in
the use of this device.


James has a keen eye for illustrations. He is not
blind to the beauties and wonders of Nature. He
sees what is happening on every hand,


5. Its and he is quick to catch any homi-
Figures of letical suggestion it may hold. Does
Speech he stand by the seashore? The surge


that is driven by the wind and tossed
reminds him of the man who is unstable in all his
ways, because he has no anchorage of faith, and
his convictions are like driftwood on a sea of doubt
(1 6). Then he notices that the great ships are
tumed about by a small rudder, and he thinks how
the tongue is a small member, but it accomplishes
great things (3 4.5). Does he walk under the sun-
light and rejoice in it as the source of so many good
and perfect gifts? He sees in it an image of the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1564


goodness of God that is never eclipsed and never
exhausted, unvarying for evermore (117), He
uses the natural phenomena of the land in which he
lives to make his meaning plain at every turn: the
flower of the field that passes away (1 10.11), the
forest fire that sweeps the mountain side and like a
living torch lights up the whole land (3 5), the
sweet and salt springs (8 11), the fig trees and the
olive trees aud the vines (3 12), the seed-sowing
and the fruit-bearing (3 18), the morning mist
immediately lost to view (4 14), the early and the
latter rain for which the husbandman waiteth
patiently (6 7). : :

There is more of the appreciation of Nature in
this one short ep. of Jas than in all the epp. of Paul
put together. Human life was more interesting
to Paul than natural scenery. However, James is
interested in human life just as profoundly as Paul.
He is constantly endowing inanimate things with
living qualities. He represents sin as a harlot,
conceiving and bringing forth death (1 15). The
word of truth has a like power and conceives and
brings forth those who live to God’s praise (1 18).
Pleasures are like gay hosts of enemies in a tourna-
ment, who deck themselves bravely and ride forth
with singing and laughter, but whose mission is to
wage war and to kill (4 1.2). The laborers may
be dumb in the presence of the rich because of their
dependence and their fear, but their wages, fraudu-
lently withheld, have a tongue, and cry out to high
heaven for vengeance (6 4). What is friendship
with the world? It is adultery, James says (4 4).
The rust of unjust riches testifies against those who
have accumulated them, and then turns upon them
and eats their flesh like fire (5 3). James observed
the man who glanced at himself in the mirror in
the morning, and saw that his face was not clean,
and who went away and thought no more about it
for that whole day, and he found in him an illus-
tration of the one who heard the word and did not
do it (1 23.24). The ep. is full of these rhetorical
figures, and they prove that James was something
of a poet at heart, even as Jesus was. He writes
in prose, but there is a marked rhythm in all of his
speech. He has an ear for harmony as he has an
eye for beauty everywhere.


The Pauline epistles hegin with salutations and close


with benedictions. They are filled with autobiographical
touches and personal messages. one
6. Its Un- of these things appear here. The ep.
likeness begins and ends with all abruptness. Ti
has an address, but no thanksgiving.
to Paul There are no personal messages and no


. indications of any intimate personal rela-
tionship hetween the author and his readers. They are
his ‘‘heloved brethren.’’ He knows their needs and their
sins, but he may never have seen their faces or visited
their homes. The ep. is more like a prophet’s appeal
to a nation than 2 personal letter.


Both the substance of the teaching and the
method of its presentation remind us of the dis-
courses of Jesus. James says less
7. Its Like- about the Master than any other
ness to writer in the NT, but his speech is
Jesus more like that of the Master than the
speech of any one of them. There are
at least ten parallels to the Sermon on the Mount
in this short ep., and for almost everything that
James has to say we can recall some statement of
Jesus which might have suggested it. When the
parallels fail at any point, we are inclined to suspect
that James may be repeating some unrecorded
utterance of Our Lord. He seems absolutely faith-
ful to his memory of his brother’s teaching. He is
the servant of Jesus in all his exhortation and per-
suasion.
Did the Master shock His disciples’ faith by the.
loftiness of the Christian ideal He set before them
in His great sermon, ‘Ye therefore shall be perfect,


1565


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


James, Ep. of


as your heavenly Father is perfect’? (Mt 5 48)? | remember how Jesus proceeded in His sermon to
James sets the same high standard in the very fore- i


front of his ep.: ‘Let patience have its perfect work,
that ye may be perfect and entire, lacking in
nothing” (1.4). Did the Master say, “Ask, and
it shall be given you” (Mt 7 7)? James says, ‘If
any of you lacketh wisdom, let him ask of God
.... 3 and itshall be given him” (1 5). Did the
Master add a condition to His sweeping promise
to prayer and say, “Whosoever... . shall not
doubt in his heart, but shall believe that what he
saith cometh to pass; he shall have it” (Mk 11
23)? James hastens to add the same condition,
“Let him ask in faith, nothing doubting: for he
that doubteth is like the surge of the sea driven by
the wind and tossed” (1 6). Did the Master close
the great sermon with His parable of the Wise
Man and the Foolish Man, saying, ‘Every one
that heareth these words of mine, and doeth them,
shall be likened unto a wise man. And every one
that heareth these words of mine, and doeth them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish man” (Mt 7 24.
26)? James is much concerned about wisdom, and
therefore he exhorts his readers, ‘“Be ye doers of
the word, and not hearers only, deluding your own
selves’? (1 22). Had the Master declared, “If ye
know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them”
(Jn 13 17)? James echoes the thought when he
says, ‘A doer that worketh, this man shall be
blessed in his doing” (1 25). Did the Master say to
the disciples, ‘“Blessed are ye poor: for yours is the
kingdom of God” (Lk 6 20)? James has the same
sympathy with the poor, and he says, ‘“Hearken,
my beloved brethren; did not God choose them
that are poor as to the world to be rich in faith, and
heirs of the kingdom which he promised to them
that love him?” (2 5). Did the Master inveigh
against the rich, and say, “‘Woe unto you that are
rich! for ye have received your consolation. Woe
unto you, ye that are full now! for ye shall hunger.
Woe unto you, ye that laugh now! for ye shall
moum and weep” (Lk 6 24.25)? James bursts
forth into the same invective and prophesies the
same sad reversal of fortune, ““Conie now, ye rich,
weep and howl for your miseries that are coming
upon you” (6 1). ‘Cleanse your hands, ye sin-
ners; and purify your hearts, ye doubleminded.
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter
be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness”
(4 8.9). Had Jesus said, “Judge not, that ye be
not judged” (Mt 7 1)? James repeats the ex-
hortation, “Speak not one against another, brethren.
He that... . judgeth his brother ... . judgeth
the law: ... . but who art thou that judgest thy
neighbor?” (4 11.12). Had Jesus said, “Who-
soever shall humble himself shall be exalted’? (Mt
23 12)? Wefind the very words in James, ““Humble
yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall
exalt you” (4 10). Had Jesus said, “I say unto

ou, Swear not at all; neither by the heaven, for
it is the throne of God; nor by the earth, for it
is the footstool of his feet..... But let your
speech be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: and whatsoever
is more than these is of the evil one” (Mt 5 34-37)?
Here in James we come upon the exact ||: “But
above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither
by the heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other
oath; but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay;
that ye fall not under judgment” (6 12).

We remember how the Master began the Sermon
on the Mount with the declaration that even those
who mourned and were persecuted and reviled and
reproached were blessed, in spite of all their suffer-
ing and trial. Then we notice that James begins
his ep. with the same paradoxical putting of the
Christian faith, “Count it all joy, my brethren,
when ye fall into manifold trials” (1 2ARVm). We


set forth the spiritual significance and the assured
permanence of the law; and we notice that James
treats the law with the same respect and puts upon
it the same high value. He calls it “the perfect
law” (1 25), “the royal law” (2 8), the “law of
liberty” (2 12). We remember what Jesus said
about forgiving others in order that we ourselves
may be forgiven; and we know where James got
his authority for saying, “Judgment is without
mercy to him that hath showed no mercy” (2 13).
We remember all that the Master said about good
trees and corrupt trees being known by their fruits,
“Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?”
(Mt 7 16-20). Then in the Ep. of Jas we find a
like question, ‘Can a fig tree, my brethren, yield
olives, or a vine figs?” (3 12). We remember that
the Master said, ‘“Know ye that he is nigh, even
at the doors” (Mt 24 33). We are not surprised
to find the statement here in James, ‘Behold, the
judge standeth before the doors’ (6 9). These
reminiscences of the sayings of the Master meet
us on every page. It may be that there are many
more of them than we are able to identify. Their
number is sufficiently large, however, to show us
that James is steeped in the truths taught by Jesus,
and not only their substance but their phraseology
constantly reminds us of Him.

IV. Date of the Epistle.—There are those who
think that the Ep. of Jas is the oldest ep. in the NT.
Among those who favor an early date are Mayor,
Plumptre, Alford, Stanley, Renan, Weiss, Zahn,
Beyschlag, Neander, Schneckenburger, Thiersch,
and Dods.

The reasons assigned for this conclusion are: (1) the
general Judaic tone of the ep., which seems to antedate
admission of the Gentiles in any alarming numbers into
the church: but since the ep. is addressed only to Jews,
why should the Gentiles be mentioned in lt, whatever
its date? and (2) the fact that Paul and Peter are sup-
posed to have quoted from Jas in their writing; but this
matter of quotation is always an uncertain one, and It
has been ably argued that the quotation has been the
other way about. ‘


Others think that the ep. was written toward the
close of James’s life. Among these are Kern, Wie-
singer, Schmidt, Briickner, Wordsworth, and Farrar.


These argue (1) that the ep. gives evidence of a con-
siderable lapse of time in the history of the church,
sufficient to allow of a declension from the spiritual fervor
of Pentecost and the estahlishmeut of distinctions among
the brethren; but any of the sins mentioned in the ep.
in all probability could have been found in the church
in any decade of its history. (2) James has a position
of established authority, and those to whom he writes
are not recent converts but members in long standing;
but the position of James may have been established
from a very early date, and in an encyclical of this sort
we could not expect any indication of shorter or longer
Membership in the church. Doubtless some of those
addressed were recent converts, while others may have
been members for many years. (3) There are references
to persecutions and trials which fit the later rather than
the earlier date; but all that is said on this subject might
be suitable in any period of the presidency of James at
Jerus. (4) There are indications of a long and disap-
pointing delay in the Second Coming of the Lord in the
repeated exhortation to patience in waiting for it; but
on the other hand James says, ‘‘The coming of the Lord
is at hand,” and ‘‘ The judge standeth before the doors”’
(5 7-9). The same passage is cited in proof of a belief
that the immediate Sppearance of the Lord was expected,
as in the earlicst period of the church, and in proof that
there had been a disappointment of this earlier belief
and that it had been succeeded by a feeling that there
was need of patience in waiting for the coming so long
delayed.

It seems clear to us that there are no decisive
proofs in favor of any definite date for the ep. It
must have been written before the martyrdom of
James in the year 63 AD, and at some time during
his presidency over the church at Jerus; but there
is nothing to warrant us in coming to any more
definite conclusion than that Davidson, Hilgenfeld,
Baur, Zeller, Hausrath, von Soden, Jiilicher, Har-


James, Ep. of
amin


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1566


nack, Bacon and others date the ep. variously in
the post-Pauline period, 69-70 to 140-50 AD. ‘The
arguments for any of these dates fall far short of
proof, rest largely if not wholly upon conjectures
and presuppositions, and of course are inconsistent
with any belief in the authorship by James.

V. History of the Epistle.—Eusebius classed Jas
among those whose authenticity was disputed by
some. “James is said to be the author of the first
of the so-called Catholic Epp. But it is to be ob-
served that it is disputed; at least, not many of the
ancients have mentioned it, as is the case likewise
with the ep. that bears the name of Jude, which
is also one of the seven so-called Catholic Epp.
Nevertheless, we know that these also, with the
rest, have been read publicly in most churches”
(HE, II, 23). Eusebius himself, however, quotes
Jas 4 11 as Scripture and Jas 5 13 as spoken by
the holy apostle. Personally he does not seem dis-
posed to question the genuineness of the ep. There
are ||s in phraseology which make it possible that
the ep. is quoted in Clement of Rome in the Ist
cent., and in Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin Martyr,
the Ep. to Diognetus, Irenaeus, and Hermas in the
2d cent. It is omitted in the canonical list of the
Muratorian Fragment and was not included in the
Old Lat version. Origen seems to be the first writer
to quote the ep. explicitly as Scripture and to assert
that it was written by James the brother of the Lord.
It appears in the Pesh version and seems to have
been generally recognized in the East. Cyril of
Jerus, Gregory of Nazianzus, Ephraem of Edessa,
Didymus of Alexandria, received it as canonical.
The 3d Council of Carthage in 397 AD finally settled
its status for the Western church, and from that
date in both-the East and the West its canonicity
was unquestioned until the time of the Reformation.

Erasmus and Cajetan revived the old doubts con-
cerning it. Luther thought it contradicted Paul
and therefore banished it to the appendix of his
Bible. “James,” he says, “has aimed to refute
those who relied on faith without works, and is too
weak for his task in mind, understanding, and
words, mutilates the Scriptures, and thus directly
contradicts Paul and all Scriptures, seeking to
accomplish by enforcing the law what the apostles
successfully effect by love. Therefore J will not

lace his Ep. in my Bible among the proper leading
Foals?! (Werke, XIV, 148). He declared that it
was a downright strawy ep., as compared with such
as those to the Rom and to the Gal, and it had no
real evangelical character. This judgment of
Luther is a very hasty and regrettable one. The
modern church has refused to accept it, and it is
generally conceded now that Paul and James are
m perfect agreement with each other, though their
presentation of the same truth from opposite points
of view brings them into apparent contradiction.
Paul says, ‘“By grace have ye been saved through
faith .... not of works, that no man should
glory” (Eph 2 8.9). “We reckon therefore that a
man is justified by faith apart from the works of
the law’? (Rom 3 28). James says, ‘Faith, if it
have not works, is dead in itself” (2 17). “Ye see
that by works a man is justified, and not only by
faith” (2 24). With these passages before him
Luther said, “Many have toiled to reconcile Paul
with James . . . . but to no purpose, for they are
contrary, ‘Faith justifies’; ‘Faith does not justify’;
J will pledge my life that no one can reconcile those
propositions; and if he succeeds he may call me a
fool” (Colloquia, II, 202).

Jt would be difficult to prove Luther a fool if
Paul and James were using these words, faith,
works, and justification, in the same sense, or even
if each were writing with full consciousness of what
the other had written. They both use Abraham for


an example, James of justification by works, and
Paul of justification by faith. How can that be
possible? The faith meant by James is the faith
of a dead orthodoxy, an intellectual assent to the
dogmas of the church which does not result in any
practical righteousness in life, such a faith as the
demons have when they believe in the being of God
and simply tremble before Him. The faith meant
by Paul is intellectual and moral and spiritual,
affects the whole man, and leads him into conscious
and vital union and communion with God. It is
not the faith of demons; itis the faith that redeems.
Again, the works meant by Paul are the works of a
dead legalism, the works done under a sense of com-
pulsion or from a feeling of duty, the works done in
ohedience to a law which is a taskmaster, the works
of a slave and not of ason. ‘These dead works, he
declares, can never give life. The works meant by
James are the works of a believer, the fruit of the faith
and love born in every believer’s heart and manifest
in every believer's life. The possession of faith
will insure this evidence in his daily conduct and
conversation; and without this evidence the mere
profession of faith will not save him. The justifi-
cation meant by Paul is the initial justification of
the Christian life. No doing of meritorious deeds
will make a man worthy of salvation. He comes
into the kingdom, not on the basis of merit but on
the basis of grace. The sinner is converted not by
doing anything, but by believing on the Lord Jesus
Christ. He approaches the threshold of the king-
dom and he finds that he has no coin that is current
there. He cannot buy his way in by good works;
he must accept salvation by faith, as the gift of
God's free grace. The justification meant by James
is the justification of any after-moment in the
Christian life, and the final justification before the
judgment throne. Good works are inevitable in
the Christian life. There can be no assurance of
salvation without them.

Paul is looking at the root; James is looking at
the fruit. Paul is talking about the beginning of
the Christian life; James is talking about its con-
tinuance and consummation. With Paul, the works
he renounces precede faith and are dead works.
With James, the faith he denounces is apart from
works and is a dead faith.

Paul believes in the works of godliness just as
much as James. He prays that God may estab-
lish the Thessalonians in every good work (2 Thess
217). He writes to the Connthians that ‘‘God is
able to make all grace abound unto” them; that
they, “having always all sufficiency in everything,
may abound unto every good work” (2 Cor 9 8).
He declares to the Ephesians that ‘we are his work-
manship, created in Christ Jesus for good works,
which God afore prepared that we should walk in
them” (Eph 2 10). He makes a formal statement
of his faith in Rom: God “will render to every man
according to his works: to them that by patience
in well-doing seek for glory and honor and incor-
ruption, eternal life: but unto them that are fac-
tious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteous-
ness, shall be wrath and indignation, tribulation
and anguish, upon every soul of man that worketh
evil, of the Jew first, ‘and also of the Gr; but glory
and honor and peace to every man that worketh
good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gr” (Rom 2
6-10). This is the final justification discussed by
James, and it is just as clearly a judgment by works
with Paul as with him.

On the other hand James believes in saving faith
as well as Paul. He begins with the statement
that the proving of our faith works patience and
brings perfection (1 3.4). He declares that the
prayer of faith will bring the coveted wisdom (1 6).
He describes the Christian profession as a holding


1567


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


James, Ep. of
Jamin


“the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of
glory” (2 1). He says that the poor as to the world
are rich in faith, and therefore heirs to the kingdom
(2 5). He quotes the passage from Gen, “Abraham
believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for
righteousness” (2 23), and he explicitly asserts that
Abraham’s “faith wrought with his works, and by
works was faith made perfect” (2 22). The faith
mentioned in all these passages is the faith of the
professing Christian; it is not the faith which the
sinner exercises in accepting salvation. James and
Paul are at one in declaring that faith and works
must go hand in hand in the Christian life, and that
in the Christian’s experience both faith without
works is dead and works without faith are dead
works. They both believe in faith working through
love as that. which alone will avail in Christ Jesus
(Gal 5 6). Fundamentally they agree. Super-
ficially they seem to contradict each other. That
is because they are talking about different things
and using the same terms with different meanings
for those terms in mind.
VI. The Message of the Epistle to Our Times.—
There are those who talk holiness and are hypo-
crites; those who make profession of
1. To the _ perfect love and yet cannot live peace-
Pietist ably with their brethren; those who
are full of pious phraseology but fail
in practical philanthropy. This ep. was written
for them. It may not give them much comfort,
but it ought to give them much profit. The mys-
ticism that contents itself with pious frames and
phrases and comes short in actual sacrifice and de-
voted service will find its antidote here. The
antinomianism that professes great confidence in
free grace, but does not recognize the necessity for
corresponding purity of life, needs to ponder the
practical wisdom of this ep. The quictists who are
satisfied to sit and sing themselves away to everlast-
ing bliss ought to read this ep. until they catch its
bugle note of inspiration to present activity and
continuous good deeds. All who are long on theory
and short on practice ought to steep themselves in
the spirit of James; and since there are such people
in every community and in every age, the message
of the ep. will never grow old.
The sociological problems are to the front today.
The old prophets were social reformers, and James
is most like them in the NT. Much
2. To the that he says is applicable to present-
Sociologist day conditions. He lays down the
right principles for practical philan-
thropy, and the proper relationships between master
and man, and between man and man. If the teach-
ings of this ep. were put into practice through-
out the church it would mean the revitalization of
Christianity. It would prove that the Christian
religion was practical and workable, and it would
go far to establish the final brotherhood of man in
the service of God.
The life of Our Lord is the most important life
in the history of the race. It will always be a sub-
ject of the deepest interest and study.
3. To the Modern research has penetrated every
Student of contributory realm for any added light
the Life and upon the heredity and the environ-
Character ment of Jesus. The people and the
of Jesus land, archacology and contemporary
history, have been cultivated inten-
sively and extensively for any modicum of knowl-
edge they might add to our store of information
concerning the Christ. We suggest that there is a
field here to which sufficient attention has not yet
been given. James was the brother of the Lord.
His ep. tells us much about himself. On the sup-
position that he did not exhort others to be what
he would not furnish them an example in being, we


read in this ep. his own character writ large. He
was like his brother in so many things. As westudy
the life and character of James we come to know
more about the life and character of Jesus.

Jesus and James had the same mother. From
her they had a common inheritance. As far as they
reproduced their mother’s characteristics they were
alike. They had the same home training. As far
as the father in that home could succeed in putting
the impress of his own personality upon the boys,
they would be alike. It is noticeable in this con-
nection that Joseph is said in the Gospel to have
been “a just man” (Mt 1 19 AV), and that James
came to be known through all the early church as
James the Just, and that in his ep. he gives this
title to his brother, Jesus, when he says of the un-
righteous rich of Jerus, ““Ye have condemned and
killed the just” man (6 6 AV). Joseph was just,
and James was just, and Jesus was just. The
brothers were alike, and they were like the father
in this respect. The two brothers seem to think
alike and talk alike to a most remarkable degree.
They represent the same home surroundings and
human environment, the same religious training
and inherited characteristics. Surely, then, all
that we learn concerning James will help us the
better to understand Jesus.


They are alike in their porvical insight and their prac-
tical wisdom. ‘They are both fond of figurative speech,
and it seems always natural and unforced. The dis-
courses of Jesus are filled with birds and flowers and
winds and clouds and all the sights and sounds of rural
life in Pal. The writings of James abound in reference
to the fleld flowers and the meadow grass and the salt
fountains and the burning wind and the early and the
latter rain. They are alike in mental attitude and in
spiritual alertness. They have much in common in the
material equipment of their thought. James was well
versed in the apoc lit. May we not reasonably conclude
that Jesus was just as familiar with these books as he?
James seems to have acquired a comparative mastery
of the Gr language and to have had some acquaintance
with the Gr philosophy. Would not Jesus have been
as well furnished in these lines as he?

What was the character of James? All tradition
testifies to his personal purity and persistent devotion,
commanding the reverence and the respect of all who
knew him. As we trace the various elements of his
character manifesting themselves in his anxieties and
exhortations in this ep., we find rising before us the
image of Jesus as well as the portrait of James. He
is a single-minded man, stedfast in faith and patient
in trials. He is slow to wrath, but very quick to
detect any sins of speech and hypocrisy of life. He
is full of humility, but ready to champion the cause
of the oppressed and the poor. He hates all insincerity
and he loves wisdom, and he believes in prayer and prac-
tises it in reference to both temporal and spiritual good.
He believes in absolute equality in the house of God.
He is opposed to anything that will establish any dis-
tinctions between brethren in their place of pore: He
believes in prec philanthropy. He helieves that the
right sort of religion will lead a man to visit the fatherless
and widows in their affliction, and to kcep himself un-
spotted from the world. A pure religion in his estima-
tion will mean a pure man. He believes that we ought
to practise all that we preach.


As we study these characteristics and opinions of
the younger brother, does not the image of his and
our Elder Brother grow ever clearer before our
eyes?


Lirerarore.—Works on Introduction: by Zahn,
Weiss, Jiilicher, Salmon, Dods, Bacon, Bennett and
Adeney; MacClymont, The NT and Its Writers;


Farrar, The Messages of the Books, and Early Days of
Christianity; Fraser, Lectures on the Bible; Godet, Bib.
Studies. Works on the Apostolic Age: | McGiffert,
Schaff, Hausrath, Weizsicker. Commentaries: Mayor,
aes Beyschiag, Dale, Huther, Plummer, Plumpire,
er.
Dorremus ALmy Hayes
JAMES, PROTEVANGELIUM, pri-té-van-jel’-


j-um, OF. See APocRYPHAL GosPELs.


JAMIN, ja’min (727, yamin, “right hand”):
(1) In Gen 46 10; Ex 6 15; Nu 26 12; 1 Ch
4 24,a “son” (clan) of Simeon.


Jaminites
Jareb


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1568


(2) In1 Ch 2 27, a Judahite, “son” of Ram and
grandson of Jerahmeel.

(3) In Neh 8 7, a Levite (?), one of those who
“caused the people to understand” the Torah when
Ezra enforced it=“Iadinus”’ in 1 Esd 9 48.


JAMINITES, j4’min-its CJ%055 , ha-yamini, coll.
with art.): In Nu 26 12, descendants of Jamin
((1} above).


JAMLECH, jam’lek (T2702, yamlékh, “may he
[God] cause to reign”): A “prince” or chief of the
tribe of Simeon (1 Ch 4 34). If ver 41 refers to
the preceding list, he lived in the time of Hezekiah.


JAMNIA, jam’‘ni-a.


JAMNITES, jam/’nits ('Iapvirar, Jamnittai):
The inhabitants (2 Macc 12 9) of Jamnia, the
ancient Jabneel, a town on the northern border of
Judah near the sea. Its port and navy were burned
by Judas Maccabaeus (loc. cit.).


See JABNEEL.


JANAI, ja’nd-i, ja’/nt C297, ya‘nay, “he answers”;
as to whether final y is the third radical, or may be
taken as equivalent to the Divine name Yah, see
HPN, 149-51): A chief of a family descended trom
Gad (1 Ch 5 12, AV “Jaanai’’).


JANGLING, jan’gling (waraodoyla, mataiologia,
“vain discourse,” “babbling’’): This word is not
found in ARV; once only in AV (1 Tim 16). ARV
has ‘‘vain talking,’’ instead of “vain jangling,” and
evidently means proud, self-conceited talking against
what God has revealed and against God Himself.


JANIM, ja’nim (0°)2, yantm; AV Janum): A
place in the Hebron uplands named with Eshan
and Beth-tappuah (Josh 15 53); unidentified.


JANNAI, jan’4-1 (‘Iavval, Jannat, Tisch., Treg.,
WH;; ’Iavvd, Jannd, TR; AV Janna); An ancestor of
Jesus in Lk’s genealogy, the 5th before Joseph, the
husband of Mary (Lk 3 24).


JANNES, jan’éz, AND JAMBRES, jam’bréz
(Iavvias kal 'lapBpas, Jannés kat Iambrés, 2 Tim
3.8): These are the names of two magicians in

ancient Egypt, who withstood Moses
1. Egyptian before Pharach. This is the only
Magicians place where the names occurin the NT,
and they are not mentioned in the OT
at all. In Ex 7 11.22 Egyp magicians are spoken
of, who were called upon by Pharaoh to oppose
Moses and Aaron: ‘Then Pharaoh also called for
the wise men and the sorcerers: and they also, the
magicians of Egypt, did in like manner with their
enchantments.” Jannes and Jambres were evidently
two of the persons referred to in this passage. It
should be observed that the word tr? here ‘‘magi-
cians” occurs also in Gen 41 8 in connection with
Pharaoh’s dreams: Pharaoh “sent and called for
all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men
thereof.’ RVm reads for ‘‘magicians,”’ “or sacred
scribes.” The Heb word is hartummitm, and means
sacred scribes who were skilled in the sacred writing,
that is in the hieroglyphics; they were a variety of
Egyp priests. J. and J. were doubtless members of
one or other of the various classes spoken of in the
passages in Ex and Gen, the wise men, the sorcerers,
and the magicians or sacred scribes.
J. and J., one or both, are also men-


2. Men- tioned hy Pliny (23-79 AD), by Apuleius
tioned by (c130AD), bothof whomspeak ot Moses
Pliny and and Jannes as famous magicians of an-
Others tiquity. The Pythagorean philosopher


Numenius (2d cent. AD) speaks of J.
and J. as Egyp hierogrammateis, or sacred scribes.


There are many curious Jewish traditions regarding
J. and J. These traditions, which are found in the
; Tg and elsewhere, are full of contradic-
3. Tradi- tions and impossibilities and anachronisms.
tions They are to the effect that J. and J. were
3 sons of Balaam, the soothsayer of Pethor.
Notwithstanding this impossibility in the matter of date,
they were said to have withstood Moses 40 years pre-
viously at the court of Pharaoh, to whom it was also
said, they so interpreted a dream of that king, as to
foretell the birth of Moses and cause the oppression of
the Israelites. They are also said to have become
proselytes, and it is added that they left Egypt at the
Exodus, among the mixed multitude. They are reported
to have instigated Aaron to make the golden calf. The
traditions of their death are also given in a varying tash-
ion. They were said to have been drowned in the Red
Sea, or to have been put to death after the making of the
golden calf, or during the slaughter connected with the
name of Phinehas.


According to Origen (Comm. on Mt 27 8) there
was an apocryphal book—not yet rediscovered—
4. Origen’s called “The Book | of J. , and J.”
Statem ant Origen’s statement is that in 2 Tim

3 8 Paul is quoting from that book.
In the Targumic lit. “Mambres” occurs as a vari-
ant reading instead of “Jambres.” It is thought
that Jambres is derived from an Aram.
5. Deriva- root, meaning “to oppose,” the parti-
tion ciple of which would be Mambres.
The meaning of either form is ‘he who
opposes.” Jannegis perhaps a corruption of Joannes
or [ohannes (John). Joun RUTHERFURD


JANNES AND JAMBRES, BOOK OF: An
apocryphal work condemned by Pope Gelasius.
See preceding art., JANNES AND JAMBRES.


JANOAH, ja-nd’a (O19, yandth, “resting-
place’):

(1) A place named on the eastern boundary of
Ephraim (Josh 16 6f; AV “Janohah”). Onom (s.v.
“Jano’’) places it in Akrabattine, 12 Rom miles EH. of
Neapolis (Vablis). This points definitely to Khirbet
Yanan. On a hill near by, the Moslems show the
Makam of Neby Nan, the father of Joshua.

(2) A town in the uplands of Naphtali, mentioned
as having been captured and depopulated by Tiglath-
pileser. It is named with Abel-beth-maacah and
Kedesh (2 K 15 29). It may be identical with
Yanuh, a village about 6 miles E. of Tyre.

W. Ewine

JANUM, ja’num (Keré D9, yandm, Kethibh
D3", yantm). See Jani.


JAPHETH, ja‘feth (D2, yepheth; MP7, ya-
pheth; *Iape@, Idpheth): This name, in Gen 9 27,
seems to he explained by the phrase
1. Ety- “may God make wide [yapht, ARV
mologies of “enlarge’’| for Japheth,” where yapht
Japheth and Japheth are represented by the
same consonants, but with different
vowel-points. The root of yapht is pathah, “‘to
make wide.” This etymology, however, is not
universally accepted, as the word-play is so obvious,
and the association of Japheth with Shem (‘dark’’)
and Ham (“‘black”) suggests a name on similar lines
—either gentilic, or descriptive of race. Japheth
has therefore been explained as meaning “fair,”
from yaphah, the non-Sem and non-Hamitic races
known to the Jews heing all more or less white-
skinned. The Tg of Onkelos agrees with the EV,
but that of Jonathan has “God shall beautify
Japheth,” as though from yaphah.
The immediate descendants of J. were seven in
number, and are represented by the nations desig-
‘ nated Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan,
2. His De- Tubel, Mesech, and Tiras; or, rough-
scendants ly, the Armenians, Lydians, Medes,
_ Greeks, Tibarenians, and Moschians,
the last, Tiras, remaining still obscure. ‘The sons


1569


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jaminites
Jareb


of Gomer (Ashkenaz, Riphath and Togarmah) were
all settled in the West Asian tract; while the sons
of Javan (Elisah, Tarshish, Kittim and Dodanim or
Rodanim) occupied the Mediterranean coast and

the adjacent islands.
_In Gen 9 27, as in other passages, Japheth occu-
pies the 3d place in the enumeration of the sons of
Noah, but he is really regarded as the


3. His 2d son, Ham being the youngest. In
Place the genealogical table, however (Gen
among the 10 1/ff), the descendants of Japheth
Sons of are given first, and those of Shem last,
Noah in order to set forth Sem affinities at


greater length. Though this would
seem to indicate that the fair races were the least
known to the Jews, it implies that the latter were
well disposed toward them, for Japheth was (ulti-
mately) to dwell in the tents of Shem, and therefore
to take part in Shem’s spiritual privileges.
It seems unlikely that the Gr giant-hero, Tapetos,
father of Prometheus, who was regarded by the
Greeks as the father of the human race,
4, Japheth has any connection with the Heb
and Japetos Japheth. The original of the Heb
record probably belongs to a date too
early to admit borrowing from the Gr, and if the
name had been borrowed by the Greeks from the
Hebrews, a nearer form might be expected. See
SHem; Ham; Taste or Nations.
T. G. Pincues
JAPHETH, ja’feth (Idhe0, Idpheih): A region
mentioned only in Jth 2 25, where no particulars
are given which may lead to its identification.
Holofernes ‘‘came unto the borders of Japheth,
which were toward the south, over against Arabia.’’


JAPHIA, ja-fi’a, jaf’i-a (2"D7, yaphi", perhaps
“tall”; cf Arab.; *Lép0a, Jéphtha):

(1) King of Lachish, one of the 5 “kings of the
Amorites’’ who allied themselves together in an
expedition against Gibeon on account of its treaty
with the Israelites (Josh 10 3-5). After their
discomfiture by Joshua in the battle of Beth-horon
(ver 10), “one of the most important in the history
of the world” (Stanley), they fled and hid them-
selves in the cave at Makkedah (ver 16). As
Joshua passed, he was informed of this, but, unwill-
ing to delay his pursuit of the fugitives, he ordered
great stones to be rolled unto the mouth of the cave,
leaving a guard in charge (vs 17f). On the com-
pletion of his victory, Joshua returned, to Makkedah
and commanded the Israelites to bring forth the
imprisoned kings, and summoned the chiefs of his
army to plant their feet upon their necks. Then
he put them to death; and after he had hung their
bodies on 5 trees, he ordered the Israelites in the
evening to take them down and cast them into the
cave (vs 22-27).

(2) (LXX "legids, Iephiés, Ilagué, Iaphié): One of
the sons of David who were born to him at Jerus
(286 15;1Ch37; 146). James Cricuton


JAPHIA, ja-fi’a, jaf’i-a (27°29, yaphia*): A town
on the southern boundary of Zebulun named with
Chisloth-tabor and Daberath (Josh 19 12). It is
represented by the modern Yafd, about 1} miles
S.W. of Nazareth, near the foot of the hills. It was
one ef the places fortified by Jos (Vita, 45; BJ, I,
xx, 6).


JAPEHLET, jaf‘let (u25" , yaphlét, “he escapes”’[?]):
In1 Ch 7 32.33, a “son” of Heber, an Asherite.


JAPHLETI, jaf’lé-ti, jaf-le’ti: AV in Josh 16 3,
where Heb is "Q25710, ha-yaphiéi, ‘‘the Japhletites,”
RV, a clan said to border on the territory of Joseph,
but not mentioned elsewhere.


JAPHO, ja’fs: AV and ARVm in Josh 19 46
for Joppa (q.v.).


JAR, jar.


JARAH, ja’ra (W197, ya'rah, “honey-comb” [?]):
A descendant of King Saul (1 Ch 9 42); but LXX
B, A, have *la8é, Jadé= 91, ya‘dah, a name
found in LXX of 1 Ch 8 36, where MT has
MIPIM, yhd‘addah, Jehoaddah. Some Heb MSS
have ya‘dah in 9 42, and it should probably be
accepted as the correct reading there, for ya‘déh=
Jehoaddah y*hi‘addah, linguistically; cf Jonathan
and Jehonathan, etc.


JAREB, ja’reb, jar’eb (AN, ydrébh, “let him
contend’; LXX 'Iapety, Zareim): Is mentioned
twice in Hos (6 13; 10 6) as an Assyr

1. Obscurity king who received tribute from Israel.


See BARREL.


of the We do not, however, know of an Assyr
Name king of that name, or of such a place

as is indicated by ‘‘the king of Jareb”
(6 18 AVm). Sayce (HCM, 417) thinks Jareb


may possibly be the earlier name of Sargon who
took Samaria in 722 BC, as the passages in which
it appears seem to relate to the last struggles of
the Northern Kingdom. This conjecture he bases
on the probability that the successor of Shalmaneser
IV, following the example of other usurpers of the
Assyr throne before him, assumed the name of Sar-
gon. Those who hold that Hosea’s prophecies are
probably not later than 734 BC reject this view.
If we take the Heb text in 5 13 asit stands (melekh
yarébh), Jareb cannot be regarded as the name of
a person, owing to the absence of the
2. Meaning art. before melekh, “king,” which is
of the Word always inserted in such a case. It is
probably an epithet or nickname applied
to the Assyr king, as is suggested by RVm (“a king
that should contend’) and AVm (“the king that
should plead’’), being derived from the y/ ribh, ‘“‘to
strive.” The rendering would then be “King Com-
bat,”’ “King Contentious,” indicating Assyria’s
general hostility to Israel and the futility of apply-
ing for help to that quarter against the will of Jeh.
Some suggest that for melekh ydrébh we should read
malki rabh (2 being the old nominative termination),
or melekh rabh, ‘Great King,” a title frequently ap-
plied to Assyr monarchs. Others, following the
LXX, would read melekh ram, “High King.”
The historical reference, if it be to any recorded
incident, may be to the attempt of Menahem, king
of Israel in 738 BC, to gain over the


3. Histori- Assyrians by a large subsidy to Pul,
cal Ref- who assumed the name of Tiglath-
erence pileser (2 K 16 19). In this case, as


both Ephraim and Judah are men-
tioned in the protasis, we should have to suppose
that Ephraim made application on behalf of both
kingdoms. If “Judah” be inserted before “sent”
to complete the parallel, then the clause would be
interpreted of Ahaz, king of Judah, who offered a
heavy bribe to Tiglath-pileser to help him to with-
stand the combined attack of Rezin of Syria and
Pekah of Israel (2 K 16 7f). But perhaps there
may be no particular allusions in the two clauses of
the apodosis, but only a reference to a general tend-
ency on the part of both kingdoms to seek Assyr aid.
Cheyne would make a violent change in the verse.
He would substitute ‘Israel’ for “Judah” as war-
ranted by Hos 12 2, insert ‘Israel’ be-
4, Other fore ‘‘sent,’’ change ’ashshur, ‘‘Assyria,”’
Views into miccur, the North Arabian land of
Musri, ‘references to which underlie
many passages in the OT,” and for melekh yarebh,
he would read melekh ‘érabhi, “king of Arabia.’”’ For
other views see JCC. JAMES CRICHTON


Jared.
Jattir


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1570


JARED, ja’red (TI), yeredh, “‘descent”; pausal
form, “i'J}, ya@redh, in Gen 5 15; 1 Ch 1 2, hence
EV “Jared” for “Jered”; *Iapé5, Jaréd): In Gen
5 15-20; 1 Ch 1 2; Lk 3 37, son of Mahalaleel
and father of Enoch. AV has “Jered” in 1 Ch 1 2.

The name is supposed by Budde to denote a degenera-
tlon of the human race, the first five generations being


righteous, their successors not, except Enoch and Noah.
The name has been identified with that of Irad (GJ,


‘iradh), Gen 4.18. See Skinner, Gen, 117, 129, 131,
JARESIAH, jar-é-si’a: AV for JAARESHIAE (q.v.).


JARHA, jar’ha M72, yarha‘, meaning unknown):
An Egyp slave of Shesham, ahout Eli’s time (cf
HPN, 235), who married his master’s daughter, and
hecame the founder of a house of the Jerahmeelites
(1 Ch 2 34 ff).


JARIB, ja’rib, jar’ib (A", yaribh, “he contends,”
or ‘takes [our] part,”’ or “conducts [our] case’):

(1) In 1 Ch 4 24, a “son” (lan) of Simeon=
‘Jachin’’ of Gen 46 10; Ex 6 15; Nu 26 12.

(2) In Ezr 8 16, one of the “chief men’ for
whom Ezra sent, and dispatched hy him to Casiphia
to es ministers for God’s house=“Joribus” (1 Esd
8 44).

(3) In Ezr 10 18, a priest who had married a
foreign wife=‘“Joribus” (1 Esd 9 19).


JARIMOTH, jar’i-moth (‘Iapipdé, Jariméth):
1 Esd 9 28; called “Jeremoth” in Ezr 10 27.


JARMUTH, jar’muth (MAT, yarmath):

(1) A city of the Canaanites in the Shephelah
(Josh 165 35) of Judah whose “‘king,”’ Piram, joined
the league of the “five kings’’ against Joshua (Josh
10 3-5), was defeated at Gibeon and slain at Mak-
kedah (ver 23). One of the 31 “kings” defeated
in Joshua’s campaign (Josh 12 11). In Josh 15
35 it is mentioned in conjunction with Adullam,
Socoh and Azekah, and in Neh 11 29 with Zorah,
Zanoah and Adullam. Cheyne (ZB) suggests that
the ““Maroth” of Mic 1 12 may be a copyist’s error
for Jarmuth. In Onom (OS? 182 31; 266 38)
mention is made of a ‘Ieppoxds, Iermochés, or Jer-
mucha, 10 Rom miles N.E. of Eleutheropolis (Beit
Jibrin). The site of this once important place is
Khirbet el Yarmik, a ruin, with many old walls
and cisterns, on the top of a hill 1,465 ft. above sea-
level. It is nearly 2 miles N.W. of Bett Nattij,
from which it is visible, and 8} miles, as measured
on map, N.N.E. of Bett Jibrin. Cf PEF, III, 128,
Sh XVIII. ;

(2) A city of Issachar belonging to the ‘children
of Gershon, of the families of the Levites’” (Josh
21 29); in the duplicate list in 1 Ch 6 73 we have
Ramoth, while in the LXX version of Josh 21 29
we have, in different VSS, Rhemmdth or Ierméth.
In Josh 19 21 ‘“Remeth” occurs (in Heb) in the lists
of cities of Issachar; in the LXX Rhémmas or
Rhamdth. The name was probably “Remeth” or
“Ramoth,” but the place has never been identified
with any certainty. See Ramora.

. E. W. G. MasterMan

JAROAH, ja-ré’a (192, ydroh, meaning un-
known): A Gadite chief (1 Ch 5 14). But the
text is doubtful; see Curtis, Ch, 124.


JASAELUS, jas-a-é/lus (Iacdndos, Iasdélos; B,
Asdélos; AV Jasael, ja’sa-el [1 Esd 9 30]): Called
“Sheal” in Ezr 10 29.


JASHAR, ja’shar, jash’ar, BOOK OF (190
“W3, sépher ha-yashar; AV Book of Jasher, m “‘the
book of the upright’’): The title of an ancient Heb
national song-book (Lit. “book of the righteous one’)


from which two quotations are made in the OT:
(1) Josh 10 12-14, the command of Joshua to the
sun and moon, “Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon.
...»~ Is not this written in the book of Jashar?”
(see BeTu-noron; LXX in this place omits the
reference to Jashar); and (2) 2 § 1 18 ff, “the song
of the bow,’’ or lament of David over Saul and
Jonathan. (3) Some conjecture a third extract in
1 K 8 12, “Then spake Solomon, Jeh hath said that
he would dwell in the thick darkness.””? The words
of Jeh are quoted by LXX in ver 53 as ‘‘written
in the book of the song”’ (en biblié tés odés), and it is
pointed out that the words “the song’’ (in Heb
“Wi, ha-shir) might easily be a corruption of
“WM, ha-yashaér. A similar confusion (“song” for
“righteous”’) may explain the fact that the Pesh
Syr of Josh has for a title ‘the hook of praises or
hymns.” The book evidently was a well-known
one, and may have been a gradual collection of
religious and national songs. It is conjectured that
it may have included the Song of Deborah (Jgs_ 5),
and older pieces now found in the Pent (e.g. Gen
423.24; 9 25-27; 27 27-29); this, however, is
uncertain. On the curious theories and speculations
of the rabbis and others about the book (that it was
the Book of the Law, of Gen, etc), with the fantastic
reconstructive theory of Dr. Donaldson in his Jas-
har, see the full art. in HDB. JAMES ORR


JASHEN, ja’shen, jash’en (JU?, ydshén,
“asleep” [?]): Seemingly the father of some of
David’s thirty valiant men (2 8 23 32f). TheMT
reads ‘“Eliahba the Shaalbonite, the sons of Jashen,
Jonathan, Shammah the Hararite,....” 1 Ch
11 33f has “‘Eliahha the Shaalbonite, the sons of
Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shagee
the Hararite ....” Itisclear that ‘sons of” area
dittography of the last three consonants of the pre-
vious word. LXX, Lucin2 Sand1 Ch has 6 Tovvl,
ho Gount, ‘the Gunite,” for “the Gizonite,” perhaps
correctly (cf Gen 46 24; Nu 26 48 for “Guni,”
“Gunite”’). So 2 8 23 32 may be corrected thus:
“Eliahba the Shaalbonite, Jashen the Gunite, Jona-
than the son of Shammah the Hararite.” Jashen
thus becomes one of the thirty =“‘Hashem”’ of 1 Ch
11 34. Davin Francis Roperts


JASHER, ja’shér, jash’ér, BOOK OF: AV for
JaSHAR (q.v.), and see BeTH-HoRON, BATTLE oF.


JASHOBEAM, ja-shd’bé-am (OP 2?


W., yashobh-
‘am, probably “people will return’; see discussion


of names compounded with DY, ‘am, in HPN,
41-59): Jashoheam is mentioned in three passages
(1 Ch 11 11; 12 6 [Heb 7]; 27 2f), but opinions
vary as to the number of persons referred to. In
1 Ch 11 11 he is called ‘the son of a Hachmonite”’
(reference unknown) and “the chief of the three”
(“three,’’ the best reading; RV “thirty”; AV, RVm
“captains”), mighty men of David. He is said to
have slain 300 (800 in 2 8 23 8) at one time, ie.
one after another.


, Lhe gibbérim, or heroes, numbered 600 and were di-
vided into bands of 200 each and subdivided into smaller
bands of 20 each, with a captain for each company large
and small. Jashobeam had command of the first of the
three bands of 200 (see Ewald, HI, III, 140f; Stanley,
JC, Il, 78). From the indefiniteness of the descrip-
tion, “three of the thirty chief,” he can hardly be re-
garded as one of the three mighty men who broke through
the ranks of the Philis, and brought water from the well
of Bethlehem to David on the hill-fortress of Adullam
(1 Ch 11 15-17), and the fact that ‘‘the thirty’ have
not yet been meutioned would seem to indicate that this
story is not in its proper place. But ‘‘Jashobeam"' here
(1 Ch 11 11) is probably an error for ‘‘Ishbaal,’”’ the
reading of many of the MSS of the LX_X (HPN, 46, n.).


In the || passage (2 S 23 8) he is called “Josheb-
basshebeth, a Tahchemonite.” This verse, however,


1571


is probably corrupt (RVm), and the text should be
corrected in accordance with Ch to ‘Ishbaal, the
Hachmonite.” In 1 Ch 27 2f Jashobeam is said
to have been “the son of Zabdiel,” of the family of
Perez, and the commander-in-chief of the division
of David’s army which did duty the first month.
The army consisted of 12 divisions of 24,000 each,
each division serving a month in turn. In 1 Ch
12 6 (Heb 7) Jashobeam is mentioned among those
who joined David at Ziklag in the time of Saul, and
is described as a Korahite, probably one belonging
to a family of Judah (cf 2 48). James CricHTon


JASHUB, ja’shub, jash’ub (Q1W2, ydshubh;
2°07, yashtbh, in Ch, but Keré 2W7, yadshibh, “he
returns’):

(1) In Nu 26 24; 1 Ch 7 1, a “son” (clan) of
Issachar. Gen 46 13 has incorrectly Iob, but LXX
Jashub.

(2) In Ezr 10 29, one of those who had married
foreign wives= ‘‘Jasubus’ in 1 Esd 9 30.

( (3) In Isa 7 3, part of the name SHmaAR-JASHUB
q.v.).


JASHUBI-LEHEM, ja-shoo-bi-lé’hem (1307
DMD, ydshubhi-lehem): A name in 1 Ch 4 22
where commentators insert TA, béth, between the
two words and translate “[and] returned to Beth-
lehem.”’


JASHUBITES, ja’shub-its, jash’ub-its, THE
CAWS , ha-ydshubhi, coll. with art.): In Nu 26
24, descendants of JasHus (q.v. [1]).


JASIEL, ja’si-cl, jas'i-cl ON WI", ya'dsi’ él, “God
is maker,’ 1 Ch 11 47 AV). See JaasrEen.


JASON, j2’sun (‘Idcav, Iésdn): A common name
among the Hellenizing Jews who used it for Jesus
or Joshua, probably connecting it with the Gr vb.
idsthai (“to heal”).

(1) Son of Eleazar, sent (161 BC) by Judas
Maccabaeus with other deputies to Rome “to make
a league of amity and confederacy” (1 Mace 8 17;
Jos, Ant, XII, x, 6), and perhaps to be identified
with (2).

(2) The father of Antipater who went as am-
bassador of Jonathan to Rome in 144 BC (1 Macc
12 16; 14 22; Ant, XIII, v, 8).

(8) Jason of Cyrene, a Jewish historian, who is
known only from what is told of him in 2 Mace
2 19-23. 2 Maccis in fact simply an abridgment
in one book of the 5 books written by Jason on the
Jewish wars of liberation. He must have written
after 162 BC, as his books include the wars under
Antiochus Eupator.

(4) Jason the high priest, second son of Simon
II and brother of Onias III. The change of name
from Jesus (Jos, Ant, XII, v) was part of the Hel-
lenizing policy favored by Antiochus Epiphanes
from whom he purchased the high-priesthood by a
large bribe, thus excluding his elder brother from
the office (2 Macc-4 7-26). He did everything
in his power to introduce Gr customs and Gr life
among the Jews. He established a gymnasium in
Jerus, so that even the priests neglected the altars
and the sacrifices, and hastened to be partakers of
the “unlawful allowance” in the palaestra. The
writer of 2 Macc calls him “that ungodly wretch”
and “vile’ Jason. He even sent deputies from
Jerus to Tyre to take part in the worship of Her-
cules; but what he sent for sacrifices, the deputies
expended on the “equipment of galleys.” After
3 years of this Hellenizing work he was supplanted
in 172 BC in the favor of Antiochus by Menelaus
who gave a large bribe for the high priest’s office.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jared
Jattir


Jason took refuge with the Ammonites; on hearing
that Antiochus was dead he tried with some suc-
cess to drive out Menelaus, but ultimately failed
(2 Macc 5 5ff). He took refuge with the Am-
monites again, and then with Aretas, the Arabian,
and finally with the Lacedaemonians, where he
hoped for protection ‘‘as being connected by race,”
and there “perished miserably in a strange land.”

(5) A name mentioned in Acts 17 5-9 and in
Rom 16 21. See following article.

J. Hurcurson

JASON, ja’sun (’Idcwv, Idsén): A Gr name as-
sumed by Jews who bore the Heb name Joshua.
This name is mentioned twice in the NT. (See
also preceding article.)

(1) Jason was the host of St. Paul during his
stay in Thessalonica, and, during the uproar or-
ganized by the Jews, who were moved to jealousy
by the success of Paul and Silas, he and several
other “brethren’’ were severely handled by the mob.
When the mob failed to find Paul and Silas, they
dragged Jason and “certain brethren’’ before the
politarchs, accusing Jason of treason in receiving
into his house those who said ‘There is another
king, one Jesus.’ The magistrates, being troubled,
took security from them, and let them go.


There are various explanations of the purpose of this
security. ‘‘By this expression it is most probahly meant
that a sum of money was deposited with the magistrates,
and that the Christian community of the plas made
themselves responsible that no attempt should be made
against the supremacy of Rome, and that peace should
be maintained in Thessalonica itself'’ (Conybeare and
Howson, St. Paul). Ramsay (St. Paul the Traveller)
thinks that the security was given to prevent Paul from
returning to Thessalonica and that St. Paul refers to
this in 1 Thess 2 18.


The immediate departure of Paul and Silas seems
to show the security was given that the strangers
oe leave the city and remain absent (Acts 17
5-9).

(2) Jason is one of the companions of St. Paul
who unite with him in sending greetings to the Rom
Christians (Rom 16 21). He is probably the same
person as (1). Paul calls him a kinsman, which
means a Jew (cf Rom 9 3; 16 11.21).

8. F. Hunter

JASPER, jas’pér, JASPIS, jas’pis. See Sronus,
PrReEcIovs.


JASUBUS, ja-st’bus (’IdcovBos, Idésoubos): An
Israelite who in the time of Ezra had to put away
his foreign wife (1 Esd 9 30); called “Jashub” in
Ezr 10 29.


JATAL, ja’tal (1 Esd 5 28). See Arar.


JATHAN, ja’than (‘Ia@dv, Jaihén; &, Nathan):
For “Jonathas’” in AV, which is the Lat form for the
Heb “Jonathan.” Jonathan was brother of Ananias
and “son of that great Sammaias”’ (Tob 6 13).


JATHBATH, jath’bath. See Jorparnan.


JATHNIEL, jath’ni-el GNIN2, yathni’él, “God
lives’): Fourth “son” of Meshelemiah, a Kora-


hite (1 Ch 26 2).


JATTIR, jat/ér (WN, yottir, and “Wl, yaitir):
A town in the hill country of Judah, mentioned in
conjunction with Shamir and Socoh (Josh 16 48);
one of the cities given to the “children of Aaron the
priest”? (Josh 21 14; 1 Ch 6 57). David after his
victory over the Amalekites sent a present of the
spoil from Ziklag “to them that were in Jattir”
(1 § 30 27).

It is now Khirbet ‘Aittr, an important ruin, in
the extreme 8. of the hill country, 5 miles S.E. of


Javan
Jedidah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1572


edh Dhartyeh and 20 miles S.E. of Beit Jibrin. This
must correspond to the “very large village Jethira’”’
which is mentioned in Onom (119 27; 138 3; 134
24, etc) as 20 miles S.E. of Eleutheropolis (i.e. Beit
Jibrin). The site is full of caves. See PEF, III,
408, Sh XXV. E. W. G. MasterMan
JAVAN, ja’van (J)? yawdn, meaning unknown):
(1) In Gen 10 24=1 Ch 15.7 (LXX ‘Iwvdp,
Toudn); Isa 66 19; Ezk 27 13 (LXX ‘EAAds, Hellds,
Greece); Dnl 8 21m; 10 20; 112; Zec 9 13;
Joel 3 6 (Heb 4 6) (LXX of Eddnves, hoi Héllénes,
ie. “Greeks’’), “son” of Japheth, and ‘father’ of
Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodarim, i.e. Rhodes
Gncorrectly ‘““Dodanim” in Gen 10 4). Javan is
the Gr Idwr, Id6n, or "Ié(¢)wv, Ié(v)dn, and in Gen
and 1 Ch=the Ionian Greeks of Asia Minor, prob-
ably here=Cyprus. The reference in Ezk 27 13
(from which that in Isa 66 19 is copied) is the
country personified. In Joel the pl. D7), y-wanim,
isfound. In Dnl the name is extended to the Greeks
generally. Corrohoration of the name is found in
Assyr (KB, II, 43). “The Pers Yauna occurs in the
same double reference from the time of Darius; cf
Aesch. Pers., 176, 562”? (Skinner, Gen, 198). In
Egyp the word is said to be y*v¢n-(n)a; in the Am
Tab Yivana is mentioned as being im the land of
Tyre. See HDB, II, 5526.
(2) Place (Ezk 27 19); name wanting in LXX.
Davin Francis RoBerts
JAVELIN, jav'lin, jav’e-lin. See ARMor; Arms.


JAW, jé om, Ichi, “cheek [bone],” ‘jaw [bone]’’),
JAWBONE, jo’bon, JAW TEETH: In Job 41 2,
RV gives ‘“‘pierce his jaw through with a hook” for
AV “bore his jaw through with a thorn” (see Hoox;
LeviaTHan). Ps 22 15, “My tongue cleaveth to
my jaws [malkéth],”’ is descriptive of the effect of a
fever or physical torture, a dryness and a horrible
clamminess. Malkohayim is an ancient dual form
meaning the two jaws, and, metaphorically, malkoeh
indicates that which is caught between the jaws,
booty, prey, including captives (Nu 31 11.26.32;
Isa 49 24f).

Figurative: (1) Of the power of the wicked, with
a reference to Divine restraint and discipline:
‘J brake the jaws [Heb “great teeth’’] of the nn-
righteous” (Job 29 17; Prov 30 14); ef Ps 58 6,
“Break out the great teeth [malia‘oth, “jaw teeth’’]
of the young lions, O Jeh.”’ Let the wicked be
deprived of their ability for evil; let them at least
be disabled from mischief. LX X reads “God shall
break,” etc. (Cf Edmund Prys’s Metrical Para-
phrase of the Pss, in loc.) “A bridle... . in the
jaws of the peoples” (Isa 30 28; cf 2 K 19 28)
is descriptive of the ultimate check of the Assyr
power at Jerus, “as when a bridle or lasso is thrown
upon the jaws of a wild animal when you wish to
catch and tame him” (G. A. Smith, fsa, I, 235).
Cf Ezk 29 4 (concerning Pharaoh); 38 4 (con-
cerning Gog), “I will put hooks in [into] thy jaws.”
(2) Of human labor and trials, with a reference to
the Divine gentleness: ‘I was to them as they that
lift up the yoke on their jaws” (Hos 11 4), or ‘take
the yoke off their jaws,’ as the humane driver eased
the yoke with his hands or ‘lifted it forward from
neck to the jaws’; or it may perhaps refer to the
removal of the yoke in the evening, when work is


over.
Jawbone (Jgs 15 15 ff). See RaMaTH-LEHI.
M. O. Evans
JAZER, ja’zér (AIV2 or WIY?, yatzér; LXX
‘Tativ, Iazén in A; & ? Tazér): In some cases, ¢.g.
Nu 21 32, AV reads “Jaazer.’ ‘This was a city of


the Amorites E. of the Jordan taken, along with its
towns, by Moses, and occupied by the tribe of Gad


(Nu 21 32; 32 35). The country was very fertile,
and its spacious pasture-lands attracted the flock-
masters of Gad (32 1), the southern horder of whose
territory it marked (Josh 18 25). It was assigned
to the Merarite Levites (Josh 21 39; 1 Ch 6 81).
The place was reached by Joab when_taking the
census (2 § 24 5). Inthe 40th year of King David
mighty men of valor were found here to whom he
intrusted the oversight in Reuben and Gad “for
every matter pertaining to God, and for the affairs
of the king” (1 Ch 26 32f). The fruitfulness of
the country is alluded to in Isa 16 8f; Jer 48 82.
(Note: “Sea of’? Jazer in this verse has arisen
through accidental repetition of ydm, “sea,’’ from
the preceding clause.) The city was taken from
the Ammonites hy Judas Maccabaeus, and burned
(1 Mace 5 7.8; Ant, XII, viii, 1).

Onom places Jazer 10 Rom miles W, of Philadelphia
(‘Amm4n), and about 15 miles from Heshbon, where a
great stream rises, which flows into the Jordan. Many
would identify it with Khirbet Sar, on the 8. of Wady
Sir, about 5 miles W. of 'Ammdn. The perennial stream
from Wéddy Sir reaches the Jordan by Wéddy el-Kefrein.
Cheyne (HB, s.v.) suggests Yajaz on Wady Zorby, a
tributary of the Jabhok, with extensive Rom remains.
It lies a little way to the E. of ef Jubeihat (‘‘ Jogbehah,"’
Nu 32 35). It is situated, however, to the N. and not
to the W. of ‘Amman, where Onom places it. Neither
identification is certain.

W. Ewine


JAZIZ, ja’ziz (T, yaziz, meaning uncertain):
The Hagrite who was over David’s flocks (1 Ch
27 30 [Heb 31).


JEALOUSY, jel’ns-i (ANP, kin’ah;  Cijdos,
zélos): Doubtless, the root idea of hoth the Gr and
the Heb tr? “jealousy” is “warmth,” “‘heat.’”’ Both
are used in a good and a bad sense—to represent
right and wrong passion.

When jealousy is attributed to God, the word is
used in a good sense. The language is, of course,
anthropomorphic; and it is based upon the feeling
in a hushand of exclusive right in his wife. God
is conceived as having wedded Israel to Himself,
and as claiming, therefore, exclusive devotion. Dis-
loyalty on the part of Israel is represented as adultery,
and as provoking God to jealonsy. See, e.g., Dt 32
16.21; 1 K 14 22; Ps 78 58; Ezk 8 3; 16 38.42;
23 25; 36 5; 38 19.

When jealousy is attributed to men, the sense
is sometimes good, and sometimes bad. In the
good sense, it refers to an ardent concern for God’s
honor. See, e.g., Nu 26 11 (cc 1 K 1910; 2K
10 16); 2 Cor 11 2 (cf Rom 10 2). In the bad
sense, it is fonnd in Acts 7 9; Rom 13 18; 1 Cor
3 3; 2 Cor 12 20; Jas 3 14.16.

The “law of jealousy” is given in Nu 5 11-81.
It provided that, when a man suspected his wife
of conjugal infidelity, an offering should be brought
to the priest, and the question of her guilt or inno-
cence should be subjected to a test there carefully
prescribed. The test was intended to he an appeal
to God to decide the question at issue. See ApuL-
TERY; SAacRLFICE. E. J. Forrester


JEALOUSY, IMAGE OF. See Imacus.
JEALOUSY, WATER OF. See Avutrsry, (2).


JEARIM, jé’a-rim, jé-4’rim, MOUNT(O™ 9750,
har-y‘drim): A mountain by the side of which
passed the border of Judah (Josh 15 10). It is
mentioned here only, and is identical with CxHEs-
ALON (q.V.).


ATHERAI, jé-ath’éri (RV), JEATERAI, jé-
at/é-ri (AV) CUMS, y’ath*ray, meaning unknown):
A descendant of Gershom, ‘“‘son” of Levi (1 Ch 621
{Heb 6]), and probably an ancestor of Asaph (so


1573 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA jarani
commentators) ; in_vs 39-43 the corresponding | nouncing it. The Jebusites seem ultimately to
name is ‘“Ethni.” The difference in the Heb words | have blended with the Israelitish population.

is not great. JAMES ORR


JEBERECHIAH, je-ber-é-ki’a (23937, y*bhe-
rekhyaha, ‘“Jeh blesses’): The father of the Zech-
ariah whom Isaiah (8 2) took as a witness of his
prophecy against Syria and Ephraim (¢ 734 BC).


JEBUS, jé’bus (0°27, ybhiig; 'TeBods, Ieboris):
In Jgs 19 10.11, “Jebus (the same is Jerus)”; 1 Ch
11 4.5, ‘“Jerus (the same is Jebus).” It was once
thought that this was the first name of Jerus, as
indeed might be suggested by the Bib. references,
but it is now known from the Am Tab that Uru-
sa-lem was a name used centuries before the time of
David (see JERUSALEM, I). It would appear prob-
able that the name ‘“Jebus’’ was evolved By the He-
brews as an alternate name, and possibly they may
have imagined an earlier name, for Jerus from
JEBUSITE (q.v), the name of the local tribe who
owned the district in the first centuries of Israel’s
occupation of Canaan. E. W. G. MasTERMAN


JEBUS, jé’bus, JEBUSI, jeb’t-si, JEBUSITE,
jeb’fi-zit (0322, y*bhas, “DIA, ha-y*bhiist): ‘“Je-
bus” is an old name for Jerus (Jgs 19 10.11; 1 Ch
4.5 || 28 5 6-9, “the same is Jerus’; see pre-
ceding article). ‘Jebusi’” (lit. “Jebusite’’) is also
used as a name for the city in AV (Josh 18 16.28;
cf 16 8); RV correctly renders ‘“‘Jebusite’’ (see
JERUSALEM). “Jebusites,’’ for the people (in AV
Gen 15 21; Ex 3 8.17, etc), does not occur in Heb
in the pl.; hence in RV is always rendered in the
sing., “Jebusite.’’ The ‘‘Jebusite” is said in Gen
10 16; 1 Ch 1 14 to be the 3d son of Canaan,
ie. of the country of Canaan. Elsewhere he repre-
sents a tribe separate from the Canaanites. He
stands between Heth and the Amorite (cf Nu 13
29; Josh 11 3; Ezk 16 3.45). In the lists of the
peoples inhabiting Pal the “Jebusite’’ is always
placed last, a fact indicative, probably, of their
smaller number. . ;

To what race the Jebusites belonged is doubtful.
Their name does not seem Sem, and they do not
make their appearance till after the patriarchal
period.

The original name of Jerus was Bab, Uru-Salim, ‘‘ the
city of Salim,” shortened into Salem in Gen 14 18 and
in ‘the inscriptions of the Egyp kings Ramses II and
Ramses III. In the Am Tab (1400 BC) Jerus is still
known as Uru-Salim, and its king bears a Hittite name,
implying that it was at the time in the possession of the
Hittites. His enemies, however, were closing around
him, and one of the tablets shows that the city was
eventually captured and its king slain. These enemies
would seem to have been the Jebusites, since it is after


this peed that the name '‘Jebus’’ makes its appearance
for the first time in tbe OT (Jgs 19 10.11).


The Jebusite king at the time of the conquest
was Adoni-zedek, who met bis death at Beth-horon
(Josh 10 1 ff; in ver 5 the word “Amorite’”’ is used
in its Bab sense to denote the inhabitants of Canaan
generally). The Jebusites were a mountain tribe
(Nu 13°29; Josh 11 3). Their capital “Jebus” was
taken by the men of Judah and burned with fire
(Jgs 1 8), but they regained possession of, and held,
the fortress till the time of David (2 8 6 6 ff).

When Jerus was taken by David, the lives and
property of its Jebusite inhabitants were spared,
and they continued to inhabit the temple-hill,
David and his followers settling in the new City of
David on Mit. Zion (Josh 16 8.63; Jgs 1 21; 19 11).
And as Araunah is called “king” (2 8 24 23), we
may conclude that their last ruler also had been al-
lowed to live. His name is non-Sem, and the vari-
ous spellings of it (cf 1 Ch 21 15, ‘Ornan”) indicate
that the Heb writers had some difficulty in pro-


JECAMIAH, jek-a-mi’a: AV for JeKamian


(q.v.).
JECHILIAH, jek-i-li’a (717597, ykhilyah). See


JECcHOLIAH; Kethibh and 2 Ch 26 3 RV, where
Keré is 17399, y*kholyah= “‘Jecoliah” (AV).


JECHOLIAH, jek-é-li’a (A70757, yckholyaha;
21 15 2AV="7%D", ykholyah, Keré in 2 Ch
26 3, ‘‘Jeh is able’’ or ‘“Jeh has been able’): The
mother of King Uzziah (Azariah) of Judah. RV
has “Jecoliah” in 2 K and so AV in 2 Ch.


JECHONIAS, jek-d-ni'as (Iexovias, Iechontas,
AV; Gr form of “Jechoniah,’”’ RY):

(1) The altered form of Jehoiachin (Ad Est 11
4; Bar 1 3.9; Mt 1 11.12). The last but one of
the kings of Judah.

(2) The son of Zeelus (1 Esd 8 92), called “Shec-
aniah’”’ in Kar 10 2. ’


JECOLIAN, jek-é-li’a: 2 K 15 2; 2 Ch 26 3 AV;
see JECHILIAH; JECHOLIAH.


JECONIAH, jek-é-ni’a. See JEHOIACHIN.


JECONIAS, jek-5-ni’as (’Iexovias, Iechontas):

(1) One of the chiliarchs who made great gifts
of sheep and calves at the Passover of Josiah (1
Esd 1 9); called “Conaniah” in 2 Ch 36 9.

(2) One reading makes Jeconias (not Joachaz)
son of Josiah in 1 Esd 1 34m.


JEDAIAH, jé-da’ya, jé-di’a:

(1) (WIT, ydha'yah, ‘Jeb knows’):

(a) A priest in Jerus (1 Ch 9 10; 24 7).

(b) Ezr 2 36=Neh 7 39, where “children of
Jedaiah” are mentioned=“Jeddu” in 1 Esd 6 24.

(c) J. is among “‘the priests and the Levites’’ that
returned with Zerubbabel (Neh 11 10; 12 6.19).
: 32 Another priest of the same name (Neb 12


(e). One of the exiles whom Zechariah was com-
manded to send with silver and gold to Jerus. LXX


-does not take the word as a proper name (Zec 6


10.14).
(2) (WT, y*dhayah, “Teh throws’ [?]):
(a) Father of a Simeonite prince (1 Ch 4 37).
(b) One of the repairers of the wall of Jerus (Neh
3 10). Davip Francis Roserts


JEDDU, jed’oo (*1é80v, Iéddou): Called Jn-
DAIAH (q.v. 1, [b]) in canonical books (1 Hsd 5 24).

JEDEUS, je-dé’us (‘IeSaios, Iedatos): Called
ApalaxH (q.v.) in Ezr 10 29 (1 Esd 9 30).


JEDIAEL, jé-di'd-el EXOT, ydhi'a’ él, “God
makes known’’[?]):

(1) A “son” of Benjamin or probably of Zebu-
lun (1 Ch 7 6.10.11). See Curtis, Ch, 145-49,
who suggests emending the name to dybmn ,» yahl? él,
Jahleel, in agreement with Gen 46 24,

(2) One of David’s mighty men (1 Ch 11 45),
probably=the Manassite who deserted to David at
Ziklag (1 Ch 12 20 [Heb 21)). |

(3) A Korahite doorkeeper in David’s reign (1
Ch 26 2).


JEDIDAH, jédi'da (TPT), ydhidhah, “be-
loved’): Mother of King Josiah of Judah, daughter
of Adaiah of Bozkath (2 K 22 1).


Jedidiah
Jehoash


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1574


JEDIDIAH, jed-i-di’a (MITT, y*dhidh-yah, “the
beloved of Jeh’’): The name conferred by God
ose Nathan upon Solomon at his birth (2 8


JEDUTHUN, jé-di’thun.


_ JEELL, jet (lenAl, Jetzt): Called ‘“Jaalah”’
ee 2 56 and “Jaala’”’ in Neh 7 58 (1 Esd 5


JEELUS, jé-é'lus (’IeqAos, Teélos): Called ‘“Je-
hiel” in Ezr 10 2 (1 Esd 8 92).


JEEZER, jé-@sér (AV) (AIDR, “tezer; RV
IEZER): The name of aclan of Gilead (Nu 26 30),
but read sTmaxd , la’abhi'ezer, i.e. “of Abiezer” (cf
Josh 17 2). See Anrezer.


JEEZERITES, jé-é’zér-its.


JEGAR-SAHA-DUTHA, jé-gir-sa-ha-dti’tha,
(NMITIDW 739, yghar sahddhitha’; LXX Bovvés
paptupel, Bounds marturei, “{the] mound witnesses’):
The name given by the Aramaean, Laban, to the
“cairn of witness,’ called by Jacob GaLEEp (q.v.)
(Gen 31 47). The rest of the second part of this
name appears again in Job 16 19, where "U0,
sahddhi, should be rendered with RV, “he that
voucheth for me,” i.e. “my witness.”


JEHALLELEL, jé-bal’élel (RV), JEHALELEEL,
j&haleléel (AV) OND, yhallel’él, “he shall
praise God’’):

(1) A Judahite (1 Ch 4 16).
i A Levite, a descendant of Merari (2 Ch 29


See AsaPH.


See ABIEZER.


IZ


JEHDEIAHN, je-dé’ya, ja’dé-ya GNM), yehds-
yahu, “may Jeh give joy!’’):

(1) A Levite, head of the family of Shubael
(1 Ch 24 20).

(2) An officer of David “over the asses” (1 Ch
27 30).


JEHEZKEL, jéhez’kel (RV), JEHEZEKEL,
jé-hez’é-kel (AV) (RPI, yhezke’l, “God strength-
ens’’) .


(1) A priest of David’s time (1 Ch 24 16).

(2) Jehezkel in Ezk 13 AVm, for EzExreL
(q.v.).

JEHIAH, jé&hi’a (3M, yhiyah, “may Jeh
live!”’): Keeper of the ark with Obed-edom (1 Ch
15 24), but in ver 18 the name is D8°P7, y*?al,
Ie1ex (q.v.)


JEHIEL, jé-hi’el ONT), yhal, “may God
live!’’):

(1) a Levite, one of the musicians appointed to
play upon instruments at the bringing up of the ark
by David (1 Ch 15 18.20; 16 5); Jehieli, jé-hi’é-1i
Cbs, yhi ai): A patronymic of this name (1 Ch
26 21.22), but Curtis (Ch, 286-87) reads “‘Jehiel
[ver 21] and his brethren Zetham and Joel”’ (ver 22);


cf 23 8, where the three seem to be brothers. See
(2) above.

(2) A Gershonite, head of a Levitical house (1 Ch
23 8; 29 8).


(3) Son of a Hachmonite; he was “with the
king’s [David’s] sons,” i.e. their tutor (1_Ch 27 32).
(4) A son of King Jehoshaphat (2 Ch 21 2).

(5) In 2 Ch 29 14 AV, where Keré is 2837,
yha’él, RV “Jehuel,” a Hermanite Levite who took
part in cleansing the temple in Hezekiah’s reign.


(6) An overseer in Hezekiah’s reign (2 Ch 31 18).

(7) One of the three “rulers’’ of the temple in
Hezekiah’s reign (2 Ch 35 8). L

(8) Father of Obadiah, a returned exile (Ear 8
9)=‘‘Jezelus” of 1 Esd 8 35. i F

(9) Father of Shecaniah (Ezr 10 2)=“Jeelus” of
1 Esd 8 92. He was a “son” of Elam, and so
probably the same as “Jehiel’’ in Ezr 10 26, one of
those who had married foreign wives = “‘Jezrielus”
of 1 Esd 9 27.

(10) A “son” of Harim, and one of those who
had married foreign wives (Ezr 10 21) =‘‘Hiereel”
of 1 Esd 9 21.

(41) AV in 1 Ch 9 35=Jermn (q.v. [2]).

(12) AV in 1 Ch 11 44=Jerer (q.v. [8)).

Davip Francis Rosperts

JEHIZKIAH, jé-hiz-ki’a (*03PTN, ychizktyahu,
“Jeh strengthens’): One of the Ephraimite chiefs
(2 Ch 28 12) who with Obed are said to have op-
posed the enslavement of the Judahites taken cap-
tive by Pekah in his war against Ahaz (c 734 BC).


JEHOADDABH, jé-hé-ad’a (RV), JEHOADAH,
j&ho’a-da (AV) (AVM, yho'addah, “‘Jeh has de-
posed” or “numbered’”’): A descendant of King Saul


(1 Ch 8 36), called “Jarah”’ in 1 Ch 9 42, where
LXX has "Iadd, Jadd=V397, ya'dah. See Japan.


JEHOADDAN, jé-hé-ad’an (JI7WM , yhd‘addan,
meaning unknown): In 2 Ch 25 1; and Keré, AV
in 2 K 14 2, where Kethibh aud RV are “Jehoad-
din? (JY, yhd'addin), the mother of King
Amaziah of Judah.


JEHOADDIN, jé-hé-ad’in. See JeEHoappan.


JEHOAHAZ, jé-bhd’a-haz, j6-hé-a’haz (INV,
yho’ahdz, “Jeh has grasped”; ’Iwaxds, Jdachds;
2K 13 1-9):

(1) Son of Jehu, and 11th king of Israel. He is
stated to have reigned 17 years.

Jos was already aware (Ant, IX, viii, 5) of the chrono-


logical difficulty involved in the cross-references in vs
1 and 10, the former of which states that


1. Chro- Jehoahaz began to reign in the 23d year

1 of of Jehoash of Jerus, and reigned 17 years;
nology while the latter gives him a successor in
Reign Jehoash’s 37th year, or 14 years later.


Jos alters the figure of ver 1 to 21; and,
to meet the same difficulty, the LXX (Aldine ed) changes
37 to 39 in ver 10. The difficulty may be met by sup-
posing that Jehoahaz was associated with his father Jehu
for several years in the government of the country hefore
the death of the latter, and that these years were counted
as a part of his reign. This view has in its favor the
fact that Jehu was an old man when he died, and may
have been incapacitated for the full discharge of ad-
ministrative duties before the end came. The accession
of Jehoahaz as sole ruler may be dated about 825 BC.


When Jehoahaz came to the throne, he found a
discouraged and humiliated people. The territory
beyond Jordan, embracing 23 tribes,


2. Low or one-fourth of the whole kingdom,
Condition had been lost in warfare with the
of the Syrian king, Hazael (2 K 10 32.33).
Kingdom A heavy annual subsidy was still pay-


able to Assyria, as by his father Jehu.
The neighboring kingdom of Judah was still un-
friendly to any member of the house of Jehu.
Elisha the prophet, though then in the zenith of his
influence, does not seem to have done anything
toward the stability of Jehu’s throne.
Specially did Israel suffer during this reign from
the eontinuance of the hostility of Damascus (2 K


13 3.4.22). Hazael had been selected,
3. Israel together with Jehu, as the instrument
and Syria by which the idolatry of Israel was to
be punished (1 K 19 16). Later the
instruments of vengeance fell out. On Jehu’s


death, the pressure from the east on Hazael was


1575


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jedidiah
Jehoash


greatly relieved. The great conqueror, Shalma-
neser II, had died, and his son Samsi-Ramman IV
had to meet a revolt within the empire, and was
busy with expeditions against Babylon and Media
during the 12 years of his reign (824-812 BC). Dur-
ing these years, the kingdoms of the seaboard of the
Mediterranean were unmolested. They coincide
with the years of Jehoahaz, and explain the freedom
which Hazael had to harass the dominions of that
king.

Particulars of the several campaigns in which the
troops of Damascus harassed Israel are not given. The


life of Elisha extended through the 3
4, Th reigns of Jehoram (12 years), Jehu (28
» 2ne years) and Jehoahaz (12 or 13 years),
Elisha into the reign of Joash (2 K 18 14). ft
Episodes is therefore prohahle that in the memora-~


bilia of his life in 2 K 4-8, now one and
now ancther king of Israel should figure,
and that some of the episodes there recorded belong to
the reign of Jehoahaz. There are evidences that strict
chronological order is not observed in the narrative of
Elisha, e.g. Gehazi appears in waiting on the king of
jsrael in 8 5, after the account of his leprosy in 5 27.
The terrible siege of Samaria in ch 7 is generally referred
to the reign of Jehoram; hut no atmosphere is so suitable
to it as that of the reign of Jehoahaz, in one of the later
years of whom it may have occurred. The statement
in 13 7 that ‘the king of Syria destroyed them, and made
them like the dust in threshing,” and the statistics there
given of the depleted army of Jehoahaz, would ccrre-
spond with the state of things that siege implies. In this
case the Ben-hadad of 2 K 6 24 would he the son of
Hazael (13 3).
Jehoahaz, like bis father, maintained the calf-
worship in Bethel and Dan, and revived also the
cult of the Asherah, a form of Canaan-
5. His itish_ idolatry introduced by Ahab
Idolatry (1 K 16 33). It centered round a
sacred tree or pole, and was probably
connected with phallic worship (cf 1 K 16 18,
where Maacah, mother of Asa, is said to have “made
an abominable image for an Asherah” in Jerus).
The elose of this dark reign, however, is bright-
ened by a partial reform. In his distress, we are
told, “Jehoahaz besought Jeh, and
6. Partial Jeb hearkened unto him” (2 K 13 4).
Reform If the siege of Samaria in ch 6 belongs
to his reign, we might conneet this
with his wearing ‘‘sackeloth within upon his flesh”
(ver 30)—an act of humiliation only accidentally
discovered by the rending of his garments. Ver
5 goes on to say that “Jeh gave Israel a saviour, so
that they went out from under the hand of the
Syrians.” The “saviour” may refer to Joash,
under whom the deliverance began (13 25), or to
Jeroboam Il, of whom it is declared that by him
God “saved” Israel (14 27). Others take it to
refer to Ramman-nirart III, king of Assyria, whose
conquest of Damascus made possible the victories
of these kings. See JEHoasH.
W. Saaw CaupEecorr
(2) A king of Judah, son and successor of Josiah;
reigned three months and was deposed, 608 BC.
Called “Shallum” in Jer 22 11; ef 1 Ch 3 15.
The story of his reign is told in 2 K 23 30-35,
and in a. briefer account in 2 Ch 36 1-3. The
historian of 2 K characterizes his reign as evil;
2 Ch passes no verdict upon him. On the death
of his father in battle, which threw the realm into
confusion, he, though a younger son (cf 2 K 23 31
with 23 36; 1 Ch 315 makes him the fourth
son of Josiah), was raised to the throne by “the
people of the land,” the same who had secured
the accession to his father; see under Josrau.
Perhaps, as upholders of the stcrling old Davidic
idea, which his father had carried out so well, they
saw in him a better hope for its integrity than in
his elder brother Jehoiakim (Eliakim), whose
tyrannical tendencies may already have been too
apparent. The prophets also seem to have set
store by him, if we may judge by the sympathetic


mentions of him in Jer 22 11 and Ezk 19 3.4.
His career was too short, however, to make any
marked impression on the history of Judah.

Josiah’s ill-advised meddling with the designs
of Pharaoh-necoh (see under Jostan) had had, in
fact, the ill effect of plunging Judah again into the
vortex of oriental politics, from which it had long
been comparatively free. The Egyp king imme-
diately concluded that so presumptuous a state
must not be left in his rear unpunished. Arrived
at Riblah on his Mesopotamian expedition, he put
Jchoahaz in bonds, and later carried him prisoner
to Egypt, where he died; raised his brother Je-
hoiakim to the throne as a vassal king; and im-
posed on the realm a fine of a hundred talents of
silver and a talent of gold. So the fortunes of the
Judaean state, so soon after Josiah’s good reign,
began their melancholy change for the worse.

Joun Franxuin Genune

(3) In 2 Ch 2117; 265 23=Anazzan, king of

Judah (q.v.) 2 K 8 25 ff; 2 Ch 22 1 ff).


JEHOASH, jé-ho’ash, the uncontracted form of
JOASH (WNIT, yhd’ash, UN, yo'ash, “Jeh
hath bestowed”; ef 2 K 11 2.21; 12 1 19; 2 Ch
24 1, etc; "Iwas, TGds):

(13 The 9th king of Judah; son of Ahaziah and
Zibiah, a woman of Beersheba (2 K 11-12; 2 Ch
22 10—24 27). Jehoash was 7 years old at his
accession, and reigned 40 years. His accession
may be placed in 852 BC. Some inelude in the
years of his reign the 6 years of Athaliah’s usur-
pation.

When, on Athaliah’s usurpation of the throne,
she massacred the royal princes, J. was saved from

her unnatural fury by the action of his


1. His aunt Jehosheba, the wife of Jehoiada,
Early the high priest (2 K 111.2; 2 Ch
Preser- 22 10.11). During 6 years he was con-
vation cealed in the house of Jehoiada, which


adjoined the temple; hence is said to

have been “hid in the house of Jeh”—a perfectly

legitimate use of the phrase according to the idiom
of the time.

During these formative years of J.’s early life, he

was under the moral and spiritual influence of

Jehoiada—a man of lofty character


2. The and devout spirit. At the end of 6
Counter- _—s years, a counter-revolution was plan-
Revolution ned by Jehoiada, and was successfully


carried out on a Sabbath, at one of the
great festivals. The accounts of this revolution
in K and Ch supplement each other, but though
the Levitical interest of the Chronicler is apparent
in the details to which he gives prominence, the
narratives do not necessarily collide, as has often
been represented. The event was prepared for by
the young king being privately exhibited to the 5
captains of the ‘executioners’ (RV “‘Carites’’) and
“runners’ (2 K 114; 2 Ch 23 1). These en-
tered into covenant with Jehoiada, and, by his
direction, summoned the Levites from Judah (2
Ch 23 2), and made the necessary arrangements fer
guarding the palace and the person of the king.
In these dispositions both the royal body-guard
and the Levites seem to have had their parts.
J. next appears standing on a platform in front of
the temple, the law of the testimony in his hand
and the crown upon his head. Amid acclamations,
he igs anointed king. Athaliah, rushing on the scene
with cries of ‘‘treason” (see ATHALIAH), is driven
forth and slain. A new covenant is made between
Jeh and the king and people, and, at the conclusion
of the ceremony, a great procession is formed, and
the king is conducted with honor to the royal house
(2 K 11 19; 2 Ch 23 20), Thus auspiciously did
the new reign begin.


Jehoash
Jehohanan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1576


Grown to manhood (cf the age of his son Amaziah,
2 K 14 25), J. married two wives, and by them
had sons and daughters (2 Ch 24 3).
3. Repair His great concern at this period, how-
of the ever, was the repair of the temple—
Temple the “house of Jeh’’—which in the
: reign of Athaliah had been broken
up in many places, plundered, and allowed to
become dilapidated (2 K 12 5.12; 2 Ch 24 7).
To meet the expense of its restoration, the king
gave orders that all monies coming into the temple,
whether dues or voluntary offerings, should be
appropriated for this purpose (2 K 12 4), and
from the account in Ch would seem to have con-
templated a revival of the half-shekel tax appointed
by Moses for the construction of the tahernacle
(2 Ch 24 5.6; cf Ex 30 11-16; 38 25). To en-
force this impost would have involved a new census,
and the memory of the judgments which attended
David’s former attempt of this kind may well have
had a deterrent effect on Jehoiada and the priest-
hood. “The Levites hastened it not,” it is declared
(2 Ch 24 5).
Time passed, and in the 23d year of the king’s
reign (his 30th year), it was found that the breaches
of the house had still not been repaired.
4. A New A new plan was adopted. It was
Expedient arranged that a chest with a hole
bored in its lid should be set up on the
right side of the altar in the temple-court, under
the care of two persons, one the king’s scribe, the
other an officer of the high priest, and that the
people should be invited to bring voluntarily their
half-shekel tax or other offerings, and put it in this
box (2 K 12 9; 2 Ch 24 8.9). Gifts from wor-
shippers who did not visit the altar were received
by priests at the gate, and brought to the box.
The expedient proved brilliantly successful. The
people cheerfully responded, large sums were con-
tributed, the money was honestly expended, and
the temple was thoroughly renovated. There re-
mained even a surplus, with which gold and silver
vessels were made, or replaced, for the use of the
temple. Jehoiada’s long and useful life seems to
have closed soon after.
With the death of this good man, it soon became
evident that the strongest pillar of the state was
removed. It is recorded that ‘‘J. did
5. The that which was right in the eyes of
King’s De- Jeb all his days wherein Jehoiada the
clension riest instructed him’ (2 K 12 2),
ut after Jehoiada had been honor-
ably interred in the sepulchers of the kings (2 Ch
24 16), a sad declension became manifest. The
princes of Judah came to J. and expressed their
wish for greater freedom in worship than had been
permitted them by the aged priest. With weak
complaisance, the king ‘‘hearkened unto them” (ver
17). Soon idols and Asherahs began to be set up
in Jerns and the other cities of Judah. Unnamed
prophets raised their protests in vain. The high
priest Zechariah, a worthy son of Jehoiada, testi-
fied in his place that as the nation had forsaken
Jeh, he also would forsake it, and that disaster
would follow (ver 20). Wrathful at the rebuke,
the king gave orders that Zechariah should be stoned
with stones in the temple-court (ver 21). This was
done, and the act of sacrilege, murder, and ingrati-
tude was perpetrated to which Jesus seems to refer
in Mt 23 35; Lk 11 51 (“son of Barachiah” in the
former passage is probably an early copyist’s gloss
through confusion with the prophet Zechariah).
The high priest’s dying words, “Jeh look upon
it, and require it,” soon found an answer. Within
a year of Zechariah’s death, the armies of Hazael,
the Syrian king, were ravaging and laying waste
Judah. The city of Gath fell, and a hattle, the place


of which is not given, placed Jerns at the mercy
of the foe (2 K 12 17; 2 Ch 24 23.24). To save
the capital from the indignity of


6. Calami- foreign occupation, J., then in dire
ties and sickness, collected all the hallowed
Assassi- things of the temple, and all the gold
nation of the palace, and sent them to Ha-


zael (2 K 12 17.18). This failure of
his policy, in both church and state, excited such
popular feeling against J., that a conspiracy was
formed to assassinate him. His physical suffer-
ings won for him no sympathy, and two of his own
officers slew him, while asleep, in the fortress of
Millo, where he was paying a visit (ver 20). He
was buried in the city of David, but not in the royal
sepulchers, as Jehoiada had been (2 Ch 24 25).
J. is mentioned as the father of Amaziah (2 K 14
1; 2 Ch 26 25). His contemporaries in Israel were
Jehoahaz (2 K 18 1) and Jehoash (2 K 13 10).


(2) The son of Jehoahaz, and 12th king of Israel
(2 K 13 10-25; 14 8-16; 2 Ch 25 17-24). Je-
hoash reigned for 16 years. His acces-
1. Accession sion may be placed in 813 BC. There
and Reign were almost simultaneous changes in
the sovereignties of Judah and of As-
syria—Amaziah succeeding to the throne of Judah
in the 2d year of J., and Ramman-nirari III coming
to the throne of Assyria in 811 BC—which had
important effects on the history of Israel in this
reign.
During the three previous reigns, for half a cen-
tury, Elisha had been the prophet of Jeh to Israel.
He was now aged and on his deathbed.


2. Elisha Hearing of his illness, the young king
and came to Dothan, where the prophet
Jehoash was, and had a touching interview with


him. His affectionate exclamation,
“My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and
the horsemen thereof”? (2 K 13 14; ef 2 12), casts
a pleasing light upon his character. On his lips
the words had another meaning than they bore
when used by Elisha himself at Elijah’s translation.
Then they referred to the “appearance’’ which
parted Elisha from his master; now they referred
to the great. service rendered by the prophet to the
kingdom. Not only had Elisha repeatedly saved
the armies of Israel from the ambushes prepared
for them by the Syrians (2 K 6 8-23), but he had
given assurance of the relief of the capital when it
was at its worst extremity (6 24 ff). ToJ., Elisha’s
presence was indeed in place of chariots and horse.
The truth was anew demonstrated by the promise
which the dying prophet now madeto him. Direct-
ing J. in the symbolical action of the shooting of
certain arrows, he predicted three victories over the
Syrians—the first at Aphek, now Fik, on the E. of
the Lake of Galilee—and more would have been
granted, had the faith of the king risen to the oppor-
tunity then afforded him (6 15-19).
An interesting light is thrown by the annals of
Assyria on the circumstances which may have made
these victories of J. possible. Ram-
3. Assyria man-nirari III, who succeeded to the
and throne in 811 BC, made an expedition
Damascus against Damascus, Edom and Philistia,
in his account of which hesays: “Ishut
up the king [of Syria] in his chief city, Damascus.
abe He clasped my feet, and gave himself up.
. . ... His countless wealth and goods I seized
in Damascus.” With the Syrian power thus
broken during the remainder of this ruler’s reign
of 27 years, it may be understood how J. should be
able to recover, as it is stated he did, the cities which
Ben-hadad had taken from his father Jehoahaz
(2 K 13 25). Schrader and others see in this
Assyr ruler the “saviour” of Israel alluded to in


1577


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jehoash
Jehoiachin


2 K 18 5; more usually the reference is taken to
be to J. himself, and to Jeroboam II (cf 2 K 14 27).
The epitome of J.’s reign is very brief, but the
favorable impression formed of him from the acts
of Elisha is strengthened by another
4. War gained from the history of Amaziah
with Judah of Judah (2 K 14 8-16; 2 Ch 25
: 17-24). For the purpose of a southern
campaign, Amaziah had hired a large contingent
of troops from Samaria. Being sent back unem-
ployed, these mercenaries committed ravages on
ther way home, for which, apparently, no redress
was given. On the first challenge of the king of
Judah, J. magnanimously refused the call to arms,
but on Amaziah persistmg, the peace established
nearly 80 years before by J choshaphat (1 K 22 44)
was broken at the battle of Beth-shemesh, in which
Amaziah was defeated and captured. Jerus opened
its gates to the victor, and was despoiled of all its
treasure, both of palace and temple. A portion of
the wall was broken down, and hostages for future
behavior were taken to Samaria (2 K'14 138.14).
J. did not long survive his crowning victory, but
left a resuscitated state, and laid the foundation
for a subsequent rule which raised
5. Character Israel to the zenith of its power. Jos
gives J. a high character for godliness,
but, like each of his predecessors, he followed in the
footsteps of Jeroboam I in permitting, if not en-
couraging, the worship of the golden calves. Hence
his conduct is pronounced “evil” by the historian
(2 K 1311). He was succeeded by his son
Jeroboam II. W. Saaw CaLpEcotTr


JEHOHANAN, jé-hé-ha’nan ([21M, yhona-
nan, “Jeh is [or has been] gracious”):

(1) A Korahite doorkeeper in David’s reign, ‘‘son”’
of Meshelemiah (1 Ch 26 3). LXX, Luc, has
“Jehonathan.”

(2) One of the five captains over King Jehosha-
phat’s army (2 Ch 17 15), probably father of
Ishmael, “son of J.” (2 Ch 23 1).

(3) Ezr 10 6 (AV has “Johanan”) = “Johanan” of
Neh 12 22.23=“Jonathan” of Neh 12 11, “son” of
Eliashib (Ezr 10 6; but “grandson” in Neh 12 11).
He was high priest in Ezra’s time= “Jonas” in 1 Esd
9 1 (AV “Joanan’’).

(4) One of those who had married foreign wives
Sone 28) =“Joannes” RV, “Johannes” AV (1 Esd

9).

(5) Son of Tobiah, the Ammonite, Nehemiah’s
opponent (Neh 6 18, AV “Johanan’’).
ae Head of the priestly family of Amariah (Neb


(7) A priest present at the dedication of the walls
of Jerus (Neh 12 42).

(8) The name in the Heb of 2 Ch 28 12. See
JoHANAN, (7). Davip Francis Roserts


JEHOIACHIN, je-hoi’a-kin (270M, yhdya-
khin, “Jeh will uphold”; called also “Jeconiah” in
1Ch 316; Jer 241; 119239, ykhonyah, “Jeh
will be stedfast,’” and ‘‘Coniah” in Jer 22 24.28;
AWD, konydhu, “Jeh has upheld him”; *Iwaxetp,
Toakeim): A king of Judah; son and successor of
Jehoiakim; reigned three months and surrendered
to Nebuchadnezzar; was carried to Babylon, where,

_after being there 37 years a prisoner, he died.
The story of his reign is told in 2 K 24 8-16,
and more briefly in 2 Ch 36 9-10. Then, after the
reign of his successor Zedekiah and
1. Sources the final deportation are narrated, the
account of his release from prison 37
years afterward and the honor done him is given as
the final paragraph of 2 K (25 27-30). The same


thing is told at the end of the Book of Jer (62 31-34).
Neither for this reign nor for the succeeding is there
the usual reference to state annals; these seem to
have been discontinued after Jehoiakim. In Jer
22 24-30 there is a final pronouncement on this
king, not so much upon the man as upon bis inevi-
fable fate, and a prediction that no descendant of his
shall ever have prosperous rule in Judah.
Of the brief reign of J. there is little to tell. It
was rather a historic landmark than a reign; but
its year, 597 BC, was important as the
2. His date of the first deportation of Jewish
Reign captives to Babylon (unless we except
the company of hostages carried away
in Jehoiakim’s 3d [4th] year, Dnl 11-7). His
coming to the throne was just at or near the time
when Nebuchadnezzar’s servants were besieging
Jerus; and when the Chaldaecan king’s arrival in
person to superintend the siege made apparent the
futility of resistance, J. surrendered to him, with
all the royal household and the court. He was
carried prisoner to Babylon, and with him ten
thousand captives, comprising all the better and
sturdier element of the people from prince to crafts-
man, leaving only the poorer sort to constitute the
body of the nation under his successor Zedekiah.
With the prisoners were carried away also the most
valuable treasures of the temple and the royal
palace.
Ever since Isaiah fostered the birth and education
of a spiritually-minded remnant, for him the vital
hope of Israel, the growth and influ-
3. The Two ence of this clement in the nation
Elements has been discernible, as well in the
persecution it has roused (see under
Manasseq), as in its fiber of sound progress. It
is as if a sober sanity of reflection were curing the
people of their empty idolatries. The feeling is
well expressed in snch a passage as Hab 2 18-20.
Hitherto, however, the power of this spiritual Israel
has been latent, or at best mingled and pervasive
among the various occupations and interests of the
people. The.surrender of Jehoiachin brings about
a segmentation of Israel on an unheard-of principle:
not the high and low in wealth or social position,
but the weight and worth of all classes on the one
side, who are marked for deportation, and the refuse
element of all classes on the other, who are left at
home. With which element of this strange sifting
Jeremiah’s prophetic hopes are identified appears
in his parable of the Good and Bad Figs (Jer 24), in
which he predicts spiritual integrity and upbuilding
to the captives, and to the home-staying remainder,
shame and calamity. Later on, he writes to the
exiles in Babylon, advising them to make themselves
at home and be good citizens (Jer 29 1-10). Asfor
the hapless king, ‘this man Coniah,” who is to be
their captive chief in a strange land, Jeremiah
speaks of him in a strain in which the stern sense of
Jeh’s inexorable purpose is mingled with tender sym-
pathy as he predicts that this man shall never have
a descendant on David's throne (Jer 22 24-30).
It is as if he said, All as Jeh has ordained, but—the
pity of it!
In the first year of Nebuchadnezzar’s successor,
perhaps by testamentary edict of Nebuchadnezzar
himself, a strange thing occurred.
4, Thirty- J., who seems to have been a kind of
seven Years hostage prisoner for his people, was
Later released from prison, honored above
all the other kings in similar case, and
thenceforth to the end of his life had his portion at
the royal table (2 K 25 27-30; Jer 62 31-34).
This act of clemency may have been due to some
such good influence at court as is described in the
Book of Dnl; but also it was a tribute to the good
conduct of that better element of the people of


ae THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 1578


which he was hostage and representative. It was
the last event of Judaean royalty; and suggestive
for the glimpse it seems to afford of a people whom
the Second Isaiah could address as redeemed and
forgiven, and of a king taken from durance and judg-
ment (cf Isa 53 8), whose career makes strangely
vivid the things that are said of the mysterious
‘Servant of Jeh.” JOHN FRANKLIN GENUNG


JEHOIADA, jéhoi’a-da (PTI, yhdyadha’,
“Jeh knows”; *IwSde, [adde):

(1) Father of Benaiah, the captain of David’s
body-guard (2 § 8 18; 20 23; 23 20.22; 1K 1
8, etc). J. was ‘the son of a valiant man of Kab-
zeel” (2 § 23 20), but commentators read with
LXX and Ewald, ‘“Benaiah (the son of Jehoiada)
aman of valour.” Kabzeel was a town belonging
to Judah on the border of Edom in the 8S. (Josh
15 21). Ini Ch 27 5, we read “Benaiah, the son
of Jehoiada the priest, chief,’ RV, but RVm has
“chief minister’ wrongly. Yet J. is nowhere else
called a priest or even a Levite, though in 1 Ch
12 27 (Heb 28) a J. is mentioned as a military
“leader of the house of Aaron,’’ who came to David
to Hebron with other members of the house of Levi.
In 1 Ch 27 34 there is named among David’s
counsellors, “J. the son of Benaiah,”’ where some
commentators would read with two MSS, “‘B., the
son of J.” though Curtis, Crit. and Exeget. Comm.
onthe Books of Ch, 295, keeps the MT.

(2) Priest in the reigns of Ahaziah, Queen
Athaliah, and Jehoash (Joash) of Judah (2 K 11
4—12 16 [Heb 17)=2 Ch 23 1—24 14; 2 Ch 22
11; 24 14-16.17-20.22.25). In 2 K 12 10 (Heb
11) he is called “high priest,’ and is the first to
be given that title, but as the priest lived in the
temple, there is no meaning in saying that he “‘came
up,” so commentators omit the words, “and the
chief priest.” According to 2 Ch 22 11, he had
married Jehoshabeath (=Jehosheba), the daughter
of the king, i.e. Jehoram.

(a) The account in 2 Ch 23 1-21 differsin many
respects from that in 2 K 11 4-20, but even the

latter has its problems, and Stade
1. Jehoiada (ZATW, 1885, 280ff) pomted out


and the two sources in it. This view is ac-
Revolt cepted by many. A reader is struck
against at once by the double reference to the


Athaliah death of Athaliah (vs 16.20), and the

construction of the Heb for “making
a covenant” is different in ver 4 from that in ver
17. Stade holds that there is one narrative in
11 4-12.18d-20 and another in vs 13-184.

In the first, J. makes an agreement with the cap-
tains of the foreign body-guard, and arranges that
both the incoming and outgoing temple-guard shall
be kept in the temple at the time when the guard
should be changed on the Sabbath, and also that
the young prince, Jehoash, who had been kept in
hiding, shall be proclaimed. The captains do this,
and the prince is crowned and proclaimed (vs 4-12).
Then officers are set up in the temple, and Jehoash
is taken to the royal palace and enthroned. The
revolt proves popular with the people of Jerus and
those of the district, and Athaliah is slain in the
palace.

But there are difficulties in this narrative, though the
above gives the trend of events; ver 5 refers to a third
of the guard who ‘‘came in on the sabbath,”’ and ver 7
to two companies who “go forth on the sabbath"; the
Tfeb is, ‘‘they that enter the sabbath" and ‘‘they that
go out of the sabbath,""| Ver 9 makes clear the connec-
tion between vs 5 and 7. But ver 6 introduces a diffl-
culty: it seems to denote a division of those who ‘‘enter”’
into three divisions, i.e. the two in ver 6 and one in ver 5.
Tf ver 6 be omitted, as is proposed by_many, this diffi-
eulty vanishes. But there still remains the question
oi the change of guards. Commentators say that ‘‘ they
who enter the sabbath" are those who leave the temple
and enter their quarters at the beginning of the Sabbath,


presumably, while ‘‘those who go out’’ are those who leave
their quarters to mount guard. This is not impossible
as an explanation of the Heb. It is further believed that
the guard at the temple on the Sabbath was double that
on other days. The other eld ee held by older
commentators is that on the Sabbath the guard was only
half its usual size; this gives another meaning to the
Heb phrases. On the other hand, it may be held that
the revolt took place at the close of the Sabbath, and that
the double-sized guard was kept by J. even after the
usual-sized one had come to take their place. It should
be added that Wellhausen proposed to read nayy
(ge*adhoth), ‘‘armlets’’ (cf Isa 3 19), for MATY Cedhath),
“testimony,” in ver 12; and in ver 19 the words ‘‘and
all the people of the land" are held to be an addition.


(b) The 2d narrative (vs 138-18a) begins suddenly.
Presumably its earlier part was identical with the
earlier part of the 1st narrative, unless ver 6 was a
part originally of this 2d account. Athaliah hears
the noise of the people (ver 13, where “the guard”
is a gloss and so to be omitted), and comes to the
temple, where she witnesses the revolt and cries,
“Tyeason! treason!”” J. orders her to be put forth
(omit “between the ranks’ in ver 15), so that she
should not be slain in the temple, and sheis murdered
at one of the palace entrances (ver 16, where RV,
following LXX of 2 Ch 23 15, tr* the first sentence
wrongly: it should be “So they laid hands on her’’),
J. then makes the king and the people enter into a
solemn covenant to be Jeh’s people, and the result is
the destruction of the temple of Baal, and the death
of Mattan, its priest (vs 17.18a)._ This 2d narrative
gives a religious significance to the revolt, but it is
incomplete. The other narrative presents a very
naiural course of events, for it was absolutely neces-
sary for J. to secure the allegiance of the royal foreign
body-guard. :

(c) The account in 2 Ch 23 1-21, though following
that of 2 K in the main, differs from it considerably.
The guard is here composed of Levites; it does not men-
tion the foreign body-guard, and relates how the revolt
was planned with the Levites of the cities of Judah—a
method which would have become known to Athaliah
and for which she would have made preparations, no
doubt. Ch makes it a wholly religious movement, while
2 K gives two points of view. The value of the Chroni-
cler’s account depends largely on one's estimate of the
Books of Ch and one’s views as to the development of
the Jewish priestly system. A. Van Hoonacker, Le


sacerdoce lévitique dans la loi et dans l'histoire des Hébreux,
93-100, defends the account in 2 Ch.


The part which J. played in the restoration of the
temple buildings is described in 2 K 11 2112 16
(Heb 12 1-17) ||2 Ch 24 1-14. Here

2. Jehoiada again the narratives of 2 K and 2 Ch


andthe differ to a large extent.
Restoration (a) According to 2 K (i) the priests
of the are commanded by Jehoash to devote


Temple the dues or free-will offerings of the

people to repairing the breaches in the
temple. They fail to do so, and (ii) J. is sum-
moned by the king and rebuked. Then (iii) a new
regulation is put into force: the offerings, except
the guilt offerings and sin offerings, are no longer
to be given to the priests, but to be put into a chest
provided in the temple for the purpose. (iv) The
money got in this way is devoted to repairing the
temple, but (v) none of it is used to provide temple
vessels.

(6) Ch, on the other hand, (i) relates that the
priests and Levites are commanded to go through
Judah to collect the necessary money. They “has-
tened it not.” Then (ii) J. is summoned to account
for this disobedience, and (iii) a chest is put outside
the temple to receive the tax commanded by Moses.
(iv) This the people pay willingly, and the temple
is repaired. There is such a surplus that (v) there
is money also to provide vessels for the temple.

_ It is at least questionable whether the additions
in 2 Ch are trustworthy; the contradictions against
2 K are clear, and the latter gives the more likely


1579


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jehoiada
Jehoiakim


narrative, although Van Hoonacker (op. cit., 101-
14) defends the former. .

According to 2 Ch 24 15, J. lived to be 130 years
old, and was buried among the kings—a unique
distinction.

(8) AV in Neh 3 6=Jo1apa (q.v.).

(4) There is a Jehoiada, the priest mentioned in
Jer 29 26, in whose stead Zephaniah was declared
priest by Shemaiah in a letter.

Giesebrecht takes him to be the same as the prlest of
Athaliah's time (see [2] above), but Duhm says that
nothing is known of him. In any case, Zephaniah could
not have been the direct successor of the well-known
Jehoiada, and so the reference can scarcely be to him
if it is to have any meaning.

Davin Francis Roserts

JEHOIAKIM, jé-hoi'a-kim (D9P719) ,, yrhoyakim,
“Jeh will establish”; "Iwaxelp, [dakeim): The name
given him by Pharaoh-necoh, who raised him to the
throne as vassal king in place of his brother Jehoa-
haz, is changed from Eliakim (PR, *elyakim,
“God will establish’). The change compounds the
name, after the royal Judaean custom, with that
of Jeh; it may also imply that Necoh claims Jeh’s
authorization for his act, as in a similar way Sen-
nacherib had claimed it for his invasion of Judah
(2 K 18 25). He has represented the campaign
with which Josiah interfered as undertaken by
Divine command (’Hl, 2 Ch 35 21); this episode
of it merely translates the authorization, rather
arrogantly, into the conquered nation’s dialect.

A king of Judah, elder (half-) brother and suc-
cessor of Jehoahaz; reigned 11 years from 608 BC.

I. Sources for His Life and Time.—The circum-
stances of his accession and raising of the indemnity

_ to Pharaoh-necoh, followed by a brief
1. Annalistic résumé of his reign, are narrated in
2K 23 34—246. The naming of
the source for ‘the rest of his acts’? (24 5) is the last
reference we have to “‘the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah.” The acccount in 2 Ch 36
5-8, though briefer still, mentions Nebuchadnezzar’s
looting of the temple at some uncertain date in his
reign. Neither account has any good to say of J.;
to the writer of 2 K, however, his ill fortunes are
due to Jeh’s retributive justice for the sins of
Manasseh; while to the Chronicler the sum of his
acts, apparently connected with the desecration of
the sanctuary, is characterized as “the abomina-
tions which he did.”” For “‘the rest of his acts’’ we
are referred, also for the last time, to the “book of
the kings of Israel and Judah.” :

For the moral and spiritual chaos of the time, and

for prophecies and incidents throwing much light
on the king’s character, Jeremiah has
2. Prophetic a number of extended passages, not,
however, in consecutive order.

The main ones clearly identiflable with this reign are:
22 13-19, inveighing against the king's tyrannies and
predetng his ignominious death; ch 26, dated in the

eginning of his reign and again predicting (as had been
predicted before in % 12-15) the destruction of the
temple; ch 25, dated in hls 4th year and Predicuing the
conquest of J udah and snrrounding nations by Nebuchad-
nezzar; ch 36, dated in the 4th and 5th years, and telling
the story of the roll of prophecy which the king destroyed;
ch 45, an appendix from the 4th year, reassuring Baruch
the scribe, in terms of the larger prophetic scale, for his
dismay at what he had to write; ch 46, also an appen-
dix, a reminiscence of the year of Carchemish, containing
the oracle then pronounced agalnst Egypt, and giving
words of the larger comfort to Judah. ‘the Book of the
prophet Habakkuk, written in this relgn, gives expression
to the prophetic feeling of donbt and dismay at the
unrequited ravages of the Chaldaeans against a people
more righteous than they, with a sense of the value of
stedfast faith and of Jeh's world-movement and purpose
which explains the seeming enormity.

JI. Character and Events of His Reign.—The
reign of J. is not so significant for any personal im-
press of his upon his time as for the fact that it
fell in one of the most momentous epochs of ancient


history. By the fall of Nineveh in 606 to the
assault of Nebuchadnezzar, then crown prince of the
rising Bab empire, Assyria, “the rod
1. The of [Jeh’s] anger” (Isa 10 5), ended
Epoch its arrogant and inveterate sway
over the nations. Nebuchadnezzar,
coming soon after to the Chaldaean throne, followed
up his victory by a vigorous campaign against
Pharaoh-necoh, whom we have seen at the end of
Josiah’s reign (see under Josiau) advancing toward
the Euphrates in his attempt to secure Egyp do-
minion over Syria and Mesopotamia. The en-
counter took place in 605 at Carchemish on the
northern Euphrates, where Necoh was defeated and
driven back to the borders of his own land, never
more to renew his aggressions (2 K 24 7). The
dominating world-empire was now in the hands of
the Chaldaeans, “that bitter and hasty nation”
(Hab 1 6); the first stage of the movement by
which the world’s civilization was passing from
Sem to Aryan control. With this world-movement
Israel’s destiny was henceforth to be intimately
involved; the prophets were already dimly aware
of it, and were shaping their warnings and promises,
as by a Divine instinct, to that end. It wason this
larger scale of things that they worked; it had all
along been their endeavor, and continued with in-
creasing clearness and fervor, to develop in Israel
a conscience and stamina which should be a leaven-
ing power for good in the coming great era (cf Isa
23-4; Mic 4 1-3).
Of all these prophetic meanings, however, neither
the king nor the ruling classes had the faintest reali-


zation; they saw only the political
2. The exigencies of the moment. or did:
King’s the king himself, in any patriotic way,
Perverse _rise even to the immediate occasion.
Character As to policy, he was an unprincipled


opportunist: vassal to Necoh to whom
he owed his throne, until Necoh himself was de-
feated; enforced vassal to Nebuchadnezzar for
3 years along with the other petty kings of Western
Asia; then rebelling against the latter as soon as
he thought he could make anything by it. As to
responsibility of administration, he had simply the
temper of a despotic self-indulgent Oriental. He
raised the immense fine that Necoh imposed upon
him by a direct taxation, which he farmed out to
unscrupulous officials. He indulged himself with
erecting costly royal buildings, employing for the
purpose enforced and unpaid labor (Jer 22 13-17);
while all just interests of his oppressed subjects
went wholly unregarded. As to religion, he let, mat-
ters go on as they had been under Manasseh, prob-
ably introducing also the still more strange and
heathenish rites from Egypt and the East of which
we see the effects in Ezk 8 5-17. And meanwhile
the reformed temple-worship which Josiah had
introduced seems to have become a mere formal
and perfunctory matter, to which, if we may judge
by his conspicuous absence from fast and festal
occasions (e.g. Jer 26, 36), the king paid no atten-
tion. His impious act of cutting up and burning
Jeremiah’s roll (36 23), as also his vindictive pur-
suit and murder of Uriah for prophesying in the
spirit of Jeremiah (26 20-23), reveal his antipathy
to any word that does not prophesy “smooth
things” (cf Isa 30 10), and in fact a downright
perversity to the name and will of Jeh.
With the onset of the Chaldaean power, prophecy, as


represented in the great seers whose words remain to us,
reached a crisis which only time and the


3. The consistent sense of its larger issues could

, heti enable it to weather. Isaiah, in his time,
Prophetic had stood for the inviolability of Zion, and
Attitude a miraculous deliverance had vindicated


his sublime faith. But with Jeremiah,
conditions had changed. The idea thus engendered,
that the temple was bound to stand and with it Jerus,


Jehoiarib
Jehoshaphat


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1580


an idea confirmed by Josiah’s centralizing reforms, had
hecome a superstition and a presumption (cf Jer 7 4);
and Jeremiah had reached the conviction that it, with
its wooden rites and glaring abuses, must go: that nothing
short of a clean sweep of the old religious fetishes could
cure the inveterate unspirituality of the nation. This
conviction of his must needs seem to many like an in-
consistency—to set prophecy against itself, And when
the Chaldaean appeared on the scene, his counsel of sub-
mission and prediction of captivity would seem a double
inconsistency; not only a traversing of a tested prophecy,
but treason to the state. his was the situation that
he had to encounter; and for it he gave his tender feelings,
his liberty, his life. It is in this reign of J. that, for the
sake of Jeh's word and purpose, he is engulfed in the
deep tragedy of _his career. And in this he must be vir-


tually alone. Habakkuk is indeed with him in sym-


pathy; but his vision is not so clear; he must weather
disheartening doubts, and cherish the faith of_the
righteous (Hab 2 4), and wait until the vision of Jeh’s
secret purpose clears (Hah 2 1-3). If the prophets
themselves are thus having such an equivocal crisis, we
can imagine how forlorn is the plight of Jeh’s ‘‘remnant,”
who are dependent on prophetic faith and courage to
guide them through the depths. The humble nucleus
of the true Israel, which is some day to he the nation’s
redeeming element, is undergoing a stern seasoning.
After Syria fell into Nebuchadnezzar’s power,
he seems to have established his headquarters for
some years at Riblah; and after J.
4. Harass- attempted to revolt from his authority,
ing and he sent against him guerilla bands
Death from the neighboring nations, and de-
tachments from his Chaldaean garri-
sons, who harassed him with raids and depredations.
In 2 Ch 36 6.7, itis related that Nebuchadnezzar
carried some of the vessels of the temple to Baby-
lon and bound the king im fetters to carry him also
to Babylon—the latter purpose apparently not
carried out. This was in J.’s 4th year. In Dnl 1
1.2, though ascribed to Jehoiakim’s 3d year, this
same event is related as the result of a siege of
Jerus. It is ambiguously intimated also that the
king was deported; and among ‘‘the seed royal and
of the nobles’ who were of the company were
Daniel and his three companions (Dn! 1 3.6). The
manner of J’s death is obscure. It is merely said
(2 K 24 6) that he ‘“‘slept with his fathers’; but
Jos (Ant, X, vi, 3), perhaps assuming that Jeremiah’s
prediction (Jer 22 19) was fulfilled, states that Neb-
uchadnezzar slew him and cast his body outside the
walls unburied. JoHN FRANKLIN GENUNG


JEHOLARE, jé-hoi’arib QU, yhayaribh,
“Jeh pleads’ or ‘“‘contends’’): A priest in Jerus
(1 Ch 9 10); the name occurs again in 1 Ch 24 7
as the name of a family among, the 24 courses of
priests =the family Joiarib (A"721", ydyaribh, same
meaning as above, Neh 12 6), the head of which is
Mattenai in Neh 12 19. In Neh 11 10 we should
probably read ‘Jedaiah and Joiarib” for “Jedaiah
the son of Joiarib” (cf 1 Ch 910). Jehoiarib=
Joarib in 1 Mace 2 1.


JEHONADAB, jéhon’a-dab (A721, yhdnd-
dhabh, either “Jeh is noble” or “‘liberal,’”’ or ‘“Jeh
has impelled’) = Jonadab (2721, ydnadhabh, same
meaning):

(1) Jehonadab in Heb of 2 8 13 5; but Jonadab
in EV, and in Heb and EV of 13 3.32.35; son of
Shimeah, King David’s brother. He was friendly
with Amnon his cousin, and is said to be “a very
shrewd [RV ‘‘subtle’’] man.’’ He planned to get
Tamar to wait upon Amnon. Two years after,
when Absalom had murdered Amnon, and David
had heard that all the king’s sons were assassinated,
J. assured him that only Amnon was killed; and
his reassuring tone is justified (ver 35); possibly
he knew of Absalom’s intentions. LXX, Luc, has
“Jonathan” in 18 3 ff; and in 28 21 21 || 1 Ch
20 7, there is mentioned a son of Shimei (= “Shim-
ea,” 1 Ch 20 7=“Shammah,” 18 16 9), whose
name is Jonathan. See JonaTHAN, (4).


(2) Jehonadab in 2 K 10 15.23; in Heb of Jer
35 8.14.16.18=Jonadab in Jer 35 6.10.19, and
EV of 35 8.14.16.18, “son” of Rechab, of the Kenite
clan (1 Ch 2 55). J. is described in 2 K 10 as
an ally of Jehu in the abolition of Baal-worship in
Samaria. Jehu met him after slaying the son of
Ahab (10 15); the second part of the verse should
probably be tr¢ ‘And he greeted him and said to
him, Is thy heart upright [with me] as my heart is
with thee? And Jehonadab answered, Yes. Then
spake Jehu [so LXX], If so, give me thy hand.’
In Jer 35 (where EV has Jonadab throughout), he
is called the “father” of the Rechabites, who derived
from him their ordinances for their- nomadic life
and abstention from wine. See RecHas, Rz-
CHABITES. Davip Francis RoBERtTs


JEHONATHAN, jéhon’a-than (JZ, yhona-
than, “Jeh has given’): The name is the same as
Jonathan: the Heb has the two forms for the same
person sometimes; sometimes only one is found.
See Jonatuan. The form “Jehonathan” occurs as
follows in EV:

(1) A Levite who took part in teaching the Torah
in the cities of Judah under Jehoshaphat (2 Ch 17
8 EV and Heb).

(2) Head of the priestly family of Shemaiah
(Neh 12 18 EV and Heb).

oo AV and Heb in 1 Ch 27 25; see JonaTHan,


JEHORAM, je-hi’ram, written also in the abbre-
viated form, JORAM (O77), yhoram, OID,
yoram, “‘Jeh is high”; RV retains ‘Joram’ for Heb
yhorém in 2 K 9 15-24):

(1) Ninth king of Israel (2 K 1 17—9 28), son
of Ahab and Jezebel, successor to his brother
Ahaziah, who died childless. He began to reign
853 BC, and reigned 12 years (2 K 3 1; 8 16).


The statement in 2 K 1 17, “‘the second year of Je-
horam,”’ follows a system of chronology common to the
Lucian group of MSS, in which the 1st year of Jehosha-
phat falls in the 11th year of Omri; the 24th year of
Jehoshaphat in the lst year of Ahaziah; and the Ist
year of Jehoram in the 2d year of Jehoram of Judah.
The double chronology (2 K 1 17 and 2 K 8 1) is due
to the intention of the compiler of K to refer all the acts
of Elisha to the reign of Jehoram, thus dislocating the
order of events in that reign. Elisha, however, survived
Jehoram many years, and it is possible that some of the
events are to he referred to subsequent reigns.


It is difficult to estimate the religious character
of J. Apparently the fierce fanaticism of Jezebel
and the boldness of Ahab reappear


1. His in the son in the form of duplicity and
Religious superstition. The attempt of Jezebel
Policy to substitute Baal for Jeh bad failed.


The people were on the side of Jeh.
Otherwise Jehu could not have carried out his
bloody reform. All the worshippers of Baal in the
land could be gathered into one temple of Baal
(2 K 10 18 ff). Evidently J. feared the people.
Accordingly he posed as a reformer by putting
away the pillar of Baal (2 K 3 2), while secretly
he worshipped Baal (3 13a). Nevertheless, when he
got into straits, he expected to receive the help of
Jeh (8 136). He had not learned that a dual nature
is as impossible as a union of Baal and Jeh.
Immediately upon his accession, J. came into
conflict with Mesha, king of Moab (2 K 8 4 ff).
The account of the conflict is of special


2. The interest because of the supplementary
Moabite information concerning Mesha_fur-
War nished by the Moabite Stone. There


; we learn (11. 1-8) that Moab became
tributary to Israel in the days of Omri, and remained
so for forty years, but that it rebelled in the days of
Ahab. This probably brings us to the statement in
2K 3 4 ff that Mesha “rendered unto the king of


1581


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jehoiarib
Jehoshaphat


Israel the wool of a hundred thousand lambs, and of
a hundred thousand rams,” and that “when Ahab
was dead, ... . the king of Moab rebelled against
the king of Israel.” The victories of Mesha, glorified
by the M §, possibly took place before the events of
2K 3 4ff. Accordingly, J. resolved to recover the
allegiance of the Moabites. He called to his aid the
ally of his father, Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, and
the latter’s vassal, the king of Edom. J. was enter-
tained at Jerus (Jos, Ant, IX, iii, 1). The allies
marched against Moab by the longer route, around
the southern end of the Dead Sea, indicating that
Moab was fortified against attack from the W., and
that Israel was weak in the East Jordan country.
After the allies had been miraculously delivered from
perishing for lack of water, they devastated the land
and sacked the cities, and finally they succeeded in
shutting up Mesha in Kir-hareseth. Driven to
despair, Mesha offered his eldest son upon the wall
as a burnt offering to Chemosh. This seems to
have caused the tide to turn, for “there was great
wrath against Israel,” and the allies returned to their
own land, apparently having failed to secure a last-

ing advantage. .
Assuming that 2 K 4-8 belong to the reign of J.,
it appears that the Syrians made frequent incursions
into the land of Israel, perhaps more


3. The in the nature of plundering robber
Conflicts bands than invasions by a regular army
with Syria (2 K 6). Finally, however, Ben-hadad


in person invaded the country and be-
sieged Samaria. The inhabitants were reduced to
horrible straits by famine, when the oppressors took
sudden flight and Israel was saved. In the years
849, 848, and 845, Shalmaneser II invaded Syria.
It is probable that during this period J. recovered
Ramoth-gilead, which had fallen to Syria under
Ahab. Hazael succeeded Ben-hadad as ruler of
Syria, and his first act, after having murdered his
predecessor, was to regain Ramoth-gilead. In the
defence of the city, J., who was assisted by his
nephew, Ahaziah, was wounded, and returned to
Jezreel to be healed of his wounds.
J. left the army at Ramoth-gilead under the com-
mand of Jehu, a popular captain of the host. While
J. was at Jezreel, Elisha sent a prophet
4, The Con- to anoint Jehu as king of Israel. Jehu
spiracy of had been a witness of the dramatic
Jehu scene when Elijah hurled the curse
of Jeh at Ahab for his crime against
Naboth. Jehu at once found in himself the instru-
ment to bring the curse to fufilment. Accordingly,
he conspired his crime against J. With a company
of horsemen he proceeded to Jezreel, where Ahaziah
was visiting his sick uncle, J. J. suspected treach-


ery, and, in company with Ahaziah, he rode out to’


meet Jehu. On his question, “Is it peace, Jehu?”
he received a brutal reply that no longer left him
in doubt as to the intention of the conspirator. As
J. turned to flee, Jehu drew his bow and shot him
in the back so that the arrow pierced his heart.
His dead body was thrown into the plat of ground
that had belonged to Naboth.

(2) King of Judah, son of Jehoshaphat (2 K 8
16-24; 2 Ch 21 1-20), he began to rule about
849 and reigned 8 years. With reference to the
chronological difficulty introduced by 2 K 1 17,
see (1) above. ,

In the beginning of the reigns of Ahab and Je-
hoshaphat, an attempt was made to end the old feud

between Israel and Judah. At the


1. His suggestion of Ahab, the two kingdoms,
Marriage _ for the first time, joined forces against

the common foe from the N., the
Syrians. To seal the alliance, Athaliah, daughter of


Jezebel and Ahab, was married to J., son of Je-
hoshaphat. Thus Jehoram was brother-in-law to


(1) above. No doubt this was considered as a mas-
ter stroke of conciliatory policy by the parties inter-
ested. However, it proved disastrous for Judah.
Beyond a doubt, the unholy zeal of Jezebel included
the Baalizing of Judah as well as of Israel. This
marriage was a step in that direction.
“A man shall leave his father and his mother, and
shall cleave unto his wife.” J.didso. ‘He walked
in the ways of the kings of Israel, as
2. His did the house of Ahab” (2 K 8 18).
Idolatry According to 2 Ch 21 11.13, J. not
only accepted the religion of Athaliah,
but he became a persecutor, compelling the inhabit-
ants of Jerus and of the land to Raa apostates.
Because of his gross idolatry and his wickedness,
he is said (2 Ch 21 12 ff) to have received a de-
nunciatory letter from the prophet


3. The Elijah, which, however, had no effect
Letter of | on him. But this leads to a chrono-
Elijah logical difficulty. Was Elijah still


alive? The inference from 2 K 3 11
is that hewasnot. Then, too, the Chronicler other-
wise never mentions Elijah. Oettli is of the opinion
that one should either read “Elisha” for ‘EHlijah,”
or else consider the letter to have been the con-
ception of a later writer, who felt that Elijah must
have taken note of the wickedness of J. and his wife,
Athaliah, daughter of Ahab. In the latter event,
the letter might be called a haggadic Midrash.

A man’s religion cannot be divorced from his


character. Baalism had in it the elements of

tyranny and civic unrighteousness.
4. His In keeping with his religion, and in
Character true oriental fashion, J. began his


reign by murdering his brothers, and
other princes of the land, to whom Jehoshaphat had
given valuable gifts and responsible positions. The
only event belonging to his reign re-


5. The corded in K is the revolt of Edom.
Revolt of © Edom was subdued by David, and,
Edom probably with the exception of a tem-


porary revolt under Solomon (1 K 11
14 ff), it had remained subject to the united king-
dom or to Judah until the revolt under J. The
text is somewhat obscure, but both accounts indicate
that the expedition of J. against Edom ended in
failure. In the account we are told that at the same
time Libnah revolted.
Perhaps the revolt of Libnah should be taken in
connection with the invasion of the Philis and of
_ the Arabians, mentioned in 2 Ch 21.
6. The Raid Libnah was located on the south-
into Judah western border of Judah. Since it
was a border city, it is possible that
the compiler of K considered it as belonging to
Philistia. In the account in Ch, J. is represented
as having lost all his possessions and all his family,
save Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons, when the
town was sacked and the palace plundered by the
invading force of Philis and Arabians. The account
appears to be based upon reliable sources.
In his last days, he was afflicted with a frightful
disease in the bowels. His death was unregretted,
and his burial without honor. Con-


7. His trast, however, 2 K 8 24 with 2 Ch

Death 21 20. Ahaziah, also called Jehoahaz,
his younger son, then became king

in his stead. S. K. Mosiman


JEHOSHABEATH, jé-hé-shab’éath (npawine :
yhoshabh‘ath, “Jeh is an oath’): In 2 Ch 22 11=
JEHOSHEBA (q.v.) of 2 K 11 2.


JEHOSHAPHAT, jé-hosh’a-fat (QDWIN", yho-
shaphat, ‘“Jeh has judged’’):

(1) King of Judah. See separate article.

(2) Son of Ahilud. He was recorder under David


Jehoshaphat
Jehovah-Jireh


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1582


Ps 8 16; 20 24; 1 Ch 18 15) and Solomou (1 K
(3) Son of Paruah, and Solomon’s overseer in
Issachar to provide victuals for the royal household
for one month of the year (1 K 4 17).

(4) Son of Nimshi, and father of Jehu, king of
Northern Israel (2 K 9 2.14). His name is omitted
in 9 20 and 1 K 19 16, where Jehu is called ‘‘son
of Nimshi.”

(5) AV (but not Heb) in 1 Ch 15 24; RV correctly
JOSHAPHAT (q.v.). Davip Francis Roperts


JEHOSHAPHAT, jéhosh’a-fat (ODEBWIT, yho-
shaphat, ‘‘Jeh judges’): The 4th king of Judah, son
of Asa. His mother was Azubah, the daughter of
Shilhi, of whom nothing further is known. He was
35 years of age at his accession, aud reigned 25
years, c 873-849 BC. The history of his reign is
contained in 1 K 22 41-50 and m 2 Ch 17 1—
211. The narrative in 1 K 22 1-35a@ and iu
2 K 3 4ff belongs to the history of the Northern
Kingdom. The absence from K of the details con-
tained in 2 Ch affords no presumption against their
truth. Neither do high numbers, embellished
statements, and the coloring of the writer’s own age
destroy the historical perspective.

The reign of J. appears to have been one of un-
usual religious activity. It was, however, charac-

terized not so much by striking reli-


1. His gious measures as it was by the religious
Religious spirit that pervaded every act of the
Policy king, who sought the favor of Jeh in


every detail of his life (2 Ch 17 3.4).
He evidently felt that a nation’s character is de-
termined by its religion. Accordingly, he made it
his duty to purify the national worship. The
“sodomites,” i.e. those who practised immorality
in the worship of Jeh in the temple precincts, were
banished from the land (1 K 22 46). The Asherim
were taken out of Judah (2 Ch 17 6; 19 3), and
“the people from Beer-sheba to the hill-country of
Epbraim were brought back uuto Jeh, the God of
their fathers’ (19 4). Because of his zeal for Jeh,
J. is rewarded with power and “riches and houor
in abundance” (17 5).
Believing that religion and morals, the founda-
tion and bulwarks of civilization, suffer from igno-
rance, J. introduced a system of public


2. His iustruction for the whole land (2 Ch
System of 17 7 ff). He appointed a commission,
Public In=- composed of princes, Levites and
struction priests, to go from city to city to in-


struct the people. Their instruction
was to be based on the one true foundation of sound
morals and healthy religious life, “the book of the
law of Jeh”! (17 7-9).
Next in importance to J.’s system of public in-
struction, was his provision for the better admin-
istration of justice. He appointed
3. His judges to preside over courts of com-
Judicial mon pleas, which he established in all
Institutions the fortified cities of Judah. In addi-
tion to these local courts, two courts
of appeal, an ecclesiastical and a civil court, were
established at Jerus to be presided over by priests,
Levites, and leading nobles as judges. At the head
of the ecclesiastical court of appeal was the high
priest, and a layman, ‘“‘the ruler of the house of
Judah,” headed the civil court of appeal (2 Ch 19
4-11). The insistence that a judge was to be in
character like Jeh, with whom there is “no iniquity
. .. . nor respect of persons, nor taking of bribes”
(19 7), is worthy of note.
According to 2 Ch 17 2, J. began his reign with
defensive measures against Israel. Furthermore,
he built castles and cities of store in the land of


Judah, “and he had many works,” probably mili-
tary supplies, “in the cities of Judah” (17 13).
He appears to have had a large


4, His standing army, including cavalry (1
Military K 22 4; 2 Ch 17 14 ff). However,
Defences the numbers in 2 Ch 17 14 ff seem


to be impossibly high.
Godliness and security at home were followed
by respect and peace abroad. The fact that the


Philis and the Arabians brought
5. His tribute (17 11), and that Edom had
Foreign no king (1 K 22 47), but a deputy
Policy instead, who possibly was appointed


by J., would indicate that he held the
suzerainty over the nations and tribes bordering
Judah on the 8. and W. Holding the suzerainty
over the weaker nations, and being allied with the
stronger, J. secured the peace for the greater part
of his reign (1 Ch 17 10) that fostered the internal
development of the kingdom.

In contrast to the former kings of Judah, J. saw
greater benefit in an alliance with Israel than in
civil war. Accordingly, the old feud
between the two kingdoms (1 K 14
Alliance 30; 15 6) was dropped, and J. made
with Ahab peace with Israel (22 44). The po-

litical union was cemented by the
marriage of Jehoram, son of J., to Athaliah, daughter
of Ahah and Jezebel. Shortly after the marnage,
J. joined Ahab in a campaign against Syria (2 Ch
18 1-3). In view of the subordinate position that
J. seems to take in the campaign (1 K 22 4.30),
and in view of the military service rendered to
Jehoram (2 K 3 4 ff), Judah seems to have become
a dependency of Israel. Nevertheless, the union
may have contributed to the welfare and prosperity
of Judah, and it may have enabled J. to hold the
suzerainty over the neighboring nations. However,
the final outcome of the alliance with the house of
Omri was disastrous for Judah. The introduction
into Judah of Baalism more than counterbalanced
any political and material advantage gained, and
in the succeeding reigns it indirectly led to the
Gore oe extinction of the royal family of Judah
11 1 ff).

Ju spite of the denunciation of the prophet Jehu
for his expedition with Ahab, thus “help[ing) the

wicked” (2 Ch 19 2), J. entered into


6. His


7. His Al-  asimilar alliance with Jehoram of Israel
liance with (2 K 3 4ff). On the iuvitation of Je-
Jehoram  horam to join him in an expedition


against Moab, J. was ready with the

same set spcech of acceptance as in the case of Ahab

(2 % 37; cf 1 K 22 4). For the details of the
expedition see Jenoram, (1).

The Chronicler has given us a very remarkable

account of a victory gained by J. over the Moabites

and Ammonites. No doubt he made


8. Victory useof acurreut historical Midr. Many
over the find the historical basis of the Midr in
Moabites the events recorded in 2 K 83 4ff.
and Am- However, the localities are different,
monites and there a defeat is recorded, while


in this case we have a victory. The
story in outline bears the stamp of probability. 1 K
22 45 seems to suggest wars of J. that are not men-
tioned in K. The tribes mentioned in the account
are represented as trying to make permanent settle-
ment in Judah (2 Ch 20 11). In their advauce
through theS. of Judah, they were doubtless harassed
by the shepherd population of the country. J.,
according to his custom, sought the help of Jeh.
The invadiug forces fell to quarreling amoug them-
selves (2 Ch 20 23), and destroyed one another.
The spoil was great because the invaders had brought
ee ies goods with them, expecting to remain in the
and.


1583


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jehoshaphat
Jehovah-Jireh


The destruction of J.’s fleet is recorded in 1 K
22 48.49 and in 2 Ch 20 35-37. However, the
two accounts are quite different.

9. Destruc- According to K, J. built ships of Tar-
tion of Je- shish to sail to Ophir for gold, but the
hoshaphat’s vessels were wrecked at Ezion-geber.
Fleet Thereupon Ahaziah offered to assist
; J. with seamen, but J. refused to enter
into the alliance. According to Ch the alliance
had been formed, and together they built ships at
Ezion-geber, which were destroyed because J. had
made an alliance with the wicked king of Israel. In
view of J.’s other alliances, the Chronicler may be


in the right. Ch, however, misunderstood the
term “‘ships of Tarshish.”


‘at hand at the resurrection.


This, too, was an
ordinary place for Jewish graves in preéxilic times
(2 K 23 6, etc). The valley today, esp. that part
adjacent to the temple, is crowded with Moslem
and Jewish graves. A worthless tradition indicates
the tomb of Jehoshaphat himself close to the so-
called “Pillar of Absalom.” See Krna’s Vaz.
There is not the slightest reason for believing that
this is the spot referred to by Joel—indeed he may
have spoken of an ideal spot only. The valley of
the Kidron is a nehal (“ravine”), not an ‘émek
(“broad valley”). It is impossible not to suspect
that there is some connection between the name
Jehoshaphat and the name of a village near the
head of this valley—Shdphat; perhaps at one time


VALLEY oF JEmosHAPHAT (LooginG N.E.).-


J. died at the age of 60. Jos says (Ant, IX, iti,

2) that he was buried in a magnificent manner,

for he had imitated the actions of

10. His David. The kingdom was left to

Death Jehoram, who inaugurated the begin-

ning of his reign by causing the mas-
sacre of his brethren. 8. K. Mosman


JEHOSHAPHAT, VALLEY OF (ODUM poy,
‘étmek ythdshaphat; the latter word means ‘“‘Jeh
judgeth,” and ‘émek, “wide,” “open valley”; LXX
hé kotlds Idsaphdt): The name is used in Joel 3 2.12
of the scene of Judgment: “Let the nations bestir
themselves, and come up to the valley of Jehosha-
phat; for there will I sit to judge all the nations round
about” (ver12). ‘The valley of decision” (or “sharp
judgment’) is another name the prophet gives to
this spot (ver 14). Some have identified it with
the valley (‘@mek) of Beracan (q.v.) of 2 Ch 20 26,
where King Jehoshaphat obtained a great victory,
but this is improbable.

Since the 4th cent. AD the Kipron (q.v.) valley
has been named the Valley of J. The tradition is
now strongest among the Moslems who point out
the exact scene of the Judgment; the Bridge As
Sirdt, dividing heaven and hell, is to stretch across
this valley from the Haram area to the Mount of
Olives. It is, however, the ambition of every pious
Jew to be buried on the slopes of this valley, to be


it was Wédy Shdphat, which name would readily
suggest the traditional one. See GEHENNA.
E. W. G. MasTerman

JEHOSHEBA, jé-hosh’é-ba, jé-hé-shé’ba (JID,
yhoshebha‘, “Jeh is an oath’): Called ‘“Jehosha-
beath” in 2 Ch 22 11; daughter of Jehoram king of
Judah, possibly by a wife other than Athaliah (2 K
11 2). According to 2 Ch 22 11, she was the wife
of Jehoiada, the priest. She hid Jehoash, the young
son of King Ahaziah, and so saved his life from
Queen Athaliah.


JEHOSHDA, jé-hosh’t-a (YW, yhdshue’, “Jeh
is deliverance,” or ‘is opulence”): The usual Heb
form of the name ‘Joshua’; it occurs in AV of
Nu 13 16 (ARV ‘‘Hoshea’’); and in some editions
of AV in 1 Ch 7 27, where others have the form
“Jehoshuah” (4 being wrongly added at the end).
See Josaua, son of Nun.


JEHOVAH,
Names of, IT, 5.


JEHOVAH-JIREH, jé-ho'va-ji’re (ANT TIM,
yahweh yir'eh, “Jeh sees”): The name given by
Abraham to the place where he had sacrificed a
ram provided by God, instead of his son Isaac
(Gen 22 14). The meaning plainly is that the
Lord sees and provides for the necessities of His


jé-hd’va, je-ha’va. See Gop,


feporah-Nissi_ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 1584
servants. There is an allusion to ver 8 where JEHOZADAK, jéhoz’a-dak Pir, yhoga-


Abraham says, “God will provide himself [RVm
“will see for himself”’] the lamb for a burnt offering.”
The ver (14 AV) goes on to connect the incident
with the popular proverb, “In the mount of the
Lord it shall be seen” (RV “provided”), RVm
suggests “‘he shall be seen.” “The mount of Jeh”
in other places denotes the temple hill at Jerus
(Ps 24 3; Isa 2 3, etc). With changes of the
punctuation very different readings have been sug-
gested. According to Swete’s text: ‘(And A. called
the name of that place [the] ‘Lord saw’ [aorist] in
order that they may say today: ‘In the mountain
{the} Lord was seen’’’ (aorist). LXX reads, ‘In
the mountain Jeh seeth,” or “‘will see.” If there
is merely a verbal connection between the clauses
we should most naturally read, ‘In the mount of
Jeh one is seen [appears],’’ i.e. men, people, appear
—the reference being to the custom of visiting the
temple at pilgrimages (Driver, HDB, s.v.). But
if the connection of the proverb with the name
“Jehovah-jireh” depends on the double: sense of the
word ‘‘see,” then the best explanation may be, Jeh
sees the needs of those who come to worship before
Him on Zion, and there ‘‘is seen,” i.e. reveals Him-
self to them by answering their prayers and supply-
ing their wants. His ‘‘seeing,”’ in other words, takes
practical effect in a “being seen” (ibid).
W. Ewtne

JEHOVAH-NISSI, j-nis'i CO] MM, yahweh
nissi, “Jeh is my banner’): So Moses named the
altar which he reared to signalize the defeat of the
Amalekites by Israel under Joshna, at Rephidim (Ex
17 15). LXX translates “the Lord my refuge,” de-
riving nissi from O43, nis, ‘‘to flee.” Tg Onkelos
reads, “Moses built an altar and worshipped on it
before Jeh, who had wrought for him miracles’
(O72, nissin). The suggestion is that the people
should rally round God as an army gathers round
its standard. He it is who leads them to victory.


JEHOVAH, SERVANT OF. See Servant or
JEHOVAH.


JEHOVAH-SHALOM, j.-sha’lom my mm,
yahweh shalom, ‘‘Jeh is peace’): This was the name
given by Gideon to the altar he built at Ophra, in
allusion to the word spoken to him by the Lord,
“Peace be unto thee” (Jgs 6 24). It is equivalent
to “Jeh is well disposed.”


JEHOVAH-SHAMMAB, j.-sham’a (TAY TIM,
yahweh shammah, ‘‘Jeh is there”): The name ta be
given to the new Jerus, restored and glorified, as
seen in the vision of Ezk (48 35m; cf Rev 21 3).
Jeh returns to the temple which He had forsaken,
and from that time forward the fact of supreme
importance is that He 7s there, dwelling in the midst
of His people.


JEHOVAH-TSIDKENU (CIDKEND), j.-tsid-
kent, tsid’kéni (PTS TN, yahweh cidhkéna,
“Jeh [is] our righteousness”): The symbolic name
given (1) to the king who is to reign over the restored
Israel (Jer 23 6); (2) to the state or capital (33 16).


JEHOZABAD, jéhoz’a-bad (T3T, yhoza-
bhddh, ‘‘Jeh has bestowed’):


(1) A servant of King Jehoash of Judah. Ac-


cording to 2 KK 12 21 (22), he was a son of Shomer,
but 2 Ch 24 26 makes him “son of Shimrith the
Moabitess.”’

(2) A Korahite doorkeeper, son of Obed-edom
(1 Ch 26 4).

(3) A Benjamite, one of King Jchoshaphat’s
warriors (2 Ch 17 18).


dhak, ‘‘Jeh is righteous”): Priest at the time of the
captivity under Nebuchadrezzar (1 Ch 6 14.15
[Heb 5 40.41]). He was the father of Joshua
(Jeshua) the priest (Hag 1 1.12.14; 2 2.4; Zec
6 11). V has Josedech in Hag and Zec. Same
as “Jozadak” (PIE1, yocadhak, same meaning)
in Ezr 3 2.8; 5 2; 10 18; Neh 12 26; and=
“Josedek”’ (AV “Josedec”) of 1 Esd 5 5.48.56; 6 2;
9 19; Sir 49 12.


JEHO, jé’hn (NM, yehw’; meaning uncertain,
perhaps ‘Jeh is he?; 1 K 19 16.17; 2 K 9, 10;
Elo, Hiow): Son of Jehoshaphat, and descendant
of Nimshi, hence commonly called “the son of
Nimshi”; 10th king of Israel, and founder of its
IVth Dynasty. Jehu reigned for 28 years. His
accession may be reckoned at ¢ 752 BC (some date
a few years later).


Jehu's Tribute—from Obelisk of Shalmaneser.


A soldier of fortune, J. appears first as an officer
in the body-gnard of Ahab. To himself we owe
the information that he was present
1. Officer at the judicial murder of Naboth, and
of Ahab that Naboth’s sons were put to death
with their father (2 K 9 26). He was
in attendance when Ahab drove from Samaria to
inspect his new possession in Jezreel, and was wit-
ness of the dramatic encounter at the vineyard
between the king and the prophet Elijah (cf 1 K
21 16 ff). Years after, J. reminded Bidkar, his
captain (lit. “thirdsman,” in chariot), of the decom
they had there heard pronounced upon Ahab and
his house (2 K 9 25 ff). It was in fulfilment of
this doom that J. at that time ordered the body of
the slain Jehoram to be thrown into the inclosure
which had once been Naboth’s (ver 26). Ahab’s
temporary repentance averted the punishment
from himself for a few years (1 K 21 27-29), but
the blow fell at the battle of Ramoth-gilead, and
J. would not be unmindful of the prophet’s words as
he beheld the dogs licking Ahab’s blood as they
washed his chariot “by the pool of Samaria” (22 38).
A different fate awaited Ahab’s two sons. The
elder, Ahaziah, died, after a short reign, from the
effects of an accident (2 K 1). He
2. Jehoram was succeeded by his brother Jehoram,
at Ramoth- who toward the close of his reign of
gileadand 12 years (2 K 3 1) determined on an
Jezreel attempt to recover Ramoth-gilead,
; where his father had been fatally
stricken, from Hazael, of Syria. Ramoth-gilead
was taken (2 K 9 14), but in the attack the Israel-
itish king was severely wounded, and was taken to
Jezreel to be healed of his wounds (ver 15). The
city meanwhile was left in charge of J. and his
fellow-captains. At Jezreel he was visited by
Ahaziah, of Judah, who had taken part with him
in the war (8 28.29; 9 16).
The time was now ripe for the execution of the
redicted vengeance on the house of Ahab, and to
lisha the prophet, the successor of Elijah, it fell


1585


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  ]2fovah-Nissi


to take the decisive step which precipitated the
crisis. Hazael and J. had already been named to
Elijah as the persons. who were to


3. The execute the Divine judgment, the one
Anointing as king of Syria, the other as king
of Jehu —_- of Israel (1 K 19 15-17). Elijah was


aa. doubtless aware of this commission,
which it was now his part, as respected J., to ful-
fil. A messenger was hastily dispatched to Ramoth-
gilead, with instructions to seek out J., take him
apart, anoint him king of Israel in Jeh’s name, and
charge him with the task of utterly destroying the
house of Ahab in punishment for the righteous
blood shed by Ahab and Jezebel. The messenger
was then to flee. This was done, and J., the sacred
oil poured on his head, found himself alone with
this appalling trust committed to him (2 K 9 1-10).
Events now moved rapidly. J.’s companions
were naturally eager to know what had happened,
and on learning that J. had been
4. The anointed king, they at once impro-
Revolution vised a throne by throwing their gar-
—Death of ments on the top of some steps, blew
Jehoram the trumpet, and proclaimed, “J. is
king.” Not a moment was lost. No
one was permitted to leave the city to carry forth tid-
ings, and J. himself, with characteristic impetuos-
ity, set out, with a small body of borsemen, in his
chariot to Jezreel. Bidkar was there as charioteer
(9 25). As they came within sight of the city, a
watchman reported their advance, and niessengers
were sent to inquire as to their errand. These were
ordered to fall into the rear. This conduct awaken-
ed suspicion, and Jehoram and Ahaziah—who was
still with his invalided kinsman—ordered their
chariots, and proceeded in person to meet J. The
companies met at the ill-omened field of Naboth,
and there the first stroke of vengeance fell. The
anxious query, ‘Is it peace?’ was answered by a
storm of denunciation from J., and on Jehoram
turning to flee, an arrow from J.’s powerful bow
shot him through the heart, and he sank dead in
his chariot. Ahaziah likewise was pursued, and
smitten “‘at the ascent of Gur, which is by Ibleam.”
He died at Megiddo, and was taken to Jerus for
burial in the sepulcher of the kings (9 11-28). A
somewhat variant account of Ahaziah’s death is
given in 2 Ch 22 9. It is possible that J. came to
Megiddo or its neighborhood, and had to do with
his end there.
The slaughter of Jehoram was at once followed by
that of the chief instigator of all the crimes for which
the house of Ahab suffered—the queen-
5. Death mother Jezebel. Hot from the pur-
of Jezehel suit of Ahaziab, J. pressed on Jezreel.
Jezebel, now an aged woman, but still
defiant, had painted and attired herself, and, looking
from her window, met him as he drove into the
palace court, with the insulting question, “Is it
peace, thou Zimri, thy master’s murderer?” (cf
1 K 16 9-12). J.’s answer was an appeal for aid
from those within. Two or three eunuchs of the
palace gave signs of their concurrence. These, at
J.’s bidding, threw Jezebel down into the court-
yard, where, lying in her blood, she was trodden
under foot by the chariot borses. When, a little
later, her remains were sought for burial, she was
found to have been almost wholly devoured by the
dogs—a lurid commentary on Elijah’s earlier
threatening, which was now recalled (2 K 9 30-
37). J. was an intrepid minister of judgment, but
the pitiless zeal, needless cruelty, and, afterward,
deceit, with which he executed his mission, with-
draw our sympathy from him, as it did that of a
later prophet (Hos 1 4). :
The next acts of J. reveal yet more clearly his
thoroughness of purpose and promptitude of action,


while they afford fresh exhibitions of his ruthless-
ness and unscrupulousness of spirit. Samaria was

the capital of the kingdom, and head-
6. Slaughter quarters of the Baal-worship intro-


of Ahah’s duced by Jezebel, though it is recorded
Descend- of Jehoram that he had removed, at
ants least temporarily, an obelisk of Baal

which his father had set up (2 K 3 2;
cf 10 26). The city was still held for the house of


Ahab, and 70 of Ahab’s “sons’’—to be taken here
in the large sense of male descendants—resided in
it (40 1.6). J. bere adopted a bold and astute
policy. He sent letters to Samaria challenging
those in authority to set up one of their master’s
sons as king, and fight for the city and the king-
dom. The governors knew well that they could
make no effective resistance to J., and at once
humbly tendered their submission. J., in a second
message, bade them prove their sincerity by de-
livering to him the heads of the 70 princes of Ahab’s
house in baskets. This they did, by their act
irrevocably committing themselves to J.’s cause
(ver 9). The ghastly relics were piled up in two
heaps at the gate of Jezreel—a horrible object-
lesson to any still inclined to hesitate in their alle-
giance. Friends and partisans of the royal house
shared the fate of its members (ver 11).


Apart from the faultiness in the agent's motive, the
deeds now recounted fell within the letter of J.'s com-
mission. As much cannot be said of the

h deeds of blood that follow. J. had killed

7. Slaug tet Ahaziah, king of Judah. Now, on his way
of Ahaziah’s to Samaria, he met acompanyof 42 persons,
Brethren described as ‘‘hbrethren of aziah "*—
evidently blood-relations of various de-

grees, as Ahaziah’s own brethren had been
earlier slain by the Arabians (2 Ch 21 17; 92 1)—and,
on learning who they were, and of their purpose to visit
their kinsfolk at Jezreel, gave orders that they be slain
on the spot, and their bodies ignominiously thrown in-
to the pit (or ‘‘cistern’’) of the shearing-house where he
had encountered them. It was a cruel excess for which
no sufficient justification can he pleaded (2 K 10 12-14).


Still less can the craft and violence be condoned
by which, when he reached Samaria, J. evinced his
“geal for Jeh” (ver 16) in the extirpa-
8. Massacre tion of the worshippers of Baal. J.
of the Wor- had secured on his side the support of
shippers of a notable man—Jehonadab the son of
Baal Rechab (vs 15.16; ef Jer 35 6-19)—
and his entrance into Samaria was sig-
nalized by further slaying of all adherents of Ahab.
Then, doubtless to the amazement of many, J.
proclaimed himself an enthusiastic follower of Baal.
A great festival was organized, to which all prophets,
worshippers, and priests of Baal were invited from
every part of Israel. J. himself took the leading
part in the sacrifice (ver 25). Vestments were dis-
tributed to distinguish the true worshippers of Baal
from others. Then when all were safely gathered
into “the house of Baal,’ the gates were closed, and
80 soldiers were sent in to massacre the whole de-
luded company in cold blood. None‘escaped. The
temple of Baal was broken up. Thus, indeed, ‘J.
destroyed Baal out of Israel” (ver 28), but at what
a frightful cost of falsehood and treacherous deal-
ing! (2K 10 18-28).
The history of J. in the Bible is chiefly the history
of his revolution as now narrated. His reign itself
is summed up in a few vs, chiefly occu-
9. Wars ied with the attacks made by Hazael,
with Hazael king of Syria, on the trans-Jordanic
territories of Israel (10 32.33). These
districts were overrun, and remained lost to Israel
till the reign of J.’s great-grandson, Jeroboam II
(2 K 14 28).
is i irection, viz. to the annals of Assyria,
See nee oe ony Waar information we noseees


the reign of J. In these annals, fortunately, some
Po aresting notices are preserved. In 854 BC was fought


Jehubbah
Jeremiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1586


the great battle of Karkar (a place between Aleppo and
Hamath), when Shalmaneser Ii, king of Assyria, de-
feated a powerful combination formed
10. Assyrian 48ainst him (Damascus, Hamath, Philistia,
Noti Ammon, etc). Among the allies on this oc-
ouces casion is mentioned ‘‘ Ahabbu of Sir’ilaa,”’
who took the third place with 2,000 chariots
and 10,000 footmen. There is a difficulty in supposing
Ahab to have been still reigning as late as 854, and Well-
hausen, Kamphausen and others have suggested that
Ahab’s name has been confused with that of his successor
Jehoramin the Assyrannals. Kittel, in his History of the
Hebrews (£1, 233, ET) is disposed to accept this view.
.G. Smith, in his Assyr Hponym Canon (179), is of the opinion
that the tribute lists were often carelessly compiled and
in error as to names. The point of interest is that from
this time Israel was evidently a tributary of Assyria.
_ With this accord the further notices of Israel in_the
inscriptions of Shalmaneser II, two in number. Both
belong to the year 842 BC and _ relate
11. Tribute to J. On Shalmaneser's Black Obelisk
5 is a pictorial representation of ‘‘ the tribute
of Jehu of P ;


. son of Omri.” An ambassador

kneels before the conqueror, and presents
his gifts. They include silver, gold, a gold cup, gold
vessels, a golden ladle, lead, a staff for the king’s hand,
scepters. An allusion to the same event occurs in the
annals of Shalmaneser’s campaign against Hazael of


‘At that time I received the tribute


Syria in this year.
Onri.’


of the Tyrians, Sidonians, of J., son of

There are some indications that in his latter
years, which were clouded with misfortune, J.
associated with himself his son Jehoahaz in the
government (cf2 K 13 1.10, where Jehoahaz comes
to the throne in the 23d, and dies in the 37th year
of Jehoash of Judah—14 years—yet has a total reign
of 17 years). J. is not mentioned in Ch, except in-
cidentally in connection with the death of Ahaziah
ae 22 9), and as the grandfather of Jehoash (25
1


The character of J. is apparent from the acts re-
corded of him. His energy, determination, prompti-
tude, and zeal fitted him for the work he had to
do. It was rough work, and was executed with
relentless thoroughness. Probably gentler meas-
ures would have failed to eradicate Baal-worship
from Israel. His impetuosity was evinced in his
furious driving (2 K 9 20). He was bold, daring,
unscrupulous, and masterful and astute in his
policy. But one seeks in vain in his character for
any touch of magnanimity, or of the finer qualities
of the ruler. His ‘zeal for Jeh” was too largely a
cloak for merely worldly ambition. The blood-
shed in which his rule was founded early provoked
a reaction, and his closing years were dark with
trouble. He is specially condemned for tolerating
the worship of the golden calves (2 K 10 29-31).
Nevertheless the throne was secured to his dynasty
for four generations (10 30; cf 15 12).

W. Saw CaLpEcorr

JEHUBBAHG, jé-hub’a (MAM, yhubbah, meaning
unknown): A descendant of Asher, mentioned in
1 Ch 7 34, where Keré is MAM), whubbah, “and
Hubbah,” but Kethibh is MAM, yahbah; LXX B
follows Keré.


JEHUCAL, j&hi’kal (2257, yhakhal, probably
meaning ‘“Jeh is able’): A courtier sent by King
Zedekiah to Jeremiah to ask the prophet to pra:
for the king and the people (Jer 37 3). Most VS
except LXX, with 38 1, have ‘“Jucal’?? O2a™,
yikhal, same meaning).


JEHUD, jé’hud (717), yhudh): A town in the
lot of Dan named between Baalath and Bene-berak
(Josh 19 45). The only possible identification
seems to be with el-Yehudiyeh, which lies about 8
miles E. of Jaffa.


JEHUDI, jé-ho’di CT, yhudhi, properly “a
Jew’): An officer of King Jehoiakim (Jer 36 14.21.
23). He was sent by the princes to summon
Baruch to read the roll containing Jeremiah’s


prophecies to them; he afterward read them to the
king, who destroyed them. His name is note-
worthy, as also is that of his grandfather Cushi
(i.e. “Ethiopian’’), and the two are said to point
to a foreign origin.


JEHUDIJAH, jé-bt-di’ja (1 Ch 4 18 AV). See
Ha-JEHUDIJAH.


JEHUEL, jéhi’el (Kethibh 2837, yha’al; but
Keré 28°17", yh?’ él, i.e. “Jehiel” AV, in 2 Ch 29 14):
A Levite; see JBHIEL, (5).


JEHUSH, jé’hush (1 Ch 8 39).


JEIEL, jéj’el CT, ye? a, meaning unknown):

(1) A Reubenite (1 Ch 6 7).

(2) In 1 Ch 8 29, added in RV from 9 35, where
Kethibh is ‘“Jeuel,” an ancestor of King Saul; AV
“Jehiel.””

(3) One of David’s mighty men (1 Ch 11 44).
AV is “Jehiel”; Kethibh is ‘Jeuel.” |

(4) A Levite, keeper of the ark with Obed-edom
(1 Ch 15 18.21; 16 5; 2 Ch 20 14), called “Je-
hiah” in 1 Ch 15 24.

(5) A Levite (1 Ch 16 5)=“Jaaziel” of 1 Ch 15
18 (q.v.). :

(6) Ascribe under King Uzziah (2 Ch 26 11).

(7) A chief of the Levites, present at King Jo-
siah’s great Passover feast (2 Ch 36 9). | ;

(8) One of those who had married foreign wives
(Ezr 10 43)=‘‘Juel” in 1 Esd 9 35. .

(9) AVin2 Ch 29 14; see Jenten, (5).

(10) AV in Ezr 8 13; see JEvsL, (8).

Davip Francis Roperts

JEKABZELi, jékab'zé-el Od YAP , yckabhe’ él,
“God gathers’; Neh 11 25). See Kaszrgt.


JEKAMEAM, jek-a-mé’am, j&kam’é-am (OP"p",
ykam‘am, probably “may kinsman establish’’):
Head of a Levitical house (1 Ch 23 19; 24 23).
The meaning of the name depends upon that of DY
(‘am) in compound names; see HPN, 46, 51 ff.


JEKAMIAG, jek-a-mi’a (M37, ytkamyah, “may
Jeh establish”):

(1) A Judahite, son of Shallum (1 Ch 2 41).

(2) Ason of King Jeconiah (Jehoiachin); in AV
‘Jecamiah”’ (1 Ch 3 18).


JEKUTHIEL, jé-kt'thi-el Gxnp., yckiahi él,
meaning doubtful): A Judahite (1 Ch 4 18). The
meaning ao be “preservation of God,” or perhaps
the same as SNMP", yokthe’él, “Joktheel,” the name
of aplace in Josh 15 38; 2 K 14 7.


JEMIMAR, jé-mi’ma (WA" , yemimah, perhaps
a diminutive meaning “little dove’): The first
daughter of Job (42 14), born after his restoration
from affliction.


JEMNAAN, jem’né-an ('Iepvaav, Jemndan):
A city on the coast of Pal; mentioned among those
affected by the expedition of Holofernes (Jth 2 28;
3 1 ff). The name is used for Jabniel, generally
called ‘“Jamnia’’ by the Gr writers.


JEMUEL, jémiel Oxwa, yem@él, meaning
unknown): A “son” of Simeon (Gen 46 10; Ex 6
15)=“‘Nemuel” in Nu 26 12; 1 Ch 4 24.

Syr version has ‘‘Jemuel’’ in the 4 passages, but Gray


(HPN, 307, n. 6) thinks ‘‘Jemuel’' is more probably a cor-
rection in Gen than ‘‘Nemuel”’ in Nu.


JEOPARD, jep’ard, JEOPARDY, jep’ar-di:
The Eng. word referred originally to a game where


See JEuss, (3).


1587


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jehubbah
Jeremiah


the chances were even (from OFr. jeu parti); trans-
ferred thence to designate any great risk. In the
NT, represented by the Gr vb. kinduneid (Lk 8
23; 1 Cor 15 30). In the OT (Jgs 6 18) for a
Heb idiom, “despise the soul,” i.e. they placed a
smal] value upon their lives (Vulg “offered their
souls to death”); for elliptical expression, “went
with their lives,” in 2 S 23 17m.


JEPHTHAH, jef’tha (MIAD", yiphtah, “opened,”
or “opener,” probably signifying “Jeh will open”;
"TepOde, Tephthde; used as the name of a place, as
in Josh 16 43; 19 14; of aman, Jgs 10 6—12 7):
Ninth judge of the Israelites. His antecedents are
obscure. Assuming Gilead to be the actual name of
his father, his mother was a harlot. He was driven
from home on account of his illegitimacy, and went
to the land of Tob in Eastern Syria (Jgs 11 2.3).
Here he and his followers lived the life of freebooters.

The Israelites beyond the Jordan being in danger
of an invasion by the Ammonites, J. was invited
by the elders of Gilead to be their leader (11 5.6).
Remembering how they had expelled him from their
territory and his heritage, J. demanded of them that
in the event of success in the struggle with the Am-
monites, he was to be continued as leader. This
condition being accepted he returned to Gilead (11
7-11). The account of the diplomacy used by J.
to prevent the Ammonites from invading Gilead
is possibly an interpolation, and is thought by
many interpreters to be a compilation from Nu
20-21. It is of great interest, however, not only
because of the fairncss of the argument used (11
12-28), but also by virtue of the fact that it con-
tains a history of the journey of the Israelites from
Lower Egypt to the banks of the Jordan. This
history is distinguished from that of the Pent
chiefly by the things omitted. If diplomacy was
tried, it failed to dissuade the Ammonites from seek-
ing to invade Israel. J. prepared for battle, but
before taking the field paused at Mizpeh of Gilead,
and registered a vow that if he were successful in
battle, he would offer as a burnt offering to Jeh
whatsoever should first come from his doors to greet
him upon his return (11 29-31). The battle is
fought, J. is the victor, and now his vow returns to
him with anguish and sorrow. Returning to his
home, the first to greet him is his daughter and only
child. The father’s sorrow and the courage of the
daughter are the only bright lights on this sordid,
cruel conception of God and of the nature of sacri-
fice. That the sacrifice was made seems certain
from the narrative, although some critics choose
to substitute for the actual death of the maiden
the setting the girl apart for a life of perpetual
virginity. The Israclitish laws concerning sacri-
fices and the language used in 11 39 are the chief
arguments for the latter interpretation. The
entire narrative, however, will hardly bear this
construction (11 34-40).

J. was judge in Israel for 6 years, but appears
only once more in the Scripture narrative. The
men of Ephraim, offended because they had had no
share in the victory over the Ammonites, made
war upon Gilead, but were put to rout by the forces
under J. (12 1-6). C, E. Scaenk


JEPHUNNEH, jé-fun’e (7127, y’phunneh, mean-
ing uncertain):
(1) Father of Caleb (Nu 13 6; 14 6.30, etc).


According to Nu 13 6, he was of the tribe of Judah;
according to 32 12; Josh 14 6, a Kenizzite; the Keniz-
zites were incorporated in Judah (cf 1 Ch 4 13-15).


(2) Ason of Jether, an Asherite (1 Ch 7 38).


JERAH, jé’ra (772, yerah): A son of Joktan
(Gen 10 26 ||1 Ch 1 20). No district Jerah has


been discovered. However, Yurakh in Yemen and
Yarah in Hijaz are places named by the Arab.
geographers. The fact that the word in Heb
means “moon” has led to the following suggestions:
the Bana Hilal (‘‘sons of the new moon”) in the N.
of Yemen; Ghubb el-Kamar (“the bay of the moon”),
Jebel el-Kamar (“the mountains of the moon’) in
Eastern Hadramant. But in Southern Arabia wor-
ship of the moon has caused the word to bulk largely
in place-names.


JERAHMEEL, jé-ra’mé-el ONAN, y*rahm a,
“may God have compassion!”):

(iy In 1 Ch 2 9.25.26.27.33.42, he is described
as the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of
Judah by Tamar his daughter-in-law (Gen 38).
In 18 27 10 is mentioned the neghebh of the
Jerahmeelites, jé-rai/mé-el-its ((PNAMMD , ha-yrah-
m° élt, a collective noun), RV “the South of the
Jerahmeelites.”’ The latter is a tribal name in use
probably before the proper name, above; their
cities are mentioned iu 1 S 30 29. Cheyne has
radical views on J. See EB, 8.v.; also T. Witton
Davies in Review of Theology and Philosophy, III,
689-708 (May, 1908); and Cheyne’s replies in
Hibbert Journal, VII, 182-51 (October, 1908), and
Decline and Fall of the Kingdom of Judah.

(2) A Merarite Levite, son of Kish (1 Ch 24 29).

(3) “The king’s son,” RV and AVm (Jer 36 26).
RVm, AV have “son of Hammelech,”’ taking the
word yan aS aproper name. He was “probably
a royal prince, one who had a king among his an-
cestors but not necessarily son of the ruling king;
so 38 6; 1 K 22 260; esp. Zeph 1 8 written at a
time when the reigning king, Josiah, could not have
had a grown-up ‘son’” (Driver, Jer, 224,n.¢). J.
was with two others commanded by Jehoiakim to
arrest Jeremiah and Baruch. :

: Davin Francis Roserts

JERECHU, jer’é-ki, AV Jerechus, jer’é-kus

(1 Esd 5 22). See Jenicuo.


JERED, jé’red (T)3, yeredh, “descent”): A
Judahite, father of Gedor (1 Ch 4 18). See also
JARED.


JEREMAI, jer’é-mi, jer-é-ma'i (27), yrémay,
meaning unknown): One of those who had married
foreign wives (Ezr 10 33). See Jeremias (1 Esd
9 34).


JEREMIAH, jer-é-mi’a ([a] WANN), yirmeyaha,
or [b] shorter form, "A'S", yirmeyah, both differently
explained as “Jeh establishes [so Giesebrecht],
whom Jeh casts,” i.e. possibly, as Gesenius suggests,
“appoints” [A. B. Davidson in HDB, II, 569a], and
“Jeh looseneth” [the womb]; see BDB): The form
(b) is used of Jeremiah the prophet only in Jer 27 1;
28 5.6.10.11.12b.15; 29 1; Ezr 1 1; Dnl 9 2, while
the other is found 116 t in Jer alone. In 1 Esd 1
28.32.47.57; 2 Esd 2 18, EV has “Jeremy,” so AV
in 2 Macc 2.1.5.7; Mt 217; 279; in Mt 16
14, AV has “Jeremias,” but RV in 2 Macc and Mt
has “Jeremiah.” i: :

(1) The prophet. See special article. Of the fol-
lowing, (2), (8) and (4) have form (a) above; the
others the form (0). :

(2) Father of Hamutal (Hamital), the mother of
King Jehoahaz and King Jeboiakim (2 K 23 31;
24 18 || Jer 62 1).

(3) A Rechabite (Jer 36 3). ;

(4) In 1 Ch 12 13 (Heb 14), a Gadite.

(5) In 1 Ch 12 10 (Heb 11), a Gadite. —

(6) In 1 Ch 12 4 (Heb 5), a Benjamite(?) or
Judaean. (4), (5) and (6) all joined David at
Ziklag.


Jeremiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1588


(7) Head of a Manassite family (1 Ch 5 24).

(8) A priest who sealed the covenant with Nehe-
miah (Neh 10 2), probably the same as he of 12 34
who took part in the procession at the dedication
of the walls of Jerus.

(9) A priest who went to Jerus with Zerubbabel
from exile and became head of a priestly family of
that name (Neh 12 1).

Davin Francis RoBerts

JEREMIAH, jer-é-mi’a:

. Name and Person

. Life of Jeremiah

. The Personal Character of Jeremiah

. The Prophecies of Jeremiah

. The Book of Jeremiah

. Authenticity and Integrity of the Book
- Relation to the LXX

LireERATURE


The name of one of the greatest prophets of
Israel. The Heb 377, yirmeyahi, abbreviated
to 717), yirm'yah, signifies either
1. Name ‘“Jeh hurls’ or “Jeh founds.” LXX
and Person reads ‘Iepulas, Termias, and the Vulg
Jeremias. As this name also occurs
not infrequently, the prophet is called ‘the son
of Hilkiah” (1 1), who is, however, not the high
priest mentioned in 2 K 22 and 23, as it is merely
stated that he was “of the priests that were in
Anathoth” in the land of Benjamin. In Anathoth,
now Anda, a small village 13 hours N.E. of Jerus,
lived a class of priests who belonged to a side line,
not to the line of Zadok (cf 1 K 2 26).
J. was called by the Lord to the office of a prophet
while still a youth (1 6) about 20 years of age, in
the 13th year of King Josiah (1 2; 25
2. Life of 3), in the year 627 BC, and was active
Jeremiah in this capacity from this time on to
the destruction of Jerus, 586 BC, under
kings Josiah, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and
Zedekiah. Even after the fall of the capital city
he prophesied in Egypt at least for several years,
so that his work extended over a period of about
50 years in all. At first he probably lived in
Anathoth, and put in his appearance publicly in
Jerus only on the occasion of the great festivals;
later he lived in Jerus, and was there during the
terrible times of the siege and the destruction of the


NTO Crib Gobo


city.

‘Alchough King Josiah was God-fearing and willing
to serve Jeh, and soon inaugurated his reformation
according to the law of Jeh (in the 18th year of his
reign), yet J., at the time when he was called to the
prophetic office, was not left in doubt of the fact
that the catastrophe of the judgment of God over
the city would soon come (1 11 ff); and when,
after a few years, the Book of the Law was found in
the temple (2 K 22 and 23), J. preached ‘the
words of this covenant” to the people in the town
and throughout the land (11 1-8; 17 19-27), and
exhorted to obedience to the Divine command;
but in doing this then and afterward he became the
object of much hostility, esp. in his native city,
Anathoth. Even his own brethren or near rela-
tives entered into a conspiracy against him by de-
claring that he was a dangerous fanatic (12 6).
However, the condition of J. under this pious king
was the most happy in his career, and he lamented
the latter’s untimely death in sad lyrics, which the
author of Ch was able to use (2 Ch 35 25), but
which have not come down to our times.

Much more unfavorable was the prophet’s condi-
tion after the death of Josiah. Jehoahaz-Shallum,
who ruled only 3 months, received the announce-
ment of his sentence from J. (22 10ff). Jehoiakim
(609-598 BC) in turn favored the heathen worship,
and oppressed the people through his love of
luxury and by the erection of grand structures
(Jer 22 13 ff). In addition, his politics were


treacherous. He conspired with Egypt against
his superior, Nebuchadnezzar. Epoch-making was
the 4th year of Jehoiakim, in which, in the battle of
Carchemish, the Chaldaeans gained the upper hand
in Hither Asia, as J. had predicted (46 1-12).
Under Jehoiakim J. delivered his great temple dis-
course (7-9; 10 17-25). The priests for this
reason determined to have the prophet put to
death (ch 26). However, influential elders inter-
ceded for him, and the princes yet showed some
justice. He was, however, abused by the authorities
at the appeal of the priests (ch 20). According to
36 1ff, he was no longer permitted to enter the
place of the temple. For this reason the Lord com-
manded him to collect his prophecies in a book-


- roll, and to havethem read to the people by his


faithful pupil Baruch (ch 36; cf ch 45). The
book fell into the hands of the king, who burned
it. However, J. dictated the book a second time to
Baruch, together with new additions.

Jehoiachin or Coniah (22 24 ff), the son of Je-
hoiakim, after a reign of 3 months, was taken into
captivity to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, together
with a large number of his nobles and the best part
of the people (Jer 24 1; 29 2), as the prophet had
predicted (22 20-30). But conditions did not
Improve under Zedekiah (597-586 BC). | This
king was indeed not as hostile to J. as Jehoiakim
had been; but all the more hostile were the princes
and the generals, who were now in command after
the better class of these had been deported to Baby-
lon. They continually planned rebellion against
Babylon, while J. was compelled to oppose and put
to naught every patriotic agitation of this kind.
Finally, the Bab army came in order to punish
the faithless vassal who had again entered into an
alliance with Egypt. J. earnestly advised sub-
mission, but the king was too weak and too coward-
ly as against his nobles. A long siege resulted,
which caused the direst sufferings im the life of J.
The commanders threw him into a vile prison,
charging him with being a traitor (87 11 ff). The
king, who consulted him secretly, released him from
prison, and put him into the “court of the guard” (387
17 ff), where he could move around freely, and could
again prophesy. Now that the judgment had
come, he could again speak of the hopeful future
(chs 32, 33). Also chs 30 and 31, probably, were
spoken about this time. But as he continued to
preach submission to the people, those in authority
cast him into a slimy cistern, from which the pity
of a courtier, Ebed-melech, delivered him (39
15-18). He again returned to the court of the
guard, where he remained until Jerus was taken.

After the capture of the city, J. was treated with
great consideration by the Babylonians, who knew
that be had spoken in favor of their government
(39 11 ff; 40 1ff). They gave him the choice of
going to Babylon or of remaining in his native land.
He decided for the latter, and went to the governor
Gedaliah, at Mizpah, a man worthy of all confi-
dence. But when this man, after a short time, was
murdered by conscienceless opponents, the Jews
who had been left: in Pal, becoming alarmed and
fearing the vengeance of the Chaldaeans, determined
to emigrate to Egypt. J. advised against this most
earnestly, and threatened the vengeance of Jeh, if
the people should insist upon their undertaking
(42 1 ff). But they insisted and even compelled
the aged prophet to go with them (43 1ff). Their
first goal was Tahpanhes (Daphne), a town in
Lower Egypt. At this place he still continued to
preach the word of God to his fellow-Israelites; of
the latest of his preserved discourses in 43 8-13,
as also the sermon in ch 44, delivered at a somewhat
later time but yet before 570 BC. At that time
J. must have been from 70 to 80 years old. He


1589


at Daphne by the Jews (Jerome, Adv. Jovin, ii,
37; Tertullian, Contra Gnosi., viii; Pseudepiphan,,
De Proph., ch viii; Dorotheus, 146; Isidorus, Ort.
et Obit. Pair., ch xxxviil). However, this report
is not well founded. The same is the case with the
rabbinical tradition, according to which he, in com-
pany with Baruch, was taken from Egypt to Baby-
lon by Nebuchadnezzar, and died there (Sédher
‘Olam Rabba’ 26).
The Book of Jer gives us not only a fuller account
of the life and career of its author than do the books
f of the other prophets, but we also
3. Personal learn more about his own inner and
Character personal life and feelings than we do
of Jeremiah of Isaiah or any other prophet. From
this source we learn that he was, by
nature, gentle and tender in his feelings, and sym-
pathetic. A decided contrast to this is found in
the hard and _unmerciful judgment which it was
his mission to announce. God made him strong
and firm and immovable like iron for his mission
(1 18; 15 20). This contrast between his naturally
warm personal feelings and his strict Divine mis-
sion not rarely appears in the heart-utterances
found in his prophecies. At first he rejoiced when
God spoke to him (15 16); but soon these words
of God were to his heart a source of pain and of
suffering (15 17 ff). He would have preferred not
to utter them; and then they burned in his breast
as a fire (20 7ff; 239). He personally stood in
need of love, and yet was not permitted to marry
(16 1f). He was compelled to forego the pleasures
of youth (15 17). He loved his people as nobody
else, and yet was always compelled to prophesy
evil for it, and seemed to be the enemy of his nation.
This often caused him to despair. The enmity to
which he fell a victim, on account of his declaration
of nothing but the truth, he deeply felt; see his
complaints (9 1 ff; 12 5f; 15 10; 17 14-18; 18
23, and often). In this sad antagonism between his
heart and the commands of the Lord, he would
perhaps wish that God had not spoken to him; he
even cursed the day of his birth (15 10; 20 14-18;
ef Job 3 1ff). Such complaints are to be carefully
distinguished from that which the Lord through His
Spirit communicated to the prophet. God rebukes
him for these complaints, and demands of him to
repent and to trust and obey Him (15 19). This
discipline makes him all the more unconquerable.
Even his bitter denunciations of his enemies (11
20 ff; 15 15, 17 18; 18 21-23) originated in part
in his passionate and deep nature, and show how
eat is the difference between him and that perfect
ufferer, who prayed even for His deadly enemies.
But J. was nevertheless a type of that Suffering
Saviour, more than any of the OT saints. He, as
a priest, prayed for his people, until God forbade
him to do so (7 16; 11 14; 14 11; 18 20). He
was compelled more than all the others to suffer
through the anger of God, which was to afflict his
people. The people themselves also felt that he
meant well to them. A proof of this is seen in the
fact that the rebellious people, who always did the
contrary of what he had commanded them, forced
him, the unwelcome prophet of God, to go along
with them, to Egypt, because they felt that he was
their good genius. 2
What J. was to preach was the judgment upon
Judah. As the reason for this judgment J. every-
where mentioned the apostasy from
4. The Jeh, the idolatry, which was practised
Prophecies on baméth, or the “high places” by
of Jeremiah Judah, as this had been done by Israel.
Many heathenish abuses had found
their way into the life of the people. Outspoken


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


probably died soon after this in Egypt. The | heathenism had been introduced by such men as
church Fathers report that he was stoned to death | King Manasseh, even the sacrifice of children to the


Jeremiah


honor of Baal-Molech in the valley of Hinnom (7
31; 19 5; 32 35), and the worship of “‘the queen
of heaven” (7 18; 44 19). It is true that the
reformation of Josiah swept away the worst of these
abominations. But an inner return to Jeh did not
result from this reformation. For the reason that
the improvement had been more on the surface and
outward, and was done to please the king, J. charges
up to his people all their previous sins, and the guilt
of the pica generation was yet added 6 this
(16 lif). Together with religious insin optity went
the moral corruption of the people, such as dis-
honesty, injustice, oppression of the helpless,
slander, and the like. Compare the accusations
found in & 1ff.7f£.26 ff; 6 7.13; 75.9; 9 26.8;
17 Off; 21 12; 22 13 ff; 23 10; 29 23, etc. Esp.
to the spiritual leaders, the priests and prophets,
are these things charged up.

The judgment which is to come in the near future,
as a, punishment for the sins of the people, is from
the outset declared to be the conquest of the country
through an enemy from abroad. In this way the
heated caldron with the face from the N., in the
vision containing the call of the prophet (1 13 ff),
is to be understood. This power in the N. is not
named until the 4th year of Jehoiakim (ch 25),
where Nebuchadnezzar is definitely designated as
the conqueror. It is often thought, that, in the
earlier years of his career, J. had in mind the
Scythians when he spoke of the enemies from the
N., esp. in chs 4-6. The Scythians (according
to Herodotus i.103 ff) had, probably a few years
before J.’s call to the prophetic office, taken pos-
session of Media, then marched through Asia Minor,
and even forced their way as far as Egypt. They
crossed through Canaan, passing by on their march
from E. to W., near Beth-shean (Scythopolis).
The ravages of this fierce people probably influenced
the language used by J. in his prophecies (cf 4 11 ff;
6 15 ff; 6 3.22 ff). But it is unthinkable that
J. expected nothing more than a plundering and a
booty-seeking expedition of the Scythian nomad
hordes. Chariots, such as are described in 4 13,
the Scythians did not possess. Moreover, it must
not be forgotten that J. from the outset speaks of
a deportation of his people to this foreign land
(3 18; & 19), while an exile of Israel in the country
of the Scythians was out of the question. At all
events from the 4th year of Jehoiakim, J. regards
the Chaldaeans as the enemy who, according to his
former announcement, would come from the N.
It is possible that it was only in the course of time
that he reached a clear conviction as to what nation
was meant by the revelation from God. But, upon
further reflection, he must have felt almost certain
on this subject, esp. as Isaiah (39 6), Micah (4 10),
and, soon after these, Habakkuk had named Baby-
lon as the power that was to carry out the judgment
upon Israel. Other prophets, too, regard the Baby-
lonians as belonging to the northern group of na-
tions (cf Zec 6 8), because they always came from
the N., and because they were the legal successors
of the Assyrians. ~ |

In contrast to optimistic prophets, who had hoped
to remedy matters in Israel (6 14), J. from the
beginning predicted the destruction of the city and
of the sanctuary, as also the end of the Jewish na-
tion and the exile of the people through these
enemies from abroad. According to 25 11; 29 10,
the Bab supremacy (not exactly the exile) wasto con-
tinue for 70 years; and after this, deliverance should
come. Promises to this effect are found only now
and then in the earlier years of the prophet (3 14
fi; 12 14ff; 16 14f). However, during the time
of the siege and afterward, such predictions are


Jeremiah
Jeremy, Ep. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1590


more frequent (cf 23 1 ff; 24 6f; 47 2-7; and in
the “Book of Comfort,” chs 30-33).

_ What characterizes this prophet is the spiritual
inwardness of his religion; the external theocracy
he delivers up to destruction, because its forms were
not animated by God-fearmg sentiments. Ex-
ternal circumcision is of no value without imner
purity of héart. The external temple will be de-
stroyed, because it has become the hiding-place of
sinners. External sacrifices have no value, because
those who offer them are lacking in spirituality,
and this is displeasing to God. The law is abused
and misinterpreted (8 8); the words of the prophets
as a rule do not come from God. Even the Ark of
the Covenant is eventually to make way for a glori-
ous presence of the Lord. The law is to be written
in the hearts of men (31 31 ff). The glories of the
Messianic times the prophet does not describe in
detail, but their spiritual character he repeatedly
describes in the words “Jeh our righteousness”’
(23 6; 33 16). However, we must not overesti-
mate the idealism of J. He believed in a realistic
restoration of the theocracy to a form, Just as the
other prophets (cf chs 31, 32, 38-40).

As far as the form of his prophetic utterances is
concerned, J. is of a poetical nature; but he was not
only a poet. He often speaks in the meter of an
elegy; but he is not bound by this, and readily
passes over into other forms of rhythms and also
at times into prosaic speech, when the contents of
his discourses require it. The somewhat monoto-
nous and elegiac tone, which is in harmony with
his sad message to the people, gives way to more
lively and varied forms of expression, when the
prophet speaks of other and foreign nations. In
doing this he often makes use of the utterances of
earlier prophets.

The first composition of the book is reported in 36
1ff. In the 4th year of Jehoiakim, at the command

of Jeh, he dictated all of the prophe-


5. The cies he had spoken down to this time
Book of to his pupil Baruch, who wrote them
Jeremiah oon a roll. After the destruction of


this book-roll by the king, he would not
be stopped from reproducing the contents again and
making additions to it (86 32). In this we have
the origin of the present Book of Jer. This book,
however, not only received further additions, but
has also been modified. While the discourses may
originally have been arranged chronologically, and
these reached only down to the 4th year of King
Jehoiakim, we find in the book, as it is now, as early
as 21 1ff; 23 1ff; 26 1ff, discourses from the
times of Zedekiah. However, the 2d edition (36
28) contained, no doubt, ch 25, with those addresses
directed against the heathen nations extant at that
time. The lack of order, from a chronological
point of view, in the present book, is attributable
also to the fact that historical accountsor appendices
concerning the career of J. were added to the book
in later times,.e.g. chs 26, 36, 36 and others; and
in these additions are also found older discourses
of the prophet. Beginning with ch 37, the story
of the prophet during the siege of Jerus and after
the destruction of the city is reported, and in con-
nection with this are his words and discourses
belonging to this period.

It is a question whether these pieces, which are
more narrative in character, and which are the prod-
uct of a contemporary, probably Baruch, at one
time constituted a book by themselves, out of which
they were later taken and incorporated in the book
of the prophet, or whether they were inserted by
Baruch. In favor of the first view, it may be urged
that they are not always found at their proper
places chronologically; e.g. ch 26 is a part of the
temple discourse in chs 7-9. However, this ‘Book


of Baruch,”’ which is claimed by some critics to have
existed as a separate book beside that of Jer, would
not furnish a connected biography, and does not
seem to have been written for biographical purposes.
It contains introductions to certain words and
speeches of the prophet and statements of what the
consequences of these had been. Thus it is more
probable that Baruch, at a later time, made supple-
mentary additions to the original book, which the
prophet had dictated without any personal data.
But in this work the prophet himself may have
coéperated. At places, perhaps, the dictation of
the prophet ends in a narrative of Baruch (19 14—
0. 6), or vice versa. Baruch seems to have written
a historical introduction, and then J. dictated the
prophecy (27 1; 18 1; 32 1ff, and others). Of
course, the portions of the book which came from
the pen of Baruch are to be regarded as an authentic
account.
However, critics have denied to J. and his pupil
certain sections of the present book, and they claim
that these belong to a later date.
6. Authen- Among these is 10 1-16, containing a
ticity and warning to those in the exile against
Integrity of idolatry (and related to Isa 40 ff),
the Book which, it is claimed, could not possibly
in this form and fulness be the work of
J. Also 17 19-27 is without reason denied to J.,
upon the ground that he could not have thought of
emphasizing the Sabbath law. He was, however,
no modern idealist, but respected also the Divine
ordinances (cf 11 1-8). Then ch 26 is rejected by
some, while others attack esp. vs 12-14 and 27-
38; but in both cases without reason. On the
other hand, we admit that ver 25 and also vs 13f
are later additions. The words, ‘all that is written
in this book, which J. hath prophesied against all
the nations,” are probably a superscription, which
has found its way into the text. In ver 26 the
words, “and the king of Sheshach shall drink after
them,” are likewise considered spurious. Sheshach
is rightly regarded here, as in 61 41, asa cipher for
“Babel,” but the use of ’Ai-bash (a cipher in which
the order of the letters of the Heb alphabet is re-
versed, M for &, W for 3, etc, hence SHtSHaKH=
BaBHeL, see the comms.) does not prove spurious-
ness. The sentence is not found inthe LXX. The
attacks made on chs 30 and 31 are of little moment.
33 14-26 is not found in the LXX, and its contents,
too, belong to the passages in Jer that are most
vigorously attacked. Critics regard J. as too spirit-
ual to have perpetnated the Levitical priesthood. In
ch 39, vs 1.2.4-10 are evidently additions that do
not belong to this place. The remaining portion can
stand. Among the discourses against the nations,
chs 46-61, those in 46 1-12, spoken immediately pre-
ceding the battle of Carchemish, cannot be shown
to be unauthentic; even vs 13-28 are also genuine.
The fact, however, is that the text has suffered very
much. Nor are there any satisfactory reasons
against the prophecy in chs 47-49, if we assume
that J. reasserted some of his utterances against
the heathen nations that did not seem to have been
entirely fulfilled. Chs 60 and 61, the discourses
against Babylon, have the distinct impress of J.
This impression is stronger than the doubts, which,
however, are not without weight. The events in
61 59 ff, which are not to be called into question,
presuppose longer addresses of J. against Babylon.
The possibility, however, remains that the editing
of these utterances as found in the present book
dates from the time after 586 BC. That any in-
fluence of Deutero-Isaiah or later authors can be
traced in Jer cannot be shown with any certainty.
Ch 52 was written neither by Jeremiah nor for his
book, but is taken from the Books of K, and is found
there almost verbatim (2 K 24, 25).


1591


A special probiem is furnished by the relation of the
text of Jer to the Alexandrian version of the Seventy
(LXX). Not anly does the Heh form of
7, Relation the hook differ from the Gr materially,
to the LXX much more than this is the case in other
Oo the books of the OT, but the arrangement, too,
is a different one. The oracle concerning
the heathen nations (chs 46-51) is in the LXX found in
the middle of ch 25, and that, too, in an altogether differ-
ent order (viz. 49 35 f.46; 60; 51; 47 1-7; 49 7-22;
49 1-5.28-33.23-27; 48). In addition, the readings
throughout the bock in many cases are divergent, the
text in the LXX heing in general shorter and more com-
pact. The Gr text has ahout 2,700 Heb wards less than
ule Authenie Heb text, and is thus ahout one-eighth
orter.

As far as the insertion of the addresses against the
heathen nations in ch 29 is concerned, the Gr order is
certainly not more original than is the Heb. It rather
tears apart, awkwardly, what is united in ch 25, and has
probahly been caused by a misunderstanding. The
words of 25 13 were regarded as a hint that here the
discourses against the heathen were to follaw. Then,
too, the order of these discourses in the Gr text is less
natural than the one in Heb. In regard to the readings
of the text, it has been thought that the text of the LXX
deserves the preference on account of its brevity, and
that the Heh text had been increased hy additions.
However, in general, the Gr version is very free, and often
is done without an understanding of the subject; and
there are reasons to believe that the translator shortened
the text, when he thought the style of Jeremiah too
heavy. Then, too, where he met with repetitions, he
probahiy would omit; or did so when he found trouble
with the matter or the language. This does not deny
that his tr in many places may he correct, and that addi-
tions may have heen made to the Heb text.

LiteratuRE.—Calvin, Praelectiones in Librum FPro-
phetiae Jer ef Thren, Geneva, 1653; Sebastian Schmidt,
Commentarii in libr. prophet. Jer, Argent, 1685. _Modern
comm. hy Hitzig, Ewald, Graf, Nagelsbach, Keil; also
Cheyne (Pulpit Comm.), Peake, Duhm, and von Orelli.

C. von ORELLI

JEREMIAH, EPISTLE OF. See JEREmMy, THE


EPIstLe oF.


JEREMIAH, THE LAMENTATIONS OF. See
LAMENTATIONS.


JEREMIAS, jer-é-mi'as (Iepeplas, Ieremias):

(1) Named among the sons of Baani as one of
those who had married foreign wives (1 Esd 9 34).
In Ezr 10 33 we find, ‘“Jeremai’’ among the sons
of Hashum. In 1 Esd it should come in 9 33
before Manasses.

(2) See Jenremrau (general art.).


JEREMIEL, jer-é-mi’el (Lat Hieremihel, al.
Jeremiel, “El hurls” or ‘El appoints”): AVm and
RV in 2 Esd 4 36 for AV “Uriel.’’ He is here
called the “archangel”? who answers the questions
raised by the souls of the righteous dead. He is
perhaps identical with Ramiel of Apoc Bar or
Remiel of Eth Enoch.


.JEREMOTH, jer’é-moth ({e] M27, and [6]
mwa), yremoth, [c] NVA, yrimoth, meaning un-
known): Of the following (1) has form (6), (5) the
form (c), the rest (a).

(1) In 1 Ch 7 8 (AV “Jerimoth’’), and

(2) In 1 Ch 8 14, Benjamites. Cf Jerowam, (2).

(3) In 1 Ch 23 23, and (4) in 1 Ch 26 22=
‘Jerimoth,’’ 24 30; heads of Levitical houses.

(5) A Naphtalite, one of David’s tribal princes
(1 Ch 27 19); AV ‘“Jerimoth.”

(6) (7) (8) Men who had married foreign wives.
In Ezr 10 26 (=“‘Hieremoth,” 1 Esd 9 27); ver
27 (=“Jarimoth,” 1 Esd 9 28); ver 29 (=“Hiere-
moth,” 1 Esd 9 30); the Keré of the last is N27},
wramoth, ‘and Ramoth”; so RVm, AV.


AVID FRANCIS ROBERTS
JEREMY, jer’e-mi. See Jenmmian (general art.).
JEREMY, jer’e-mi, THE EPISTLE OF (Em-
erody ‘Tepeplov, Epistolé Ieremiou) :


1. Name
2. Canonicity and Position
3. Contents


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jeremiah
Jeremy, Ep. of


4. Original Language

5. aeeery ate and Aim

6. Text and Verslons
Liveraturs


In MSS BA the title is simply “An Epistle of


Jeremiah.” But in B, etc, there is a superscription
introducing the letter: “Copy of a letter
1. Name which Jeremiah sent to the captives


about to be Jed to Babylon by [Pesh
adds Nebuchadnezzar] the king of the Babylonians,
to make known to them what had been commanded
him by God.”” What follows is a satirical exposure
of the folly of idolatry, and not a letter. The idea
of introducing this as a letter from Jeremiah was
probably suggested by Jer 29 1 ff.
The early Gr Fathers were on the whole favorably
disposed toward this tract, reckoning it to be a


part of the Canon. It is therefore
2. Canon- included in the lists of canonical
icity and writings of Origen, Epiphanius, Cyril
Position of Jerus and Athanasius, and it was


so authoritatively recognized by the
Council of Laodicea (860 AD).


In most Gr MSS of the LXX (BA Codd. March, Chisl,
in the Syr Hex), it follows Lam as an independent piece,
closing the supposed writings of Jeremiah. In the best-
known printed edd of the LXX (Tischendorf, Swete, etc),
the order is Jer, Bar, Lam, Ep. Jer. In Fritzsche, Lid,
Apoc VT Graece, Ep. Jer stands between Bar and Tob.
But in Lat MSS, including those of the Vulg, it is ap-

ended to Bar, of which it forms ch 6, though it really
has nothing to do with that hock. This last is the case
with Protestant edd (EV, etc) of the Apoc, a more intel-
ligible arrangement, as Jer and Lam do not occur in the
Apoc, and the Bib. Baruch was Jeremiah’s amanuensis.


In the so-called letter (see 1, above) the author
shows the absurdity and wickedness of heathen
worship. The Jews, for their sins, will
8. Contents be removed to Babylon, where they
will remain 7 gencrations. In that
land they will be tempted to worship the gods of the
people. The writer's aim is ostensibly to warn
them beforehand by showing how helpless and use-
less the idols worshipped are, and how immoral as
well as silly the rites of the Bab religion are. For
similar polemics against idolatry, see Isa 44 9-19
(which in its earnestness resembles the Ep. Jer
closely); Jer 10 3-9; Ps 115 4-8; 136 15-18;
Wisd 13 10-19; 15 13-17.
That the Ep. Jer was composed in Gr is the opin-
jon of practically all scholars. There are no marks
of translation; the Gr is on the whole
4, Original good, and abounds in such rhetorical


Language terms as characterized the Gr of
Northern Egypt about the beginning
of our era. There is no trace of a Heb original,


though Origen has been mistakenly understood
to say there was one in his day (see Schiirer,
GJV, III, 467). Romanist writers defend a Heb
original, and point to some Hebraisms (ver 44
and the use of the fut. for the past), but these
can be matched in admittedly Hellenistic Gr
writings.
The writer was almost certainly a resident in
Alexandria toward the close of the last cent. BC.
The Gr of the book, the references to
5. Author- Egyp religion (ver 19, where the Feast
ship, Date of Lights at Sais—Herod. ii.62—is
,and Aim referred to), and the allusion to the
Ep. Jer in 2 Macc 2 2, denied by
Schtirer, etc, make the above conclision very
probable. The author had in mind the dangers
to the religion of his fellow-countrymen presented
by the fascinating forms of idolatry existing at
Alexandria. Certainly Jeremiah is not the author,
for the book was written in Gr and never formed
part of the Heb Canon. Besides, the treatment is
far below the level of the genuine writings of that
prophet.


Jeriah
Jeroboam


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1592


(1) The Greek.—This ep. occurs in the principal MSS
of the LXX uncials (BA QI contain 7b—24a, etc) and
cursives (except 70, 96, 229).


6. Text (2) The Syriac_—P follows the Gr, but

and very freely. The Syr H follows the text

‘ of B closely, often at the expense of Syr
Versions idioms.

(3) The Latin.—The Vulg is made direct

from the Gr. There is a different Lat VS published by


Sabatier in his Bib. Sacr. Lat Versiones Antiquas, II, 734 ff.
It is freer than the Vulg.

(4) There are also Arabic (following A), Coptic (ed Quat-
remére, 1810), and Ethiopic (cd Dilimann, 1894) versions.

Lrireratrore.—See under Arocrypaa for Comm. and
editions. But note in addition to the lit. mentioned in
the art. the folowing: Reusch, Erkldr. des B. Baruch,
1853; Daubanton, ‘Het Apok boek 'EmaroAy "lepepiov,”
Theol. Studien, 1888, 126-38.

- T. Wirron Davies

JERIAH, jéri’a CN"), yrriyaha, “founded of
Jeh”): In 1 Ch 23 19; 24 23=“Jerijah” (P,
yriyah), 26 31, head of a Levitical house: called
chief of the Hebronites in 24 23 (cf ver 30).


JERIBAI, jer’i-bi, jer-i-ba’? CI“, yribhay,
meaning uncertain): One of David’s mighty men of
the armies (1 Ch 11 46); one of the names not
found in the list in 2 S 23 24-29a.,


JERICHO, jer’i-ko (the word occurs in two forms.
In the Pent, in 2 K 25 5 and in Ezr, Neh, Ch it is
written IW), yréhd; WI, yrihé, elsewhere):
In 1 K 16 34 the final letter is 1, hé, instead of 1,
waw. The termination wéw is thought to preserve
the peculiarities of the old Can. dialect. In the
LXX. we have the indeclinable form, *Iep:xé, Teri-
ché (Swete has the form Jereiché as well), both with
and without the fem. art.; in the NT ‘Iepe xo,
Tereiché, once with the fem. art. The Arab. is
er-Riha. According to Dt 32 49 it stood opposite
Nebo, while in 34 3 it is called a city grove of
palm trees. It was surrounded with a wall (Josh
2 15), and provided with a gate which was closed
at night (2 5), and was ruled over by aking. When
captured, vessels of brass and iron, large quantities
of silver and gold, and “‘a goodly Babylonish gar-
ment”? were found in it (7 21). It was on the
western side of the Jordan, not far from the camp of
Israel at Shittim, before crossing the river (2 1).
The city was on the “‘plains’’ (4 13), but so close
to “the mountain” on the W. (probably the cliffs
of Quarantania, the traditional scene of Christ's
temptation) that it was within easy reach of the
spies, protected by Rahab. It was in the lot of
Benjamin (18 21), the border of which ascended
to the “‘slope [EV “‘side’’] of J. ou the N.” (18 12).
Authorities are generally agreed in locating the
ancient city at Tel es-Sultan, a mile and a half N.W.
of modern J. Here there is a mound 1,200 ft. long
and 50 ft. in height supporting 4 smaller mounds,
the highest of which is 90 ft. above the base of the
main mound.


Site of Ancient Jericho.


The geological situation (see Jornpan Vater) sheds
great light upon the capture of the city by Joshua (Josh
6). Ifthe city was built as we suppose it to have been,
upon the unconsolidated sedimentary, deposits which
accumulated to a great depth in the Jordao valley during
the enlargement of the Dead Sea, which took place in


Pleistocene (or glacial) times, the sudden falling of the
walls becomes easily credible to anyone who believes in
the personality of God and in His power either to fore-
know the future or to direct at His will the secondary
causes with which man has to deal in Nature. The nar-
rative does not state that the blowing of the rams’ horns of
themselves effected the falling of the walls. It was simply
said that at a specified juncture on the 7th day the walis
would fall, and that they actually fell at that juncture,
The miracle may, therefore, be regarded as either that of
prophecy, in which the Creator by foretelling the course
of things to Joshua, secured the junction of Divine and
human activities which constitutes a true miracle, or we
may regard the movements which brought down the
walls to be the result of direct Divine action, such as is
exerted by man when he produces an explosion of dyna-
mite at a particular time and place. The phenomena
are just such as occurred in the earthquake of San Fran-
cisco in 1906, where, according to the report of the
scientific commission appointed by the state, ‘the most
violent destruction of buildings was on the made ground.
This ground seems to have behaved during the earth-
quake very much in the same way as jelly in a bowl, or
as a semi-liquid in atank.’’ Santa Rosa, situated on the
valley floor, ‘underlain to a considerable depth by loose
or slightly coherent geological formations, .... 20
miles from the rift, was the most severely shaken town
in the state and suffered the greatest disaster relatively
to its population and extent” (Report, 13 and15). Thus
an earthquake, such as is easily provided for along the
margin of this great Jordan crevasse, would produce
exactly the phenomena here described, and its occurrence
at the time and place foretold to Joshua constitutes it
@ miracle of the first magnitude.


Notwithstanding the curse pronounced in Josh
6 26 AV, prophesying that whosoever should rebuild
the city ‘‘he shall lay the foundations thereof in his
firstborn,” it was rebuilt (1 K 16 34) by Hiel the
Bethelite in the days of Ahab. The curse was lit-
erally fulfilled. Still David’s messengers are said
to have “tarried at Jericho” in his day (2 S 10 5;
1 Ch 19 5). In Elisha’s time (2 K 2 5) there
was a school of prophets there, while several other
references to the city occur in the OT and the Apoe
(2 Ch 28 15, where it is called “‘the city of palm-
trees’; 2 K 25 5; Jer 39 5; Ezr 2 34; Neh 3 2;
7 36; 1 Macc 9 50). Jos describes it and the
fertile plain surrounding it, in glowing terms. In
the time of Christ, it was an important place yield-
ing a large revenue to the royal family. But the
eity which Herod rebuilt was on a higher elevation,
at the base of the western mountain, probably at
Beit Jubr, where there are the ruins of a small fort.
Jericho was the place of rendezvous for Galilean
pilgrims desiring to avoid Samaria, both in going to
and in departing from Jerus, and it has been visited
at all times by thousands of pilgrims, who go down
from Jerus to bathe in the Jordan. The road lead-
ing from Jerus to Jericho is still infested by robbers
who hide in the rocky caverns adjoining it, aud ap-
pear without warniug from the tributary gorges of
the wadies which dissect the mountain wall. At
the present time Jericho and the region about is
occupied only by a few hundred miserable inhabit-
auts, deteriorated by the torrid climate which pre-
vails at the low level about the head of the Dead
Sea. But the present barrenness of the region is
largely due to the destruction of the aqueducts
which formerly distributed over the plain the
waters brought down through the wadies which
descend from the mountains of Judaea. The ruins
of many of these are silent witnesses of the cause of
jts decay. Twelve aqueducts at various levels
formerly branched from the Wdédy Kelt, irrigating
the plain both N. and S. Remains of Rom masonry
arefound iu these. In the Middle Ages they were so
repaired that an abundance and variety of crops were
raised, including wheat, barley, millet, figs, grapes
and sugar cane. See further PALEsTINE (RECENT
EXPLORATION). Grorcr FREDERICK WRIGHT


JERIEL, j@'ri-el, jer’i-cl ON, yrVal, “founded
of God”’; ef JertaH): A chief of Issachar (1 Ch 7 2).


JERIJAH, jé-ri’ja (1 Ch 26 31). See Junran.


1593


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jeriah
Jeroboam


Se eee ea


JERIMOTH, jer’i-moth (see Jzremora, [c]):
(1) A Benjamite (1 Ch 7 7).
(2) A Benjamite who joined David at Ziklag, or
perhaps a Judaean (1 Ch 12 5 [Heb 6]).
(3) In 1 Ch 24 30=Juremorn, (4) (q.v.).
&) A Levite musician in David’s time (1 Ch


B 4).

(5) Son of David and father of Mahalath, Reho-
boam’s wife (2 Ch 11 18). He is not mentioned
(2 8 3 2-5; 6 14-16; 1 Ch 3 1-9; 14 4-7) among
the sons of David’s wives, so Curtis (Ch, 369) thinks
that he was either the son of a concubine, or possibly
the name is a corruption of “Ithream” aym,
yithram, 1 Ch 3 8).

(6) A Levite overseer in Hezekiah’s time (2 Ch
31 18). Davin Francis RosBerts


2


JERIOTH, jer'i-oth, jer’i-dth (MIN, yrt'ath,
“Ttent-] curtains”): In 1 Ch 2 18, where MT is
corrupt, Kittel in his comm. and in Bib. Heb reads
“Caleb begat [children] of Azubah his wife, Jerioth.”
Wellhausen (De Gent. et Fam. Jud., 33) reads,
“Caleb begat [children] of Azubah his wife, the
daughter of Jerioth.’”’ According to EV, Caleb had
two wives, but the context does not bear this out.
J. H. Michaelis regarded J. as another name for Azu-
bah. See Curtis, Comm. on Ch, 92.


JEROBOAM, jer-é-bi’am (O72, yarobh'am;
LXX ‘IepoBodp, Hierobodm, usually assumed to
have been derived from 1" and DY, and signifying
“the people contend,” or, ‘‘he pleads the people’s
cause’): The name was borne by two kings of Israel.

(1) Jeroboam I, son of Nebat, an Ephraimite,
and of Zeruah, a widow (1 K 11 26-40; 12—14 20).
He was the first king of Israel after the disruption of
the kingdom, and he reigned 22 years (937-915 BC).

The history of J. is contained in 1 K 11 26-40;
12 1—14 20; 2 Ch 10 1—11 4; 11 14-16; 12 15;

13 3-20, and in an insertion in the
1. Sources LXX after 1 K 12 24(a-z). This in-

sertion covers about the same ground
as the MT, and the LXX elsewhere, with some
additions and variations. The fact that it calls
J.’s mother a pérné (harlot), and his wife the Egyp
princess Ano (cf 1 K 11); that J. is punished by the
death of his son before he has done any wrong; that
the episode with the prophet’s mantle does not
occur until the meeting at Shechem; that J. is not
proclaimed king at.all—all this proves the passage
inferior to the MT. No doubt it is a fragment of
some historical work, which, after the manner of the
later Midr, has combined history and tradition,
making rather free use of the historical kernel.

J. as a highly gifted and valorous young
Ephraimite, comes to the notiee of Solomon early

in his reign (1 K 11 28; ef 9 15.24).
2. His Rise Having noticed his ability, the king
and Revolt made ie overseer of the fortifica-

tions and public work at Jerus, and
placed him over the levy from the house of Joseph.
The faet that the latter term may stand for the
whole of the ten tribes (cf Am 5 6; 6 6; Ob ver
18) indicates the importance of the position, which,
however, he used to plot against the king. No
doubt he had the support of the people in his designs.
Prejudices of long standing (28 19 40f; 20f)
were augmented when Israelitish interests were
made subservient to Judah and to the king, while
enforced labor and burdensome taxation filled the
people’s hearts with bitterness and jealousy. J.,
the son of a widow, would be the first to feel the gall
of oppression and to give voice to the suffering of
the people. Im addition, he had the approval of
the prophet Ahijah of the old sanetuary of Shiloh,
who, by tearing his new mantle into twelve pieces
and giving ten of them to J., informed him that he


was to become king of the ten tribes. Jos says
(Ant, VIII, vii, 8) that J. was elevated by the words
of the prophet, ‘‘and being a young man of warm
temper, and ambitious of greatness, he could not
be quiet,” but tried to get the government into his
hands at once. For the time, the plot failed, and
J. fled to Egypt where he was recetved and kindly
treated by Shishak, the successor to the father-in-

law of Solomon.
The genial and imposing personality of Solomon
had been able to stem the tide of discontent ex-
cited by his oppressive régime, which at


3. The his death burst all restraints. Never-
Revolt of theless, the northern tribes, at a popu-
the Ten lar assembly held at Shechem, solemnly
Tribes promised to serve Rehoboam, the son


of Solomon, who had already been pro-
claimed king at Jerus, on condition that he would
lighten the burdens that so unjustly rested upon
them. Instead of reeetving the magna charia which
they expected, the king, in a spirit of despotism,
gave them a rough answer, and Jos says “‘the people
were struck by his words, as it were, by an iron
hammer” (Ant, VIII, viii, 3). But despotism lost
the day. The rough answer of the king was met
by the Marseillaise of the people:
‘What portion have we in David ?
Neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse:
To your tents, O Israel:
Now see to thine own house, David" (1 K 12 16).
Seeing the turn affairs had taken, but still unwill-
ing to make any concessions, Rehoboam sent
Adoram, who had been over the levy for many
years (1 K 6 14; 12 18), and who no doubt had
quelled dissatisfaction before, to force the people
to submission, possibly by the very methods he had
threatened to employ (1 K 12 14). However, the
attempt failed. The aged Adoram was stoned to
death, while Rehoboam was obliged to flee ignomini-
ously back to Jerus, king only of Judah (1 K 12
20). Thus the great work of David for a united
kingdom was shattered by inferiors, who put per-
sonal ambitions above great ideals.
As soon as J. heard that Solomon was dead, he
returned from his forced exile in Egypt and took
up his residence in his native town,
4, The Zeredah, in the hill country of Ephraim
Election (LXX 1 K 12 20ff). The northern
tribes, having rejected the house of
David, now turned to the leader, and perhaps insti-
gator of the revolution. Jeroboam was sent for
and raised to the throne by the choice and approval
of the popular assembly. Divinely set apart for
his task, and having the approval of the people,
J. nevertheless failed to rise to the greatness of his
opportunities, and his kingdom degenerated into
a mere military monarchy, never stronger than the
ruler who chanced to occupy the throne. In trying
to avoid the Scylla that threatened its freedom and
faith (1 K 11 33), the nation steered into the
Charybdis of revolution and anarehy in which it
finally perished.
Immediately upon his aceession, J. fortified
Shechem, the largest city in Central Israel, and
made it his eapital. Later he fortified
5. Political Penuel inthe E. Jordan country. Ac-
Events eording to 1 K 14 17, Tirzah was the
capital during the latter part of his
reign. About J.’s external relations very little is
known beyond the fact that there was war between
him and Rehoboam constantly (1 K 14 30). In
2 Ch 13 2-20 we read of an inglorious war with
Abijah of Judah. When Shishak invaded Judah
(1 K 14 25f), he did not spare Israel, as appears
from his inscription on the temple at Karnak, where
a list of the towns captured by him is given. These
belong to Northern Israel as well as to Judah,


Jeroboam
Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1594


showing that Shishak exacted tribute there, even
if he used violence only in Judah. The fact that
J. successfully managed a revolution but failed to
establish a dynasty shows that his strength lay
in the power of his personality more than in the

soundness of his principles.
Despite the success of the revolution politically,
J. descried in the halo surrounding the temple and
its ritual a danger which threatened


6. His the permanency of his kingdom. He
Religious _justifiably dreaded a reaction in favor
Policy of the house of David, should the


people make repeated religious pil-
grimages to Jerus after the first passion of the rebel-
lion had spent itself. He therefore resolved to
establish national sanctuaries in Israel. Accord-
ingly, he fixed on Bethel, which from time imme-
morial was one of the chief sanctuaries of the land
(Gen 28 19; 35 1; Hos 12 4), and Dan, also a
holy place since the conquest, as the chief centers
of worship for Israel. J. now made “two calves
of gold” as symbols of the strength and creative
power of Jeh, and set them up in the sanctuaries
at Bethel and Dan, where altars and other sacred
objects already existed. It appears that many of
the priests still in the land were opposed to his
image-worship (2 Ch 11 13 ff). Accordingly, he
found it necessary to institute a new, non-Levitical
priesthood (1 K 13 33). A new and popular festi-
val on the model of the feasts at Jerus was also
established. J.’s policy might have been considered
as a clever political move, had it not contained the
dangerous appeal to the lower instincts of the
masses, that led them into the immoralities of
heathenism and hastened the destruction of the
nation. J. sacrificed the higher interests of reli-
gion to politics. This was the “‘sin of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin”
(1 K 12 30; 16 26).
It may be that many of the prophets sanctioned
J.’s religious policy. Whatever the attitude of the
majority may have been, there was
7. Hostility no doubt a party who strenuously
of the opposed the image-worship.
Prophets (1) The anonymous prophet.—On
the very day on which J. inaugurated
the worship at the sanctuary at Bethel ‘a man of
God out of Judah” appeared at Bethel and pub-
licly denounced the service. The import of his
message was that the royal altar should some day
be desecrated by a ruler from the house of David.
The prophet was saved from the wrath of the king
only by a miracle. ‘‘The altar also was rent, and
the ashes poured out from the altar.” This narra-
tive of 1 K 18 is usually assumed to belong to a
later time, but whatever the date of compilation,
the general historicity of the account is little affected


It.

ey The prophet Ahijah.—At a later date, when
J. had realized his ambition, but not the ideal which
the prophet had set before him, Ahijah predicted
the consequences of his evil policy. J.’s eldest
son had fallen sick. He thought of Ahijah, now
old and blind, and sent the queen in disguise to
learn the issue of the sickness. The prophet bade
her to announce to J. that the house of J. should be
extirpated root and branch; that the people whom
be had seduced to idolatry should be uprooted from
the land and transported beyond the river; and,
severest of all, that her son should die.
8. His J. died in the 22d year of his reign,
Death having “bequeathed to posterity the
reputation of an apostate and a suc-

cession of endless revolutions.”

S. K. Mosrman

(2) Jeroboam II (2 K 14 23-29), son of Joash
and 13th king of Israel; 4th sovereign of the dy-


nasty of Jehu. He reigned 41 years. His accession

may be placed c 798 BC (some date lower).
J. came into power on the crest of the wave of
prosperity that followed the crushing of the su-
premacy of Damascus by his father.


1. His By his great victory at Aphek, followed
Warlike by others, Joash had regained the ter-
Policy ritory lost to Israel in the reigns of Jehu


and Jehoahaz (2 K 13 17.25). ‘This
satisfied Joash, or his death prevented further bostili-
ties. J., however, then a young man, resolved on a
war of retaliation against Damascus, and on further
conquests. The condition of the eastern world
favored his projects, for Assyria was at the time
engaged, under Shalmaneser IJI and Assurdan III,
in a life-and-death struggle with Armenia. Syria
being weakened, J. determined on a bold attempt to
conquer and annex the whole kingdom of which
Damascus was the capital. The steps of the cam-
paign by which this was accomplished are unknown
to us. The result only is recorded, that not only
the intermediate territory fell into J.’s hands, but
that Damascus itself was captured (2 K 14 28).
Hamath was taken, and thus were restored the
eastern boundaries of the kingdom, as they were in
the time of David (1 Ch 13 5). From the time of
Joshua “the entrance of Hamath’’ (Josh 13 5), a
narrow pass leading into the valley of the Lebanons,
had been the accepted northern boundary of the
promised land. This involved the subjection of
Moab and Ammon, probably already tributaries
of Damascus.
J.’s long reign of over 40 years gave time for the
collected tribute of this greatly increased territory
to flow into the coffers of Samaria, and
2. New the exactions would be ruthlessly en-
Social forced. The prophet Amos, a con-
Conditions temporary of J. in his later years,
dwells on the cruelties inflicted on the
trans-Jordanic tribes by Hazael, who ‘‘threshed
Gilead with threshing instruments of iron’? (Am
13). All this would be remembered now, and
wealth to which the Northern Kingdom had been
unaccustomed flowed into its treasuries. The
hovels of unburned brick in which the citizens had
lived were replaced by ‘houses of hewn stone’
(Am 5 11). The ivory house which Ahab built
in Samaria (1 K 22 39; decorations only are
meant) was imitated, and there were many “great
houses” (Am 3 15). The sovereign had both a
winter and a summer palace. The description of
a banqueting scene within one of these palatial
abodes is lifelike in its portraiture. The guests
stretched themselves upon the silken cushions of the
couches, eating the flesh of lambs and stall-fed
calves, drinking wine from huge bowls, singing idle
songs to the sound of viols, themselves perfumed and
anointed with oil (Am 6 4-6). Meanwhile, they
were not grieved for the affliction of Joseph, and
cared nothing for the wrongdoing of which the
country was full. Side by side with this luxury,
the poor of the land were in the utmost distress,
A case in which a man was sold into slavery for the
price of a pair of shoes seems to have come to the
prophet’s knowledge, and is twice referred to by
him (Am 2 6; 8 6).
_ With all this, and as part of the social organiza-
tion, religion of a kind flourished. Ritual took the
place of righteousness; and in a


8. Growth memorable passage, Amos denounces
of Cere- the substitution of the one for the
monial other (Am 6 21 ff). The worship
Worship took place in the sanctuaries of the


golden calves, where the votaries
prostrated themselves before the altar clothed in
garments taken in cruel pledge, and drank sacri-
ficial wine bought with the money of those who were


1595


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jeroboam
Jerusalem


fined for non-attendance there (Am 2 8). There
were subsidiary temples and altars at Gilgal and
Beersheba (Am 4 4; 5 5; 8 14). Both of these
places had associations with the early history of the
nation, and would be attended by worshippers from
Judah as well as from Israel.
Toward the close of his reign, it would appear
that J. had determined upon adding greater splendor
and dignity to the central shrine, in
4, Mission correspondence with the increased
of Amos wealth of the nation. Amos, about
the same time, received a commission
to go to Bethel and testify against the whole pro-
ceedings there. He was to pronounce that these
sanctuaries should be laid waste, and that Jeh would
raise the sword against the house of J. (Am 7 9).
On hearing his denunciation, made probably as he
stood beside the altar, Amaziah, the priest of Bethel,
sent a messenger to the king at Samaria, to tell him
of the ‘‘conspiracy”’ of Amos, and that the land was
not able to bear all his words. The messenger
bore the report that Amos had declared ‘J. shall
die by the sword,” which Amos had not done.
When the messenger had gone, priest and prophet
had a heated controversy, and new threatenings
were uttered (Am 7 10-17).
The large extension of territory acquired for
Israel by J. is declared to have been the realization
of a prophecy uttered earlier by Jonah,
5. Prophecy the son of Amittai (2 K 14 25)—


of Jonah the same whose mission to Nineveh
forms the subject of the Book of Jon
(1 1). tis also indicated that the relief which had


now come was the only alternative to the utter ex-
tinction of Israel. But Jeh sent Israel a ‘‘saviour”’
(2 K 13 5), associated by some with the Assyr
king Ramman-nirari III, who crushed’ Damascus,
and left Syria an easy prey, first to Jehoash, then
to J. (see JenoasH), but whom the historian seems
to connect with J. himself (2 K 14 26.27).

J. was succeeded on his death by his weak son
Zechariah (ver 29). W. Saaw CaupEecorr


JEROHAM, jéro’ham (00, yrdham, ‘may
he be compassionate!’’):

(1) An Ephraimite, the father of Elkanah, and

randfather of Samuel (1811; 1 Ch 6 27.34
[Heb 12.19]): Jerahmeel is the name in LXX, B, in
1 S and in LXX, L+MSS, in I Ch.

(2) A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 27), apparently=
Jeremorts, (2) (cf ver 14), and probably the same as
he of 1 Ch 9 8.

(3) Ancestor of a priest in Jerus (1 Ch 9 12=
Neh 11 12). ‘

(4) A man of Gedor, father of two of David’s
Benjamite recruits at Ziklag, though Gedor might
be a town in Southern Judah (1 Ch 12 7 [Heb 8)]).

(5) Father of Azarel, David’s tribal chief over
Dan (1 Ch 27 22). 3

(6) Father of Azariah, one of the captains who
supported Jehoiada in overthrowing Queen Atha-
liah (2 Ch 23 1). Davin Francis Rosperts


JERUBBAAL, jer-u-ba’al, jé-rub’i-al O73,
ytrubba‘al, “let Baal contend’’): The name given
to Gideon by his father, Joash, and the people in
recognition of his destruction of the altar of Baal
at Ophrah (Jgs 6 32). For this name the form
“Jerubbesheth” (2 S 11 21) was substituted after
the analogy of “Ishbosheth” and “Mephibosheth,”
in which bosheth, the Heb word for “shame,” dis-
placed the word ba‘al, no doubt because the name
resembled one given in honor of Baal. See G1pEoNn.


JERUBBESHETH, jer-ub-bé’sheth, jé-rub’é-
sheth (NWA, y'rubbesheth, sce JERUBBAAL for


meaning): It is found once (28 11 21) for Jz-
RUBBAAL.


The word nua, bésheth, ‘shameful thing,’ was sub-
stituted by later editors of the text for $9, ba‘al,


“lord,” in the text of Jer 3 24; Hos 9 10; in2 8 2 8,
etc, we find Ish-bosheth=Eshhaal (Ishbaal) in I Ch 8
33; 9 39. The reasou for this was reluctance to pro-
nounce the word Ba'‘al, which had by their time been
assoclated with Canaanitic forms of worship. In 2S 11
21 LXX, Lue, has '‘Jerohoal,'"’ which LXX, B, has cor-
rupted to Jeroboam.”’ ERIBBAAL; MEPHIBOSHETH;
and see GB, Intro, 400ff. Fora NT case cf Rom 11 4
and see Sanday and Headlam ad loc. See JerusBaaL.


Davin Francis Roperts

JERUEL, jé-r60'el, jer’dd-el ONT, yri’el,
“founded by El’’): Jahaziel prophesied that King
Jehoshaphat should meet the hordes of Moabites
and Ammonites, after they had come up by the
“ascent of Ziz,” “at the end of the valley [i.e. wady),
before the wilderness of Jeruel’? (2 Ch 20 16).
The particular part of the wilderness intended, is
unknown. Cheyne (#B) thinks this may be an error
for the Jezreel of Judah, mentioned in Josh 15 56,
etc. See JEzREEL.


JERUSALEM, je-rd0’sa-lem:
I. Toe Name
1. In Cuneiform
2. In Hebrew
3. In Greek and Latin
4. The Meaning of Jerusalem
5. Other Names
II. Gworogy, CLIMATE AND SPRINGS
1. Geology
2. Climate and Rainfall
3. The Natural Springs
III. Tae Natura. Sits
1. The Mountains Around
2. The Valleys
3. The Hills
IV. Gunerau Toroorarny or JeErusauEM
1. Description of Josephus
2. Summary of the Names of the Five Hills
3. The Akra
4. The Lower City
5. City of David and Zion
V. Excavations aNnp ANTIQUITIES
Robinson
Wilson, and the Palestine Exploration Fund
Warren and Conder
Manudslay
Schick
Clermont-Ganneau
Bliss and Dickie
Jernsalem Archaeological Societies
=e City's WALLS AND GaTEs
The Existing Walls
Wilson's Theory
The Existing Gates
Buried Remains of Earlier Walls
The Great Dam of the Tyropceon
Ruins of Ancient Gates
. Josephus’ Description of the Walls
. First Wall
. Second Wall ‘
10. Third Wall
11. Date of Second Wall
12. Nehemiah's Acconnt of the Walis
13. Valley Gate :
14. Dung Gate
15. Fountain Gate
16. Water Gate
17. Horse Gate
18. Sheep Gate
19. Fish Gate
20. “Old Gate” _
21. Gate of Ephraim
22. Tower of the Furnaces
23. The Gate of Benjamin
24. Upper Gate of the Temple
25. The Earlier Walls
ANTIQUARIAN REMAINS CONNECTED WITH THRE
Water SuPPLY ‘
1. Gihon: The Natural Spring
The Aqueduct of the Canaanites
Warren's Shaft
Hezekiah’s ‘' Siloam" Aqueduct
Other Aqueducts at Gihon
Bir ByyQb
Varieties of Cisterns
Birket Israél
Pool of Bethesda
. The Twin Pools :
. Birket Hammam el Batrak


QOS SR Gor ihe 29 BO Et


VI.


4
te


$001 OUR Cobo


VII.


ESonnampmy


ee


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1596


12. Birket Mamilla
13. Birket es Sultan
14. ‘‘Solomon's Pools”
15. Low-Level Aqueduct
16. High-Level Aqueduct
17. Dates of Construction of These Aqueducts
VIII. Tomas, Antiquarian Remains anp HccLEsras-
TICAL SITES
- ‘“The Tomhs of the Kings"’
2. ‘Herod's Tomh"
‘‘ Absalom’s Tomh”
. The “Egyptian Tomb”
. The ‘Garden Tomh"
Tomb of ‘‘Simon the Just’
Other Antiquities
Ecclesiastical Sites
IX. History
Tell el-Amarna Correspondence
Joshua's Conquest
Site of the Jebusite City
David
Expansion of the City
Solomon
. Solomon's City Wall
The Disruption (933 BC)
. Invasion of Shishak (928 BC)
10. City Plundered by Arabs
11. Hazael King of Syria Bought Off (797 BC)
12. Capture of the City by Jehoash of Israel
13. Uzziah's Refortification (779-740 BC)
14. Ahaz Allies with Assyria (736-728 BC)
15. Hezekiah's Great Works
16. His Religious Reforms
17. Manasseh’s Alliance with Assyria
18. His Repair of the Walls
19. Josiah and Religious Reforms (640-609 BC)
20. Jeremiah Prophesies the Approaching Doom
21. Aenea mezzar Twice Takes Jerusalem
58
22. Cyrus and the First Return (538 BC)
23. Nehemiah Rehuilds the Walls
24. Bagohi Governor
25. Alexander the Great
26. The Ptolemaic Rule
27. Antiochus the Great
28. Hellenization of the City under Antiochus
Epiphanes iy
29. Capture of the City (170 BC)
30. Capture of 168 BC |
31. Attempted Suppression of Judaism
32. The Maccahean Rehellion
33. The Dedication of the Temple (165 BC)
34. Defeat of Judas and Capture of the City
35. His Death (161 BC)
36. Jonathan's Restorations |
37. Boyne of City to Antiochus Sidetes (134
38. Hasmonean Buildings
39. Rome's Intervention
40. Pompey Takes the City hy Storm
41. Julius Caesar Appoints Antipas Procurator
(47 BC)
42. Parthian Invasion
43. Reign of Herod the Great (87-4 BC)
44. Herod's Great Buildings
45. Herod Archelaus (4 BC-6 AD)
46. Pontius Pilate
47. King Agrippa
48. Rising against Florus and Defeat of Gallus
49. The City Besieged hy Titus (70 AD)
50. Party Divisions within the Besieged Walls
51. Capture and Utter Destruction of the City
52. Rehellion of Bar-Cochba
53. Hadrian Builds lia Capitolina
54. Coustantine Builds the Church of the Anas-
tasis
55. The Empress Eudoxia Rebuilds the Walls
56. Justinian
57. Chosroes II Captures the City
58. Heracleus Enters It in Triumph
59. Clemency of Omar
60. The Seljuk Turks and Their Cruelties
61. Crusaders Capture the City in 1099
62. The Kharizimians
63. Ottoman Turks Obtain the City (1517 AD)
X. Mopern JERUSALEM
1. Jews and ‘‘ Zionism" :
2. Christian Buildings and Institutions
LItvERATURE


I. The Name.—The earliest mention of Jerus is
in the Am Tab (1450 BC), where it appears in the
1. In ious SUS Se eeds Live this we

are ave Ur-sa-li-immu on the Assyr monn-
Cineiora ments of the 8th cent. BC.

The most ancient Bib. form is DSWIN, y*rasha-
lém, shortened in Ps 76 2 (cf Gen 14 18) to Salem,
but in MT we have it vocalized: pep, yr asha-
laim. In Jer 26 18; Est 2 6; 2 Ch 25 1; 32 9 we


PIG ErP ge


QDI EMP O98


have D™SW397, yrishdlayim, a form which occurs
on the Jewish coins of the Revolt and also in Jewish

literature; it is commonly used by
2. In modern Talmudic Jews. The form
Hebrew with the ending -aim or -ayim is in-
terpreted by some as being a dual, re-
ferring to the upper and lower Jerus, but such forms
occur in other names as implying special solemnity;
such a pronunciation is both local and late.

In the LXX we get "Iepovcakyu (Ierousalém),
constantly reflecting the earliest and the common

: Heb pronunciation, the initial letter
3.In Gr being probably unaspirated; soon,
and Latin however, we meet with ‘Iepovogdju

(Hierousalém)—with the aspirate—the
common form in Jos, and ‘IepordAvpa ( Hieroséluma)
in Mace (Books I-IV), and in Strabo. This last
form has been carried over into the Lat writers,
Cicero, Pliny, Tacitus and Suetonius. It was re-
placed in official use for some centuries by Hadrian’s
Aelia Capitolina, which occurs as late as Jerome,
but it again comes into common use in the docu-
ments of the Crusades, while Solyma occurs at
various periods as a poetic abbreviation.

In the NT we have ‘Iepoveadyjp (Hierousalém),
particularly in the writings of St. Luke and St. Paul,
and rad ‘lepoctAupa (id Hieroséluma) elsewhere.
The AV of 1611 has Ierosalem in the OT and Hieru-
salem in the NT. The form Jerusalem first occurs
in French writings of the 12th cent.

With regard to the meaning of the original name
there is no concurrence of opinion. The oldest

known form, Uru-sa-lim, has been


4. The considered by many to mean either
Meaning the “City of Peace’ or the “City of
of Jeru- [the god] Salem,” but other inter-
salem preters, considering the name as of


R Heb origin, interpret it as the ‘‘pos-
session of peace’ or “foundation of peace.” It is
one of the ironies of history that a city which in
all its long history has seen so little peace and for
whose possession such rivers of blood have been
shed should have such a possible meaning, for its
name.

Other names for the city occur. For the name
Jebus see Jesus. In Isa 29 1, occurs the name
SN7AN, ’Gr7’ a, probably ‘‘the hearth of
God,” and in 1 26 the “city of right-
eousness.”” In Ps 72 16; Jer 32 24f;
Ezk 7 23, we have the term V9O,
hair, “the city’’ in contrast to “the land.” A
whole group of names is connected with the idea
of the sanctity of the site; ‘tr ha-kddhesh, the “holy
city” occurs in Isa 48 2; 62 1; Neh 11 1, and
yrushadlayim ha-k¢dhéshah, “Jerusalem the holy’’ is
inscribed on Simon’s coins. In Mt 4 5; 27 53 we
have 4 ayla wéXs, hé hagia pédlis, “the holy city,”
and in Philo, ‘Iepérodis, Hierépolis, with the same
meaning.

In Arab. the common name is Beit el Makdis, “the
holy house,” or el Mukaddas, ‘‘the holy,” or the
common name, used by the Moslems everywhere
today, el Kuds, a shortened form of el Ktids esh
Sheréf, ‘the noble sanctuary.”

Non-Moslems usually use the Arab. form Yeru-
salém.

II. Geology, Climate and Springs.—The geology
of the site and environs of Jerus is comparatively

simple, when studied in connection
1. Geology with that of the land of Pal as a whole

(see GEoLoGy oF PaLEsTINE). The
outstanding feature is that the rocks consist en-
tirely of various forms of limestone, with strata
containing flints; there are no primary rocks, no
sandstone (such as comes to the surface on the E.
of the Jordan) and no volcanic rocks. The lime-


5. Other
Names


1597


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


stone formations are in regular strata dipping
toward the 8.E., with an angle of about 10°.

On the high hills overlooking Jerus on the E.,
8.E. and 8.W. there still remain strata of consider-
able thickness of those chalky limestones of the
post-Tertiary period which crown so many hilltops
of Pal, and once covered the whole land. On the
“Mount of Olives,” for example, occurs a layer of
conglomerate limestone known as NG@ri, or “fire-
stone,” and another thicker deposit, known as
Ka‘kili, of which two distinct strata can be dis-
tinguished. In these layers, esp. the latter, occur
pockets containing marl or haur, and in both there
are bands of flint.

Over the actual city’s site all this has been de-
nuded long ages ago. Here we have three layers
of limestone of varying density very clearly dis-
tinguished by all the native builders and masons:

1) Mizzeh helu, lit. ‘sweet mizzeh,”’ a hard,
reddish-grey layer capable of polish, and reaching
in places to a depth of 70 ft. or more. The “holy
tock’’ in the temple-area belongs to this layer, and
much of the ancient building stone was of this
nature.

(2) Below this is the Melekeh or “royal’’ layer,
which, though not very thick—35 ft. or so—has
been of great importance in the history of the city.
This rock ig peculiar in that when first exposed to
the air it is often so soft that it can be cut with a
knife, but under the influence of the atmosphere it
hardens to make a stone of considerable durability,
useful for ordinary buildings. The great impor-
tance of this layer, however, lies in the fact that in
it have been excavated the hundreds of caverns,
cisterns, tombs and aqueducts which honeycomb
the city’s site.

(3) Under the Melekeh is a Cenomanian limestone
of great durability, known as Mizzeh Yehudeh, or
“Jewish mizzch.’’ It is a highly valued building
stone, though hard to work. Geologically it is
distinguished from Mizzeh helu by its containing
ammonites. Characteristically it is a yellowish-
grey stone, sometimes slightly reddish. A variety
of a distinctly reddish appearance, known as Miz-
zeh ahmar, or ‘red mizzeh,’’? makes a very orna-
mental stone for columns, tombstones, etc; it takes
a high polish and is sometimes locally known’ as
“marble.”

This deep layer, which underlies the whole city,
comes to the surface in the Kidron valley, and its
impermeability is probably the explanation of the
appearance there of the one true spring, the ‘Vir-
gin’s Fount.” The water over the site and environs
of Jerus percolates with ease the upper layer, but
is conducted to the surface by this hard layer; the
comparatively superficial source of the water of
this spring accounts for the poorness of its quality.

The broad features of the climate of Jerus have
probably remained the same throughout history,

although there is plenty of evidence


2. Climate that there have been cycles of greater
and and lesser abundance of rain. The
Rainfall almost countless cisterns belonging to


all ages upon the site and the long and
complicated conduits for bringing water from a
distance, testify that over the greater part of his-
tory the rainfall must have been, as at present, only
seasonal.

As a whole, the climate of Jerus may be con-
sidered healthy. The common diseases should be
largely preventable—under an enlightened govern-
ment; even the malaria which is so prevalent is to
a large extent an importation from the low-lying
country, and could be stopped at once, were efficient
means taken for destroying the carriers of infection,
the abundant Anopheles mosquitoes. On account
of its altitude and its exposed position, almost upon


the watershed, wind, rain and cold are all more
excessive than in the maritime plains or the Jordan
valley. Although the winter’s cold is severely felt,
on account of its comciding with the days of heaviest
rainfall (cf Ezr 10 9), and also because of the
dwellings and clothes of the inhabitants being suited
for enduring heat more than cold, the actual lowest
cold recorded is only 25° F., and frost occurs only
on perhaps a dozen nights in an average year.
During the rainless summer months the mean tem-
perature rises steadily until August, when it reaches
73.6° F., but the days of greatest heat, with tem-
perature over 100° F. in the shade at times, occur
commonly in September. In midsummer the cool
northwest breezes, which generally blow during
the afternoons and early night, do much to make
life healthy. The most unpleasant days occur in
May and from the middle of September until the
end of October, when the dry southeast winds—
the sirocco—blow hot and stifling from over the
deserts, carrying with them at times fine dust
sufficient in quantity to produce a marked haze
in the atmosphere. At such times all vegetation
droops, and most human beings, esp. residents not
brought up under such conditions, suffer more or
less from depression and physical discomfort;
malarial, “‘sandfly,’’ and other fevers are apt to be
peculiarly prevalent. ‘‘At that time shall it be
said... . to Jerus, A hot wind from the bare
heights in the wilderness toward the daughter of
rs people, not to winnow, nor to cleanse’ (Jer


During the late summer—except at spells of
sirocco—heavy ‘‘dews” occur at night, and at the
end of September or beginning of October the
“former” rains fall—not uncommonly in tropical
downpours accompanied by thunder. After this
there is frequently a dry spell of several weeks, and
then the winter’s rain falls in December, January and
February. In some seasons an abundant rainfall
in March gives peculiar satisfaction to the inhabit-
ants by filling up the cisterns late in the season and
by producing an abundant harvest. The average
rainfall is about 26 in., the maximum recorded in
the city being 42.95 in. in the season 1877-78, and
the minimum being 12.5 in. in 1869-70. An abun-
dant rainfall is not only important for storage, for
replenishment of the springs and for the crops, but
as the city’s sewage largely accumulates in the
very primitive drains all through the dry season,
it requires a considerable force of water to remove
it. Snow falls heavily in some seasons, causing
considerable destruction to the badly built roofs
and to the trees; in the winter of 1910-11 a fall of
9 in. occurred.

There is only one actual spring in the Jerus area,
and even to this some authorities would deny the

name of true spring on account of the


3. The comparatively shallow source of its
Natural origin; this is the intermittent spring
Springs known today as ‘Ain Umm ed deraj


(lit. “spring of the mother of the
steps’’), called by the native Christians ‘Ain Sitti
Miriam (the “spring of the Lady Mary’’), and by
Europeans commonly called “The Virgin’s Fount.”
All the archaeological evidence points to this as
the original source of attraction of earliest occu-
pants of the site; in the OT this spring is known
as GrHon (q.v.). The water arises in the actual
bottom, though apparent west side, of the Kidron
valley some 300 yds. due 8. of the south wall of the
Haram. The approach to the spring is down two
flights of steps, an upper of 16 leading to a small level
platform, covered by a modern arch, and a lower,
narrower flight of 14 steps, which ends at the mouth
of a small cave. The water has its actual source
in a long cleft (perhaps 16 ft. long) running E. and


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1598


W. in the rocky bottom of the Kidron valley, now
many feet below the present surface. The western
or higher end of the cleft is at the very entrance of
the cave, but most of the water gushes forth from
the lower and wider part which lies underneath the
steps. When the water is scanty, the women of
Siloam creep down into the cavity under the steps
and fill their water-skins there; at such times no
water at all finds its way into the cave. At the far
end of the cave is the opening of that system of
ancient tunnel-aqueducts which is described in
VI, below. This spring is “intermittent,” the water
rising rapidly and gushing forth with considerable
force, several times in the 24 hours after the rainy
season, and only once or twice in the dry. This
“intermittent”? condition of springs is not. uncom-
mon in Pal, and is explained by the accumulation
of the underground water in certain cavities or
cracks in the rock, which together make up a reser-
voir which empties itself by syphon action. Where
the accumulated water reaches the bend of the
syphon, the overflow commences and continues to
run until the reservoir is emptied. Such a phe-
nomenon is naturally attributed to supernatural
agency by the ignorant—in this case, among the
modern fellahin, to a dragon—and natives, specially
Jews, visit. the source, even today, at times of its
overflow, for healing. Whether this intermittent
condition of the fountain is very ancient it is im-
possible to say, but, as Jerome (Comm. in Esa, 86)
speaks of it, it was probably present in NT times,
and if so we have a strong argument for finding
here the “Pool of Bethesda.” See BeruEspa.

In ancient times all the water flowed down the
open, rocky valley, but at an early period a wall
was constructed to bank up the water and convert
the source into a pool. Without such an arrange-
ment no water could find its way into the cave and
the tunnels. The tunnels, described below (VI),
were constructed for the purpose (1) of reaching the
water supply from within the city walls, and (2) of
preventing the enemies of the Jews from getting
at the water (2 Ch 32 4). The water of this
source, though used for all purposes by the people
of Siloam, is brackish to the taste, and contains a
considerable percentage of sewage; it is quite unfit
for drinking. This condition is doubtless due to
the wide distribution of sewage, both intentionally
(for irrigation of the gardens) and unintentionally
(through leaking sewers, etc), over the soil over-
lying the rocks from which the water flows. In
earlier times the water was certainly purer, and it
is probable, too, that the fountain was more copious,
as now hundreds of cisterns imprison the waters
which once found their way through the soil to the
deep sources of the spring.

The waters of the Virgin’s Fount find their way
through the Siloam tunnel and out at ‘Ain Silwdén
(the “spring” of Siloam), into the Pool of Siloam,
and from this source descend into the Kidron valley
to water the numerous vegetable gardens belonging
to the village of Siloam (see S1zoaM).

The second source of water in Jerus is the deep
well known as Bir Eyytb, “Job’s well,” which is
situated a little below the point where the Kidron
valley and Hinnom meet. In all probability it
derivesits modern name from a legend in the Koran
(Sura 88 5.40-41) which narrates that God com-
manded Job to stamp with his foot, whereupon a
spring miraculously burst up. The well, which had
been quite lost sight of, was rediscovered by the

_ Crusaders in 1184 AD, and wasby them cleaned out.
It is 125 ft. deep. The supply of water in this well
is practically inexhaustible, although the quality
is no better than that of the ‘‘Virgin’s Fount’’; after
several days of heavy rain the water overflows
underground and bursts out a few yards lower


down the valley as a little stream. It continues
to run for a few days after a heavy fall of rain is
over, and this “flowing Kidron’’ is a great source
of attraction to the native residents of Jerus, who
pour forth from the city to enjoy the rare sight of
running water. Somewhere in the neighborhood of
Bir Eyydb must have lain ‘En-Rogel, but if that
were once an actual spring, its source is now buried
under the great mass of rubbish accumulated here
(see EN-ROGEL). ;

Nearly 600 yds. 8. of Bir Eyydb is a small gravelly
basin where, when the Bir Eyydb overflows, a small
spring called ‘Ain el Lozéh (the “spring of the
almond’) bursts forth. It is not a true spring, but
is due to some of the water of Job’s well which finds
its way along an ancient rock-cut aqueduct on the
west side of the Wddy en Nar, bursting up here.

The only other possible site of a spring in the Jerus
area is the Hammém esh Shef4, ‘“‘the bath of healing.”
This is an underground rock-basin in the Tyropceon
valley, within the city walls, in which water collects
by percolation through the débris of the city.
Though once a reservoir with probably rock-cut
channels conducting water to it, it is now a deep
well with arches erected over it at various periods,
as the rubbish of the city gradually accumulated
through the centuries. There is no evidence what-
ever of there being any natural fountain, and the
water is, in the dry season, practically pure sewage,
though used in a neighboring Turkish bath.

G. A. Smith thinks that the JackaL’s WELL
(q.v.) mentioned by Nehemiah (2 13), which must
have been situated in the Valley of Hinnom, may
possibly have been a temporary spring arising there
for a few years in consequence of an earthquake,
but it is-extremely likely that any well sunk then
would tap water flowing along the bed of the valley.
There is no such “spring” or “well” there today.

Ill. The Natural Site.-—Modern Jerus occupies
a situation defined geographically as 31° 46’ 45” N.
lat., by 35° 18’ 25’ KE. long. It lies in the midst of
a bare and rocky plateau, the environs being one of
the most stony and least fruitful districts in the
habitable parts of Pal, with shallow, grey or reddish
soil and many outcrops of bare limestone. Like
all the hill slopes with a southeasterly aspect, it
is so thoroughly exposed to the full blaze of the
summer sun that in its natural condition the site
would be more or less barren. Today, however, as
aresult of diligent cultivation and frequent watermg,
a considerable growth of trees and shrubs has been
produced in the rapidly extending suburbs. The
only fruit tree which reaches perfection around Jerus
is the olive.

The site of Jerus is shut in by a rough triangle of
higher mountain ridges: to the W. runs the main

ridge, or water parting, of Judaea,
1. The which here makes a sweep to the west-
Mountains ward. From this ridge a spur runs
Around 8.E. and E., culminating due E. of the

city in the Mount or Otives (q.v.),
nearly 2,700 ft. above sea-level and about 300 ft.
above the mean level of the ancient city. Another
spur, known as Jebel Deir abu Tor, 2,550 ft. high,
runs E. from the plateau of el Bukei‘a and lies 8.W.
of the city; it is the traditional ‘Hill of Evil Coun-
sel.” The city site is thus dominated on all sides
by these higher ranges—‘‘the mountains [that] are
round about Jerus’’ (Ps 125 2)—so that while on
the one hand the ancient city was hidden, at any
considerable distance, from any direction except the
8.E., it is only through this open gap toward the
desert_and the mountains of Moab that any wide
outlook is obtainable. This strange vision of wilder-
ness and distant mountain wall—often of exquisite
loveliness in the light of the setting sun—must all
through the ages have been the most familiar and the


1599


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


most potent of scenic influences to the inhabitants
of Jerus.

_ Within the enfolding hills the city’s proper site
is demarked by two main valleys. That on the W.


and 8.W. commences in a hollow occu-
2. The pied by the Moslem cemetery around
Valleys the pool Birket Mamilla. The valley


runs due E. toward the modern Jaffa
Gate, and there bends 8., being known in this upper
part of its course as the Wady el Més. Inthissouth-
ern course it is traversed by a great dam, along which
the modern Bethlehem road runs, which converts
a large area of the valley bed into a great pool, the
Birket es Sultan. Below this the valley—under the
name of Wddy er Rabdbi—bends 8.E., then E., and
finally S.E. again, until near Bir Eyydb it joins the
western valley to form the Wady en Nér, 670 ft. be-
low its origin. This valley has been very generally
identified as the Valley of Hinnom (see Hinwom).


Hills and Valleys of Jerusalem with Modern Names.


The eastern valley takes a wider sweep. Com-
mencing high up in the plateau to the N. of the city,
near the great water-parting, it descends as a wide
and open valley in a southeasterly direction until,
where it is crossed by the Great North Road, being
here known as Waddy el Jéz (the “Valley of the Wal-
nuts’), it turns more By E. It gradually
curves to the S., and as it runs E. of the city walls, it
receives the name of Wady Sitti Miriam (the “Valley

_ of the Lady Mary’). Below the S.E. corner of
the temple-area, near the traditional “Tomb of
Absalom,” the valley rapidly deepens and takes a
direction slightly to the W. of 8. It passes the
“Virgin’s Fount,”’ and a quarter of a mile lower it
is joined by el Wad from the N., and a little farther
on by the Wddy er Rababi from the W. South of
Bir Eyytb, the valley formed by their union is con-
tinued under the name of Wddy en Nér to the Dead
Sea. This western valley is that commonly known
as the Brook Kidron, or, more shortly, the ““Brook”’
(nahal), or ravine (see Kipron), but named from
the 5th cent. onward by Christians the VALLEY
oF JEHOSHAPHAT (q.v.). The rocky tongue of
land inclosed between these deep ravines, an area
roughly speaking, a little over one mile long by half
a mile wide, is further subdivided into a number of
distinct hills by some shallower valleys. The most


~y


prominent of these—indeed the only one noticeable
to the superficial observer today—is the great
central valley known to modern times by the single
name el Wad, “the valley.’ It commences in a
slight depression of the ground a little N. of the
modern “Damascus Gate,” and after entering the
city at this gate it rapidly deepens—a fact largely
disguised today by the. great accumulation of rub-
bish in its course. It traverses the city with the
Haram to its east, and the Christian and Moslem
quarters on rapidly rising ground to its west. Its
course is observed near the Bab es Silseleh, where
it is crossed by an ancient causeway, but farther
S. the valley reappears, having the walls of the
Haram (near the “wailing place” and ‘‘Robinson’s
arch’’) on the E., and steep cliffs crossed by houses
of the Jewish quarter on the W. It leaves the city
at the ‘“Dung Gate,” and passes with an open curve
to the E., until it reaches the Poo! of Siloam, below
which it merges in the Wédy Sitti Miriam. This
is the course of the main valley, but a branch of
great importance in the ancient topography of the
city starts some 50 yds. to the W. of the modern
Jaffa Gate and runs down the Suwaikat Allan, gen-
erally known to travelers as ‘David's Street,” and
thus easterly, along the Tarik bab es Silseleh, until
it merges in the main valley. The main valley is
usually considered to be the Tyropceon, or ‘“Cheese-
mongers’ Valley” of Jos, but some writers have
attempted to confine the name esp. to this western
arm of it.

Another interior valley, which is known rather
by the rock contours, than by surface observations,
being largely filled up today, cuts diagonally across
the NE. corner of the modern city. It has no
moodern name, though it is sometimes called “St.
Anne’s Valley.” It arises in the plateau near
‘“Herod’s Gate,’’? known as es Sahra, and entering
the city about 100 yds. to the E. of that gate, runs
S.S.E., and leaves the city between the N.E. angle
of the Haram and the Golden Gate, joining the
Kidron valley farther S.E. The Birket Israé runs
across the width of this valley, which had far more
influence in determining the ancient topography
of the city than has been popularly recognized.
There is an artificially made valley between the
Haram and the buildings to its north, and there is
thought by many to be a valley between the 8.E.
hill, commonly called “Ophel” and the temple-area.
Such, then, are the valleys, great and small, by
which the historic hills on which the city stood are
defined. All of them, particularly in their southern
parts, were considerably deeper in ancient times,
and in places the accumulated débris is 80 ft. or
more. All of them were originally torrent beds,
dry except immediately after heavy rain. The
only perennial outflow of water is the scanty and
intermittent stream which overflows from the Pool
of Siloam, and is used to irrigate the gardens in the
Wady Stiiti Miriam.

The E. and W. valleys isolate a roughly quadri-
lateral tongue of land running from N.W.W. to

§.S.E., and tilted so as to face 8.E.
3. The This tongue is further subdivided by
Hills el Wad into two long ridges, which

merge iuto each other in’ the plateau
to the N. The western ridge has its actual origin
considerably N. of the modern wall, being part of
the high ground lying between the modern Jaffa
road to the W., and the commencement of the
Kidron valley to the E. Within the city walls it
rises as high as 2,581 ft. near the northwestern corner.
Jt is divided by the west branch of the Tyropceon
valley into two parts: a northern part—the north-
western hill—on which is situated today the Church
of the Holy Scpulchre and the greater part of the
“Christian quarter’ of the city, and a southern hill—


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1600


the southwestern—which is connected with the
northwestern hill by but a narrow saddle—50 yds.
wide—near the Jaffa Gate. This hill sustains the
citadel (the so-called ‘Tower of David’’), the bar-
racks and the Armenian quarter within the walls,
and the Coenaculum and adjacent buildings outside
the walls. This hill is from 2,500 to 2,350 ft. high
along its summit, but drops rapidly on its south-
western, southern and southeastern sides. In its
central part it falls much more gently toward the
pone hill across the now largely filled valley el
ad.

The eastern ridge may be reckoned as beginning
at the rocky hill el-Hdhemtyeh—popularly known
as Gordon’s Calvary—but the wide trench made
here by quarrying somewhat obscures this fact.
The ridge may for convenience be regarded as
presenting three parts, the northeastern, central
or central-eastern, and southeastern summits. The
northeastern hill within the modern wall supports
the Moslem quarter, and rises in places to a height
of over 2,500 ft.; it narrows to a mere neck near the
“Ecce Homo” arch, where it is joined to the bar-
racks, on the site of the ancient Antonia. Under
the present surface it is here separated from the
temple summit by a deep rocky trench.

The central, or central-eastern, summit is that
appearing as es Sakhra, the sacred temple rock, which
is 2,404 ft. high. This is the highest pomt from
which the ground rapidly falls E., W., and 8., but
the natural contours of the adjacent ground are
much obscured by the great substructures which
have been made to sustain the temple platform.

The sloping, southeastern, hill, S. of the temple-
area appears today, at any rate, to have a steady
fall of from 2,350 ft. just 8. of the Haram southern
wall to a little over 2,100 ft. near the Pool of Siloam.
It is a narrow ridge running in a somewhat curved
direction, with a summit near 200 ft. above the
Kidron and 100 ft. above the bed of the Tyropceon.
In length it is not more than 600 yds., in width, at
its widest, only 150 yds., but its chief feature, its
natural strength, is today greatly obscured on ac-
count of the rubbish which slopes down its sides
and largely fills up its surrounding valleys. In
earlier times, at least three of its sides were protected
by deep valleys, and probably on quite two-thirds
oi its circumference its summit was surrounded
by natural rocky scarps. According to Professor
Guthe, this hill is divided from the higher ground to
the N. by a depression 12 ft. deep and 30-50 yds.
wide, but this has not been confirmed by other ob-
servers. The city covering so hilly a site as this
must ever have consisted, as it does today, of houses
terraced on steep slopes with stairways for streets.

IV. General Topography of Jerusalem.—From
the foregoing description of the ‘natural site,’ it
will be seen that we have to deal with 5 natural
subdivisions or hills, two on the western and three
on the eastern ridges.

In discussing the topography it is useful to com-
mence with the description of Jos, wherein he gives

to these 5 areas the names common in
1. Descrip- his day (BJ, V, iv, 1,2). He says:
tion of “The city was built upon two hills
Josephus which arc opposite to one another and

have a valley to divide them asunder.
.... Now the Valley of the Cheesemongers, as
it was called, and was that which distinguished the
hill of the upper city from that of the lower, ex-
tended as far as Siloam’’ (ib, V, iv, 1). Here we
get the first prominent physical feature, the bisec-
tion of the city-site into two main hills. Farther
on, however, in the same passage—one, it must be
admitted, of some obscurity—Jos distinguishes 5
distinct regions:

(1) The Upper City or Upper Market Place:


(The hill) “which sustains the upper city is much
higher and in length more direct. Accordingly, it
was called the citadel (¢povptor, phrotrion) of King
David .... butitis by uscalled the Upper Market
Place.” This is without dispute the southwestern
hill.
(2) Akra and Lower City: “The other hill,
which was called Akra, and sustains the lower city,
was double-curved” (dugixupros, amphikurtos).
The description can apply only to the semicircular
shape of the southeastern hill, as viewed from the
“upper city.’ These names, “Akra”’ and “Lower
City,” are, with reservations, therefore, to be ap-
plied to the southeastern hill.

(3) The Temple Hill: Josephus’ description here
is curious, on account of its indefiniteness, but there
can be no question as to which hill he intends.
He writes: “Over against this is a third hill, but
naturally lower than the Akra and parted formerly
from the other by a flat valley. However, in those
times when the Hasmoneans reigned, they did away
with this valley, wishing to connect the city with
the temple; and cutting down the summit of the
Akra, they made it lower, so that the temple might
be visible over it.’ Comparison with other passages
shows that this “third hill” is the central-eastern—
the ‘‘Temple Hill.”’

(4) Bezetha: “It was Agrippa who encompassed
the parts added to the old city with this wall (ie.
the third wall) which had been all naked before;
for as the city grew more populous, it gradually
crept beyond its old limits, and those parts of it
that stood northward of the Temple, and joined that
hill to the city, made it considerably larger, and
oceasioned that hill which is in number the fourth,
and is called ‘Bezetha,’ to be inhabited also. It lies
over against the tower Antonia, but is divided from
it by a deep valley, which was dug on purpase.
... . . This new-built part of the city was called
‘Bezetha’ in our language, which, if interpreted in
the Gr language, may be called the ‘New City.’”
This is clearly the northeastern hill.

(5) The Northern Quarter of the City: From the
account of the walls given by Jos, it is evident
that the northern part of his “first wall” ran along
the northern edge of the southwestern hill; the
second wall inclosed the inhabited part of the north-
western hill, Thus Jos writes: “The second wall
took its beginning from the gate which they called
Gennath in the first wall, and inclosing the northern
quarter only reached to the Antonia.’ This area
is not described as a separate hill, as the inhabited
area, except on the §., was defined by no natural
valleys, and besides covering the northwestern hill,
must have extended into the Tyropceon valley.

Here then we have Josephus’ names for these
five districts: (1) Southwestern Hill, ‘Upper City”

and ‘Upper Market Place’; also the
2. Summary Phrourion, or ‘fortress of David.”
of Names From the 4th cent. AD, this hill has.
of the Five also been known as “Zion,” and on it
Hills today is the so-called “Tower of

David,” built on the foundations of
two of Herod’s great towers.

(2) Northwestern Hill: ‘The northern quarter
of the city.” This district does not appear to have
had any other name in OT or NT, though some of
the older authorities would place the “Akra” here
(see infra). ‘Today it is the “Christian quarter’
of Jerus, which centers round the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre.

(3) Northeastern Hill: ‘Bezetha”’ or “New City,”
even now a somewhat sparsely inhabited area, has
no name in Bib. literature.

(4) Central-eastern Hill: The “third hill” of Jos,
clearly the site of the Temple which, as Jos says
(BJ, V, v), “was built upon a strong hill.’ In


1601


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


earlier times it was the “threshing-floor of Araunah
the Jebusite.”” On the question whether it has any
claims to be the Moriah of Gen 22 2, as it is called
in 2 Ch 3 1, see Morisu. The temple hill is also
in many of the Heb writings called Zion, on which
point see Zion.

(5) Southeastern Hill: This Jos calls “Akra” and
“Lower City,’’ but while on the one hand these
names require some elucidation, there are other
names which have at one period or another come to
be applied to this hill, viz. “City of David,” “Zion”
and “Ophel.’’ These names for this hill we shall
now deal with in order.

In spite of the very definite description of Jos,
there has been considerable difference of opinion

regarding the situation of the ‘‘Akra.”’
3. The Various parts of the northwestern,
Akra the northeastern, the southeastern
hills, and even the central-eastern it-
self, have been suggested by earlier authorities, but
instead of considering the various arguments, now
largely out of date, for other proposed sites, it will
be better to deal with the positive arguments for
the southeastern hill. Jos states that in his day
the term ‘“Akra” was applied to the southeastern
hill, but in references to the earlier history it is clear
that the Akra was not a whole hill, but a definite
fortress (dxpa, édkra=‘‘fortress’’).

(1) It was situated on the site, or on part of the
site, which was considered in the days of the Macca-
hees to have been the “City of David.” Antiochus
Epiphanes (168 BC), after destroying Jerus, “forti-
fied the city of David with a great and strong wall,
with strong towers and it became unto them an
Akra”’ (1 Macc 1 33-36). The formidable for-
tress—known henceforth as “the Akra’’—hecame
a constant menace to the Jews, until at length, in
142 BC, it was captured by Simon, who not only
razed the whole fortress, but, according to Jos (Ant,
XIII, vi, 7; BJ, V, iv, 1), actually cut down the
hill on which it stood. He says that “they all,
labouring zealously, demolished the hill, and ceasing
not from the work night and day for three whole
years, brought it to a level and even slope, so
that the Temple became the highest of all after the
Akra and the hill upon which it was built had been
removed” (Ant, XIII, vi, 7). The fact that at the
time of Jos this hill was evidently lower than
the temple hill is in itself sufficient argument
against any theory which would place the Akra
on the northwestern or southwestern hills. (2) The
Akra was close to the: temple (1 Macc 13 52), and
from its walls the garrison could actually overlook
it (1 Macc 14 36). Before the hill was cut down
it obscured the temple site (ib). (3) It is identified
by Jos as forming part, at Icast, of the lower city,
which (see below) bordered upon the temple (cf BY,

, i, 4; V, iv, 1; vi, 1). (4) The LXX identifies the
Akra with Millo (2S 5 9; 1 K 9 15-24; 2 Ch 32


5).

Mineine that the original Akra of the Syrians
was on the southeastern hill, it is still a matter of
some difficulty to determine whereabouts it stood,
esp. as, if the statements of Jos are correct, the nat-
ural configuration of the ground has been greatly
altered. The most prominent point upon the
southeastern hill, in the neighborhood of Gihon,
appears to have been occupied by the Jebusite for-
tress of Zion (q.v.), but the site of the Akra can
hardly be identical with this, for this became the
“City of David,’ and here were the venerated
tombs of David and the Judaean kings, which must
have been destroyed if this hill was, as Jos states,
cut down. On this and other grounds we must
look for a site farther north. Sir Charles Watson
(PEFS, 1906, 1907) has produced strong topo-
graphical and literary arguments for placing it


where the al Aksa mosque is today; other writers
are more inclined to put it farther south, some-
where in the neighborhood of the massive tower
discovered by Warren on the “Ophel’’ wall (see
Mitio). If the account of Jos, written two cen-
turies after the events, is to be taken as literal, then
Watson’s view is the more probable.

Jos, as we have seen, identified the Akra of his

day with the Lower City. This latter is not a

name occurring in the Bible because,
4, The as will be shown, the OT name for
Lower City this part was “City of David.” That

by Lower City Jos means the south-
eastern hill is shown by many facts. It is actually
the lowest part of the city, as compared with the
“Upper City,’ Temple Hill and the Bezetha; it
is, as Jos describes, separated from the Upper City
by a deep valley—the Tyropcon; this southeastern
hill is ‘‘double-curved,’’ as Jos describes, and lastly
several passages in his writings show that the Lower
City was associated with the Temple on the one end
and the Pool of Siloam at the other (cf Ant, XIV,
xvi, 2; BJ, II, xvii, 5; IV, ix, 12; VI, vi, 3; vii, 2).

In the wider sense the “Lower City’? must have
included, not only the section of the city covering
the southeastern hill up to the temple precincts,
where were the palaces (BJ, V, vi, 1; VI, vi, 3),
and the homes of the well-to-do, but also that in the
valley of the Tyropceon from Siloam up to the
“Council House,”’ which was near the northern “first
wall” (cf BJ, V, iv, 2), a part doubtless inhabited
by the poorest.

It is clear (2 S 5 7; 1 Ch 11 5) that the citadel
“Zion’’ of the Jebusites became the “‘City of David,”

or as G. A. Smith calls it, ‘David's
5. City of Burg,’ after its capture by the He
David and brews. The arguments for placing
Zion “Zion”? on the southeastern hill are

given elsewhere (see Zion), but a few
acts relevant esp. to the “City of David’’ may be
mentioned here: the capture of the Jebusite city by
means of the gutter (2 8 6 8), whichis most reason-
ably explained as “Warren’s Shaft” (see VII); the
references to David’s halt on his flight (2 S 165 23),
and his sending Solomon to Gihon to be crowned (1
K 1 33), and the common expression ‘“‘up,”’ used in
describing the transference of the Ark from the
City of David to the Temple Hill (1 K 8 1; 2 Ch
5 2; cf 1 K 9 24), are all consistent with this view.
More convincing are the references to Hezekiah’s
aqueduct which brought the waters of Gihon “down
on the west side of the city of David’ (2 Ch 32 30);
the mention of the City of David as adjacent to the
Pool of Shelah (or Shiloah; cf Isa 8 6), and the
“king’s garden” in Neh 3 15, and the position
of the Fountain Gate in this passage and Neh 12
87; and the statement that Manasseh built ‘“‘an
outer wall to the City of David, on the west side of
Gihon’’ in the nahal, i.e. the Kidron valley (2 Ch
33 14).

The name appears to have had a wider significance
as the city grew. Originally “City of David” was
only the name of the Jebusite fort, but later it be-
came equivalent to the whole southeastern hill.
In the same way, Akra was originally the name of the
Syrian fort, but the name became extended to the
whole southeastern hill. Jos looks upon “City of
David” and ‘‘Akra’”’ as synonymous, and applies
to both the name ‘Lower City.” For the names
Ophel and Ophlas see OPHEL.

V. Excavatians and Antiquities.—During the last
hundred years explorations and excavations of a suc-
cession of engineers and archaeologists have furnished
an enormous mass of observations for the understanding
of the condition of ancient Jerus. Some of the more
important are as follows:


n 1833 Messrs. Bonomi, Catherwood and Arundale
made a first thorongh survey of the Haram (temple-area),


Jerusalem


a work which was the foundation of all subsequent maps
for over a quarter of a century.

In 1838, and again in 1852, the famous American
traveler and divine, Rev. E. Robinson, D.D., visited

E the land as the representative of an Ameri-
1. Rohinson can society, and made a series of brilliant
‘ tapout hical investigations of profound
importance to all students of the Holy Land, even today.
n 1849 Jerus was surveyed by Lieuts. Aldrich and
Symonds of the Royal Engineers, and the data acquired
were used for a map constructed by Van de Vilde and
published by T. Tobler.

In 1857 an American, J. T. Barclay, published another
Inap of Jerus and its environs ‘“‘from actual and minute
survey made on the spot."

In 1860-63 De Vogiié in the course of some elahorate
researches in Syria explored the site of the sanctuary.

In 1864-65 a committee was formed in London to con-
sider the sanitary condition of Jerus, esp. with a view to

furnishing the city with a satisfactory water-


i supply, and Lady Burdett-Contts gave

2. vison £500 toward a proper survey of Jerus and
and the its environs as a preliminary step. Cap-
Palestine tain Gater Tieutenant-General Sir Charles)
A ‘ilson, R.E., was lent by the Ordnance
Eaplongeu Survey Department of Great Britain for
und, the purpose. The results of this survey,


? and of certain tentative excavations and
observations made at_the same time, were so encour-
aging that in 1865 ‘‘The Palestine Exploration Fund"’
was constituted, ‘‘for the purpose of investigating the
archaeology, geography, geology, and natural history
of the Holy Land."

During 1867-70 Captain (ater Lieutenant-General

Sir Charles) Warren, R.E., carried out @ series of most

exciting and original excavations all over

3. Warren the site of Jerus, esp. around the Haram.

Cond During 1872-75 Lieutenant (ater Lieu-

and Conder tenant-Colonel) Gonder, R.E., in the

course of the great survey of Western Pal,

pace further contributions to our knowledge of the Holy
ity.

In 1875 Mr. Henry Maudslay, taking advantage of the


occasion of the rebuilding of ‘' Bishop Gobat's Boys’
School,'’ made a careful examination of


4. Mauds- the remarkable rock cuttings which are
zy now more or less incorporated into the
lay school buildings, and made considerable


excavations, the results being described in
PEFS (April, 1875).
In 1881 Professor Guthe made @ series of important
excavations on the southeastern hill, commonly called
‘*QOphel,’’ and also near the Pool of Siloam; his reports
were published in ZDPV, 1882.
The same year (1881), the famous Siloam inscription
was discovered and was first reported by Herr Baurath
Schick, a resident in Jerus who from 1866
8. Schick Until his death in 1901 made a long series
° of observations of the highest importance
on the topography of Jerus. He had
unique opportunities for scientifically examining the
buildings in the Haram,and the results of his study of
the details of that locality are incorporated in his wonder-
ful Temple model. He also made a detailed report of the
ancient aqueducts of the city. Mostimportant of all were
the records he so patiently and faithfully kept of therock
levels in all parts of the city's site whenever the digging
of foundations for buildings or other excavations gave
access to the rock. His contributions to the PHF and
ZDPYV run into hundreds of articles.
M. Clermont-Ganneau, who was resident in Jerus in
the French consular service, made for many years, from
1880 onward, a large number of .acute
6. Clermont- 0°bservations on the archaeology of Jerus
4 and its environs, many of which were pub-
Ganneau jished by the PEF. Another name
honored in connection with the careful
study of the topography of Jerus over somewhat the same
period is that of Rev. Selah Merrill, D.D., for many years
U.S. consul in Jerus. :
In 1894-97 the Palestine Exploration Fund conducted
an elaborate series of excavations with a view to determin-
ing In particular the course of the ancient


7. Bliss southern walls under the direction of Mr.

d T. J. Bliss (son of Rev. Daniel Bliss, D.D.,
ane then president of the Syrian Protestant
Dickie College, Beirat), assisted by Mr. A. C.


Dickie as architect. After plcking up
the buried foundatlons of walls at the southeastern
corner where ‘‘Maudslay’s scarp'’ was exposed In the
Protestant cemetery, Bliss and Dickie followed them all
the way to the Pool of Siloam, across the Tyropceon and
on to ‘'Ophel'—and also in other directions. Dis-
coveries of great interest were also made in the neigh-
borhood of the Pool of Siloam (see S110Am). hs

Following upon these excavations a number of private
investigations have heen made by the Augustinians in a
large estate they have acquired on the E. side of the
tradItional hill of Zion.

In 1909-11 a party of Englishmen, under Captain the
Hon. M. Parker, made a number of explorations with
very elaborate tunnels upon the hill of Ophel, imme-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1602


diately above the Virgin's Fount. In the course of their
work, they cleaned out the whole Siloam aqueduct, find-
ing some new passages; they reconstructed the Siloam
Pool, and they completed Warren's previous investiga-
tion in the neighborhood of what has been known as
‘‘Warren's Shaft.” .
There are several societies constantly engaged in ob-
serving new facts connected with the topography of
ancient Jerus, notably the School of Ar-
8. Jerusa- chaeology connected with the University
1 Ar. of St. Stephens, under the Dominicans;
€m AI- the American School of Archaeology; the
chaeological German School of Bib. Archaeology under
Societies Professor Dalman, and the Palestine Ex-
ploration Fund.


VI. The City’s Walls and Gates.—Although the


existing walls of Jerus go hack in their present form
to but the days of Suleiman the Mag-


1. The nificent, ¢ 1542 AD, their study is an
Existing essential preliminary to the under-
Walls standing of the ancient walls. The


total circuit of the modern walls is
4,326 yds., or nearly 24 miles, their average height
is 35 ft., and they have altogether 35 towers and 8
gates—one of which is walled up. They make a
rough square, with the four sides facing the cardinal
points of the compass. The masonry is of various
kinds, and on every side there are evidences that the
present walls are a patchwork of many periods.
The northern wall, from near the northwestern
angle to some distance E. of the ‘(Damascus Gate,”
lies parallel with, though somewhat inside of, an
ancient fosse, and it and the gate itself evidently
follow ancient lines. The eastern and western walls,
following as they do a general direction along the
edges of deep valleys, must be more or less along the
course of earlier walls. The eastern wall, from a
little south of St. Stephen’s Gate to the southeastern
angle, contains many ancient courses, and the gen-
eral line is at least as old as the time of Herod the
Great; the stretch of western wall from the so-
called “Tower of David” to the southwestern
corner is certainly along an ancient line and has
persisted through very many centuries. This line
of wall was allowed to remain undestroyed when
Titus leveled the remainder. At the northwestern
angle are some remains known as Kala‘at Jaldd
(“Goliath’s castle”), which, though largely mediae-
val, contain a rocky core and some masonry of
Herodian times, which are commonly accepted as
the relics of the lofty tower Psephinus.
The course of the southern wall has long been
a difficulty; it is certainly not the line of wall before
Titus; it has none of the natural ad-
2. Wilson’s vantages of the western and eastern
Theory walls, and there are no traces of any
great rock fosse, such as is to be found
on the north. The eastern end is largely built upon
the lower courses of Herod’s southern wall for his
enlarged temple-platform, and in it are still to be
found walled up the triple, single and double gates
which lead up to the Temple. The irregular line
followed by the remainder of this wall has not until
recent times received any explanation. Sir Charles
Wilson (Golgotha and the Holy Sepulchre) suggests
the probable explanation that the line of wall from
the southwestern to the ‘Zion Gate’ was deter-
mined by the legionary camp which stood on the
part of the city now covered by the barracks and
the Armenian quarter. Allowing that the remains
of the first wall on the N. and W. were utilized for
this fortified camp (from 70-132 AD), and supposing
the camp to have occupied the area of 50 acres, as
was the case with various European Rom camps,
whose remains are known, the southern camp wall
would have run along the line of the existing south-
ern walls. This line of fortification having been thus
selected appears to have been followed through the
greater part of the succeeding centuries down to
modern times. The line connecting the two ex-


AGTIVA NOUCIN WOU WHIVSnNar 40 TIVM JO UANUOO


am


1603


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


tremities of the southern wall, thus determined by

the temple-platform and legionary camp, respec-

tively, was probably that first followed by the south-
ern wall of Hadrian’s city Aflia.

Of the 8 existing city gates, on the west side there

is but one, Béb el Khulil (the “Gate of Hebron’),

commonly known to travelers as the


3. The Jaffa Gate. It is probably the site of
Existing several earlier gates. On the N. there
Gates are 3 gates, Bab Abd’ul Hamid (named


after the sultan who made it) or the
“New Gate’; Bab el ‘amdd (‘‘Gate of the Columns’’),
now commonly called the “Damascus Gate,” but
more anciently known as ‘St. Stephen’s Gate,”
and clearly, from the existing remains, the site of
an earlier gateway; and, still farther east, the Bab
es Sahirah (“Gate of the Plain’ "), or “Herod’s Gate.”
On the east side the only open gate is the Béb el
‘Asbat (“Gate of the Tribes’), commonly called
by native Christians, Bab Sittt Miriam (“Gate of
the Lady Mary’’), but in European guide-books
called “St. Stephen’s Gate.’”’ A little farther 8.,
near the northeastern corner of the Haram is the
great walled-up Byzantine Gate, known as Béb ed
Dahariyeh (‘Gate of the Conqueror’’), but to Euro-
peans as the “Golden Gate.” This structure has
been variously ascribed to Justinian and Heraclius,
_ but there are massive blocks which belong to a
more ancient structure, and early Christian tra-
dition places the ‘Beautiful Gate’’ of the Temple
bere. In the southern wall are two city gates; one,
insignificant and mean, occupies the center of ed
Wad and is known as Béb el Mugharibeh (“Gate of
the Moors’), and to Europeans as the “Dung
Gate’; the other, which is on the crown of the
western hill, traditional Zion, is the important Bab
Nebi Daoud (‘‘Gate of the Prophet David’’), or the
“Zion Gate.”

All these gates assumed their present form at the
time of the reconstruction of the walls by Suleman
the Magnificent, but the more important ones
occupy the sites of earlier gates. Their names have
varied very much even since the times of the Cru-
saders. The multiplicity of names for these va-
rious gates—they all have two or three today—and
their frequent changes are worth noticing in con-
nection with the fact that in the OT history some
of the gates appear to have had two or more names.


ORR nt bog Mente


St. Stephen’s Gate.


As bas been mentioned, the course of the present
southern wall is the result of Rom reconstruction
of the city since the time of Titus. To Warren,
Guthe, Maudslay and Bliss we owe a great deal of
certain knowledge of its more ancient course.
These explorers have shown that in all the pre-Rom
period (and at least one period since) the contin-
uation southward of the western and eastern ridges,
as well as the wide valley between—an area now
but sparsely inhabited—was the site of at once the
most crowded life, and the most stirring scenes in


the Heb history of the city. The sanctity of the
Holy Sepulchre has caused the city life to center
itself more and more around :that sanctuary,
thereby greatly confusing the ancient topography

for many centuries.
(1) Warren’s excavations revealed: (4) a mas-
sive masonry wall 46 ft. E. of the Golden Gate,
which curved toward the W. at ita


4. Buried northern end, following the ancient
Remains rock contours at this spot. It is
of Earlier probable that this was the eastern
Walls wall of the city in pre-Herodian times.


Unfortunately the existence of a large
Moslem cemetery outside the eastern wall of the
Haram precludes the possibility of any more exca-
vations in this neighborhood. (6) More important
remains in the southeastern hill, commonly known
as “Ophel.”’ Here commencing at the south-
eastern angle of the Haram, Warren uncovered
a wall 144 ft. thick running 8. for 90 ft. and then
S.W. along the edge of the hill for 700 ft. This
wall, which shows at least two periods of construc-
tion, abuts on the sanctuary wall with a straight
joint. Along its course were found 4 small towers
with a projection of 6 ft. and a face from 22 to
28 ft. broad, and a great corner tower projecting
413 ft. irom the wall and with a face 80 ft. broad.
The face of this great tower consists of stones one
to two ft. high and 2 or 3 ft. long; it is founded upon
rock and stands to the height of 66 ft. Warren
considers that this may be ha-mighdal ha-ydcé or
“tower that standeth out’’ of Neh 3 25.

(2) In 1881 Professor Guthe picked up frag-
mentary traces of this city-wall farther south, and
im the excavations of Captain Parker (1910-11)
further fragments of massive walls and a very an-
cient gate have been found.

(8) Maudslay’s excavations were on the sonth-
western hill, on the site occupied by ‘Bishop Gobat’s
School” for boys, and in the adjoining Anglo-
German cemetery. The school is built over a
great mass of searped rock 45 ft. sq., which rises
to a height of 20 ft. from a platform which surrounds
it and with which it is connected by a rock-cut
stairway; upon this massive foundation must have
stood a great tower at what was in ancient times
the southwestern corner of the city. From this
point a scarp facing westward was traced for 100
{t. northward toward the modern southwestern
angle of the walls, while a rock scarp, in places 40 ft.
high on the outer or southern side and at least
14 ft. on the inner face, was followed for 250 ft.
eastward until it reached another great rock pro-
jection with a face of 43 ft. Although no stones
were found in sifu, it is evident that such great rock
cuttings must have supported a wall and tower of
extraordinary strength, and hundreds of massive
squared stones belonging to this wall are now in-
corporated in neighboring buildings.

(4) Bliss and Dickie’s work commenced at the
southeastern extremity of Maudslay’s scarp, where
was the above-mentioned massive projection for a
tower,and here were found several courses of masonry
still in situ. This tower appears to have been the
point of divergence of two distinct lines of wall, one
of which ran in a direction N.E., skirting the edge
of the southeastern hill, and probably joined the
line of the modern walls at the ruined masonry
tower known as Burj el Kebrit, and another run-
ning 8.E. down toward the Pool of Siloam, along
the edge of the Wady er Rébébi (Hinnom). The
former of these walls cannot be very ancient, be-
cause of the occurrence of late Byzantine mold-
ings in its foundations. The coenaculum was in-
cluded in the city somewhere about 485-450 AD
(see IX, 55), and also in the 14theent. Bliss eon-
siders it probable that this is the wall built in 1239


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1604


by Frederick II, and it is certainly that depicted in
the map of Marino Sanuto (1321 AD). Although
these masonry remains are thus comparatively late,
there were some reasons for thinking that at a much
earlier date a wall took a similar direction along the
edge of the southwestern hill; and it is an attractive
theory, though unsupported hy any very definite
archaeological evidence, that the wall of Solomon
took also this general line. The wall running 8.E.
from the tower, along the edge of the gorge of
Hinnom, is historically of much greater importance.
Bliss’s investigations showed that here were remains
belonging to several periods, covering altogether
considerably over a millennium. The upper line
of wall was of fine masonry, with stones 1 ft. by
3 ft. in size, beautifully jointed and finely dressed;
in some places this wall was founded upon the
remains of the lower wall, in others a layer of débris
intervened. It is impossible that this upper wall
can be pre-Rom, and Bliss ascribes it to the Empress
Eudoxia (see [X, 55). The lower wall rested upon
the rock and showed at least 3 periods of construc-
tion. In the earliest the stones had broad margins
and were carefully jointed, without mortar. This
may have been the work of Solomon or one of the
early kings of Judah. The later remains are evi-
dently of the nature of repairs, and include the
work of the later Judaean kings, and of Nehemiah
and of all the wall-repairers, down to the destruction
in 70 AD. At somewhat irregular intervals along
the wall were towers of very similar projection and
breadth to those found on Warren’s wall on the
southeastern hill. The wall foundations were
traced—except for an interval where they passed
under a Jewish cemetery—all the way to the mouth
of the Tyropeeon valley. The upper wall disap-
peared (the stones having been all removed for later
buildings) before the Jewish cemetery was reached.
During most periods, if not indeed in all, the wall
was carried across the mouth of the Tyropoon
valley upon a great dam of which the


5. The massive foundations still exist under
Great Dam the ground, some 50 ft. to the EK. of
of the the slighter dam which today supports
Tyropeon the Birketel Hamra (seeSttoaM). This


ancient dam evidently once supported
a pool in the mouth of the Tyropceon, and it showed
evidences of having undergone buttressing and other
changes and repairs. Although it is clear that dur-
ing the greater part of Jewish history, before and
after the captivity, the southern wall of Jerus
crossed upon this dam, there were remains of walls
found which tended to show that at one period, at
any rate, the wall circled round the two Siloam
pools, leaving them outside the fortifications.

In the stretch of wall from “Maudslay’s Scarp”
to the Tyropmon valley remains of 2 city gates

were found, and doubtful indications
6. Ruins of of 2 others. The ruins of the first of
Ancient these gates are now included in the
Gates new extension of the Anglo-German

cemetery. The gate had door sills,
with sockets, of 4 periods superimposed upon each
other; the width of the entrance was 8 ft. 10 in.
during the earliest, and 8 ft. at the latest period.
The character of the masonry tended to show that
the gate belonged to the upper wall, which is appar-
ently entirely of the Christian era. If this is so,
this cannot be the “‘Gate of the Gai’ of Neh 3 13,
although the earlier gate may have occupied this
site. Bliss suggests as a probable position for this
gate an interval between the two contiguous towers
IV and V, a little farther to the E.

Another gate was a small one, 4 ft. 10. in. wide,
marked only by the cuttings in the rock for the door
sockets. It lay a little to the W. of the city gate
next to be described, and hoth from its position and


its insignificance, it does not appear to have been
an entrance to the city; it may, as Bliss suggests,
have given access to a tower, now destroyed.

The second great city gateway was found some
200 ft. S. of the Birket el Hamra, close to the south-
eastern angle of the ancient wall. The existing
remains are bonded into walls of the earlier period,
but the three superimposed door sills, with their
sockets—to be seen uncovered today in situ—
mark three distinct periods of long duration. The
gate gave access to the great main street running
down the Tyropceon, underneath which ran a great
rock-cut drain, which probably traversed the whole
central valley of the city. During the last two
periods of the gate’s use, a tower was erected—at the
exact southeastern angle—to protect the entrance.
The earliest remains here probably belong to the
Jewish kings, and it is very probable that we have
here the gate called by Neh (3 13) the ‘Dung
Gate.’’ Bliss considered that it might be the
“Fountain Gate’ (Neh 3 15), which, however,
was probably more to the E., althongh Bliss could
find no remains of it surviving. The repairs and
alterations here have been so extensive that its
disappearance is in no way surprising. The Foun-
tain Gate is almost certainly identical with the
“Gate between the Two Walls,’ through which
Zedekiah and his men of war fled (2 K 25 4; Jer.
39 4; 527).

The most definite account of the old walls is that
of Jos (BJ, V, iv, 1, 2), and though it referred pri-

marily to the existing walls of his day,
7. Josephus’ it is a convenient one for commencing
Description the historical survey. He describes
of the Walls three walls. The first wall “began

on the N., at the tower called Hippi-
cus, and extended as far as the Xistus, and then
joining at the Council House, ended at the west-
ern cloister of the temple.’”’” On the course of this
section of the wall there is no dispute. The tower
Hippicus was close to the present Jaffa Gate, and
the wall ran from here almost due W. to the
temple-area along the southern edge of the western
arm of the Tyropceon (see III, 2, above). It is
probable that the Haret ed Dawdyeh, a street run-

ning nearly parallel with the neigh-
8. First boring “David Street,’? but high up
Wall above it, lies above the foundations
of this wall. It must have crossed
the main Tyropceon near the Tarik bab es Silsilel,
and joined the western cloisters close to where the
Mehkemeh, the present “Council House,” is sit~
uated.

Jos traces the southern course of the first wall
thus: “It began at the same place [i.e. Hippicus],
and extended through a place called Bethso to the
gate of the Essenes; and after that it went south-
ward, having its bending above the fountain Siloam,
when it also bends again toward the E. at Solomon’s
Pool, and reaches as far as a certain place which
they called ‘Ophlas,’ where it was joined to the
eastern cloister of the temple.” Although the main
course of this wall has now been followed with pick
and shovel, several points are still uncertain.
Bethso is not known, but must have heen close to
the southwestern angle, which, as we have seen, was
situated where ‘Bishop Gobat’s School” is today.
It is very probably identical with the ‘Tower of
the Furnaces’ of Neh 3 11, while the “Gate of the
Essenes” must have been near, if not identical with,
the “Gate of the Gai” of ver 13. The description
of Jos certainly seems to imply that the mouth of the
Siloam aqueduct (‘fountain of Siloam’) and the
pools were hoth outside the fortification. We have
seen from these indications in the underground
remains that this was the case at one period.
Solomon’s Pool is very probably represented by the


1605


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


modern Birket el Hamra. It is clear that the wall
from here to the southeastern angle of the temple-
platform followed the edge of the southeastern hill,
and coincided farther north with the old wall ex-
cavated by Warren. As will be shown below, this
first wall was the main fortification of the city from
the time of the kings of Judah onward. In the
time of Jos, this first wall had 60 towers.


Probable Course of the Three Walls Described by
Josephus.
The ‘‘Second Wall"’ was probably added in the days of the Hasmonean rulers;
the “Third Wall'’ was commenced hy Herod Agrippa 1 and hurriedly
finished shortly before the siege by Titus.


The Second Wall of Jos ‘‘took its beginning from
that gate which they called ‘Gennath,’ which be-
longed to the first wall: it only en-
compassed the northern quarter of the
eity and reached as far as the tower
: Antonia” (ib). In no part of Jerus
topography has there been more disagreement than
upon this wall, both as regards its curve and as
regards its date of origin. Unfortunately, we have
no idea at all where the ‘‘Gate Gennath’’ was. The
Tower Antonia we know. The line must have
passed in a curved or zigzag direction from some
unknown point on the first wall, i.e. between the
Jaffa Gate and the Haram to the Antonia. A con-
siderable number of anthorities in the past and a
few careful students today would identify the
general course of this wall with that of the modern
northern wall. The greatest objections to this
view are that no really satisfactory alternative
course has been laid down for the third wall (see
below), and that it must have run far N. of the
Antonia, a course which does not seem to agree
with the description of Jos, which states that the
wall “went up” to the Antonia. On the other hand,
no certain remains of any city wall within the
pea north wall have ever been found; fragments

ave been reported by various observers (e.g. the
piece referred to as forming the eastern wall of the
so-called “Pool of Hezekiah’; see VII, ii, below),
but in an area so frequently desolated and rebuilt
upon—where the demand for squared stones must
always have been great—-it is probable that the
traces, if surviving at all, are very scanty. This
is the case with the south wall excavated by Bliss
(see VI), and that neighborhood has for many


9. Second
Wall


centuries been unbuilt upon. It is quite probable
that the area included within the second wall may
have been quite small, merely the buildings which
clustered along the sides of the Tyropceon. Its
40 towers may have been small and built close
together, because the position was, from the mili-
tary aspect, weak. It must be remembered that it
was the unsatisfactory state of the second wall
which necessitated a third wall. There is no abso-
lute reason why it may not have excluded the greater
part of the northwestern hill—and with it the site
of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre—but there is
no proof that it did. The date of the second wall
is unknown (see below).

This third wall, which was commenced after the
time of Christ by Herod Agrippa I, is described in

more detail by Jos. It was begun
10. Third upon an elaborate plan, but was not
Wall finished in its original design because
Agrippa feared Claudius Caesar, “lest
he should suspect that so strong a wall was built
in order to make some innovation in public affairs’
(BJ, V, iv, 2). It, however, at the time of the siege,
was of a breadth of over 18 ft., and a height of 40
ft., and had 90 massive towers. Jos describes it as
beginning at the tower Hippicus (near the Jaffa
Gate), “‘where it reached as far as the north quarter
of the city, and the tower Psephinus.’’ This
mighty tower, 135 it. high, was at the northwestern
corner and overlooked the whole city. From it,
according to Jos (BJ, V, vi, 3), there was a view
of Arabia (Moab) at sunrising, and also of “the
utmost limits of the Heb possessions at the Sea
westward.’ From this corner the wall turned
eastward until it came over against the monuments
of Helene of Adiabene, a statement, however, which
must be read in connection with another passage
(Ant, XX, iv, 3), where it says that this tomb “was
distant no more than 3 furlongs from the city of
Jerus.” The wall then “extended to a very great
length” and passed by the sepulchral caverns of the
kings—which may well be the so-called ‘“Solomon’s
Quarries,’ and it then bent at the “Tower of the
Corner,’’ at a monument which is called the Monu-
ment of the Fuller (not identified), and joined to
the old wall at the Kidron valley.

The commonly accepted theory is that a great
part of this line of wall is that pursued by the
modern north wall, and Kal‘at el Jalud, or rather the
foundation of it, that marks the site of Psephinus.
The Damascus Gate is certainly on the line of some
earlier gate. The ‘Tower of the Corner” was prob-
ably about where the modern Herod’s Gate is, or a
little more to the E., and the course of the wall was
from here very probably along the southern edge of
the “St. Anne’s Valley,”’ joining on to the N.E. corner
of the Haram a little 8. of the present St. Stephen’s
Gate. This course of the wall fits in well with the
description of Jos. If. the so-called ““Tombs of the
Kings” are really those of Queen Helena of Adiabene
and her family, then the distance given as 3 fur-
longs is not as far out as the distance to the modern
wall; the distance is actually 33 furlongs.

Others, following the learned Dr. Robinson, find
it impossible to believe that the total circuit of the
walls was so small, and would carry the third wall
considerably farther north, making the general line
of the modern north wall coincide with the second
wall of Jos. The supporters of this view point to
the description of the extensive view from Psephinus,
and contend that this presupposed a site on still
higher ground, e.g. where the present Russian
buildings now are. They also claim that the state-
ment that the wall came “over against’’ the monu-
ment of Queen Helena certainly should mean very
much nearer that monument than the present walls.
Dr. Robinson and others who have followed him


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1606


have pointed to various fragments which they claim
to have been pieces of the missing wall. The present
writer, after very many years’ residence in Jerus,
watchmg the buildings which in the last 25 years
have sprung up over the area across which this line
of wall is claimed to have run, has never seen a
trace of wall foundations or of fosse which was in
the very least convincing; while on the other hand
this area now being rapidly covered by the modern
suburb of Jerus presents almost everywhere below
the surface virgin rock. There is no evidence of
any more buildings than occasional scattered Rom
villas, with mosaic floors. The present writer has
rather unwillingly come to the opinion that the city
walls were never farther north than the line they
follow today. With respect to the objection raised
that there could not possibly have been room enough
between the two walls for the “Camp of the As-
syrians,’’ where Titus pitched his camp (BJ, V, vii,
3), any probable line for the second wall would leave
a mean of 1,000 ft. between the two walls, and in
several directions considerably more. The proba-
ble position of the “Camp of the Assyrians’’ would,
according to this view, be in the high ground (the
northwestern hill) now occupied by the Christian
quarter of the modern city. The question of what
the population of Jerus was at this period is dis-
cussed in IX, 49, below. For the other great build-
ings of the city at this period, see also IX, 43-44,
below.
Taking then the walls of Jerus as described by
Jos, we may work backward and see how the walls
ran in earlier periods. The third wall
11. Date of does not concern us any more, as it
Second was built after the Crucifixion. With
Wall respect to the second wall, there is a
great deal of difference of opinion re-
garding its origm. Some consider, like Sir Charles
Watson, that it does not go back earlier than the


Probable Course of Walls and Position of the Principal
Gates from Hezekiah till Long after Nehemiah.
(The N.E. corner is necessarily doubtful.)


N.B.—The fortress Zion, renamed by David ‘‘City of David," became in later
times ‘‘Akra,'' the fortross of the Syrians.


Hasmoneans; whereas others (e.g. G. A. Smith), be-
cause of the expression in 2 Ch 82 5 that Hezekiah,
after repairing the wall, raised ‘‘another wall with-
out,” think that this wall goes back as far as this


monarch. The evidence is inconclusive, but. the
most probable view seems to be that the “first
wall,” as described by Jos, was the only circuit of
wall from the kings of Judah down to the 2d cent.

BC, and perhaps later. ae
The most complete Scriptural description we
have of the walls and gates of Jerus is that given by
Nehemiah. His account is valuable,


12. Nehe- not only as a record of what he did,
miah’s but of what had been the state of the
Account of walls before the exile. It is perfectly
the Walls clear that considerable traces of the


old walls and gates remained, and
that his one endeavor was to restore what had been
before—even though it produced a city enclosure
much larger than necessary at his time. The
relevant passages are Neh 2 13-15, the account of
his night ride; 3 1-82, the description of the re-
building; and 12 31-39, the routes of the two pro-
cessions at the dedication. roe fs Re

In the first account we learn that Nehemiah
went out by night by the Vatney Gare (q.v.), or

Gate of the Gai, a gate (that is, opening)
13. Valley into the Gai Hinnom, and probably at
Gate or near the gate discovered by Bliss
in what is now part of the Anglo-
German cemetery; he passed from it to the Dung
Gate, and from here viewed the walls of the city.

This, with considerable assurance, may
14. Dung be located at the ruined foundations
Gate of a gate discovered by Bliss at the
southeastern corner of the city. The
line of wall clearly followed the south edge of the
southwestern hill from the Anglo-German cemetery
to this point. He then proceeded to the Fountain

Gate, the site of which has not been re-
15. Fountain covered, but, as there must have been
Gate water running out here (as today) from

the mouth of the Siloam tunnel, is
very appropriately named here. Near by was the
Kine’s Poon (q.v.), probably the pool—now deeply
buried—which is today represented by the Birket
el Hamra. Here Nehemiah apparently thought of
turning into the city, “but there was no place for
the beast that was under me to pass” (2 14), so he
went up by the Nahal (Kidron), viewed the walls
from there, and then retraced his steps to the Valley
Gate. There is another possibility, and that is that
the King’s Pool was the pool (which certainly existed)
at Gihon, in which case the Fountain Gate may also
have been in that neighborhood.

All the archaeological evidence is in favor of the
wall having crossed the mouth of the Tyropceon by
the great dam at this time, and the propinquity
of this structure to the Fountain Gate is seen in
Neh 3 15, where we read that Shallum built the
Fountain Gate ‘“‘and covered it, and set up the doors
thereof . . . . and the bars thereof, and the wall
of the pool of Shelah [see Sttoam] by the Kina’s
GARDEN [q.v.], even unto the stairs that go down
from the city of David.” All these localities were
close together at the mouth of el Wad.

Passing from here we can follow the circuit of
the city from the accounts of the rebuilding of the
walls in Neh 3 15f. The wall from here was
carried “over against the sepulchres of David,”
which we know to have stood in the original “City
of David” above Gihon, past “the pool that was
made,” and “the house of the Gibborim” (mighty
men)—both unknown sites. It is clear that the
wall is being carried along the edge of the south-
eastern hill toward the temple. We read of two
angles in the wall—both needed by the geographical
conditions—the high priest’s house, of “the tower
that standeth out’’ (supposed to have been un-
aoe by Warren), and the wall of the OpHEL

q.v.).


1607


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


There is also mention of a Water Gate in this
position, which is just where one would expect a
road to lead from the temple-area down
16. Water to Gihon. From the great number of
Gate companies engaged in building, it may
be inferred that all along this stretch
of wall from the Tyropceon to the temple, the de-
struction of the walls had been specially great.
Proceeding N., we come to the Horse Gate.
This was close to the entry to the king’s house


(2 K 11 16; 2 Ch 23 15; Jer 31
17. Horse 40). The expression used, “above”
Gate the Horse Gate, may imply that the


gate itself may have been uninjured;
it may have been a kind of rock-cut passage or
tunnel. It cannot have been far from the present
southeastern angle of the city. Thence “repaired
the priests, every one over against his own house’
—the houses of these people being to the E. of the
temple. Then comes the Gare or HaMMIPHKAD
(q.v.), the ascent (or “upper chamber,’’ m) of the

corner, and finally the Susee GaTe
18. Sheep (q.v.), which was repaired by the
Gate goldsmiths and merchants. This last
gate was the pomt from which the
circuit of the repairs was traced. The references,
Neh 8 1.31; 12 39, clearly show that it was at the
eastern extremity of the north wall.

The details of the gates and buildings in the north
wall as described by Nehemiah, are difficult, and
certainty is impossible; this side must always neces-
sarily have been the weak side for defence because
it was protected by no, or at best by very little,
natural valley. As has been said, we cannot be
certain whether Nehemiah is describing a wall
which on its western two-thirds corresponded with
the first or the second wall of Jos. Taking the first
theory as probable, we may plan it as follows: W.
of the Sheep Gate two towers are mentioned (Neh
3 1; 12 39). Of these Hanane (q.v.) was more
easterly than Hamman (q.v.), and, too, it would
appear from Zec 14 10 to have been the most
northerly point of the city. Probably then two
towers occupied the important hill where afterward
stood the fortress Baris and, later, the Antonia.
At the Hammeah tower the wall would descend
into the Tyropceon to join the eastern extremity of
the first wall where in the time of Jos stood the
Council House (BJ, V, iv, 2).

It is generally considered that the Fish Garr
(q.v.) (Neh 3 3; 12 39; Zeph 110; 2 Ch 33

14) stood across the Tyropceon in
19. Fish much the same way as the modern
Gate Damascus Gate does now, only con-
siderably farther 8. It was probably
so dalled because here the men of Tyre sold their
fish (Neh 13 16). It is very probably identical
with the “Middle Gate’ of Jer 39 3. With this
region are associated the MisHNEH (q.v.) or “‘sec-
ond quarter’ (Zeph 1 10m) and the Maxres#
(q.v.) or “mortar”? (Zeph 1 11).

The next gate westward, after apparently a con-

siderable interval, is tr? in EV the “Op Gate”

q.v.), but is more correctly the “Gate
20. “Old of theold.. . .”; what the word thus
Gate’? qualified is, is doubtful. Neh 3 6m

suggests “old city” or ‘old wall,”
whereas Mitchell (Wall of Jerus according to the
Book of Neh) proposes “old pool,” taking the pool
_in question to be the so-called ‘Pool of Hezekiah.’
According to the view here accepted, that the
account of Neh refers only to the first wall, the ex-
pression “old wall’? would be peculiarly suitable,
as here must have been some part of that first wall
which went back unaltered to the time of Solomon.
The western wall to the extent of 400 cubits had
been rebuilt after its destruction by Jehoash, king


of Israel (see IX, 12, below), and Manasseh had
repaired all the wall from Gihon round N. and then
W. to the Fish Gate. This gate has also been
identified with the Sha‘ar ha-Pinnah, or “Corner
Gate,” of 2K 14 13; 2 Ch 25 23; Jer 31 38;
Zec 14 10, and with the Sha‘ar ha-Ri'shén, or ‘First
Gate,” of Zec 14 10, which is identified as the same
as the Corner Gate; indeed ri’shén (‘‘first’’) is prob-
ably a textual error for ydshdn (“old”). If this is
so, this ‘‘Gate of the Old” or ‘Corner Gate’? must
have stood near the northwestern corner of the city,
somewhere near the present Jaffa Gate.
The next gate mentioned is the Gate of Ephraim
(Neh 12 39), which, according to 2 K 14 13;
2 Ch 25 23, was 400 cubits or 600 ft.
21, Gate of from the Corner Gate. This must
Ephraim have been somewhere on the western
wall; it is scarcely possible to believe,
as some writers would suggest, that there could
have been no single gate between the Corner Gate
near the northwestern corner and the Valley Gate
on the southern wall.
The “Broad Wall” appears to correspond to the
southern stretch of the western wall


22. Tower as far as the ‘Tower of the Furnaces”
of the or ovens, which was probably the
Furnaces extremely important corner tower


now incorporated in “Bishop Gobat’s
School.’ This circuit of the walls satisfies fairly
well all the conditions; the difficulties are chiefly
on the N. and W. It is a problem how the Gate
of Ephraim comes to be omitted in the account of
the repairs, but G. A. Smith suggests that it may be
indicated by the expression, ‘‘throne of the governor ‘
beyond the river’ (Neh 3 7). See, however, Mitchell
(loc. cit.). If the theory be accepted that the second
wall already existed, the Corner Gate and the Fish
Gate will have to be placed farther north.


Probable Course of Solomon's Wall.


In OT as in later times, some of the gates appear
to have received different names at various times.
Thus the Sheep Gate, at the north-

23. The eastern angle, appears to be identical
Gate of with the Gate of Benjamin or Upper
Benjamin Cate of Benjamin (Jer 20 2; 37 13;
38 7); the prophet was going, appar-

ently, the nearest way to his home in Anathoth.


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1608


In Zec 14 10 the breadth of the city is indicated,
where the prophet writes, “She shall be lifted up,
and shall dwell in her place, from Benjamin’s gate
unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner
gate.’

The Upper Gate of the Temple (2 K 15 35;
2 Ch 27 3; cf 2 Ch 23 20; Ezk 9 2) is probably

another name for the same gate. It
24. Upper must be remembered the gates were,
Gate of the as excavations have shown us, re-
Temple duced to a minimum in fortified sites:
they were sources of weakness.

The general outline of the walls and gates thus
followed is in the main that existing from Nehemiah
back until the early Judaean monarchy, and possi-
bly to Solomon.


centered round it. The three sources of supply
have been (1) springs, (2) cisterns, (3) aqueducts.
(1) The natural springs have been described in
II, 3; but connected with them, and esp. with the
city’s greatest and most venerated source, the
Gihon, there are certain antiquarian remains of
great interest. : , :
~ (a) The “Virgin’s Fount,” ancient Gihon, arises,
as has been described (II, 3), in a rocky cleft in the
Kidron valley bottom; under natural
1. Gihon: conditions the water would run along
The Natural the valley bed, now deeply buried
Spring under débris of the ancient city, and
doubtless when the earliest settlers
made their dwellings in the caves (which have been
excavated) on the sides of the valley near the spring,


All


\
Teg! yy


it


Fe


Semr-DiacramMatic PLan or ‘‘ Warren's SHarr’? anp Orner Rock Passaces (Mopiriep FROM WARREN, PEF).


1, Steps leading to the Virgin's Fount (Gihon).


pendicular shaft 40 feet high.
Parker's Shaft.


Of the various destructions and repairs which
occurred during the time of the monarchy, a suffi-
cient account is given in IX below, on


25. The the history. Solomon was probably
Earlier the first to inclose the northwestern
Walls hill within the walls, and to him usually


is ascribed all the northern and western
stretch of the ‘First Wall’; whether his wall ran
down to the mouth of the Tyropceon, or only
skirted the summit of the northwestern hill is un-
certain, but the latter view is probable. David
was protected by the powerful fortifications of the
Jebusites, which probably inclosed only the south-
eastern hill; he added to the defences the fortress
Miz0 (q.v.). It is quite possible that the original
Jebusite city had but one gate, on the N. (2 S 15 2),
but the city must have overflowed its narrow limits
during David’s reign and have needed an extended
and powerful defence, such as Solomon made, to
secure the capital. For the varied history and
situation of the walls in the post-Bib. period, see
IX (‘‘History’’), below.

VII. Antiquarian Remains Connected with the
Water-Supply.—In a city like Jerus, where the prob-
lem of a water-supply must always have been one
of the greatest, it is only natural that some of the
most ancient and important works should have


2. Fissure in the rocky valley bed from which spring arises.
waters, 4. Cave at the commencement of the rock aequeduct. 5. Commencement of the Siloam (Hezekiah’s) aqueduct.
9. Lofty cave-like tunnel leading to shaft.


8. Ancient wall constructed to dam up the
6, 7. Other aqueducts. 8. Per-


10. The chasm, now cleared to the bottom. 11. Warren's Arch. 12, Captain


they and their flocks lived on the banks of a stream
of running water in a sequestered valley among
waterless hills. From, however, a comparatively
early period—at the least 2000 BC—efforts were
made to retain some of the water, and a solid stone
dam was built which converted the sources into a
pool of considerable depth. Either then, or some-
what later, excavations were made in the cliffs over-
hanging the pool, whereby some at least of these
waters were conducted, by means of a tunnel, into
the heart of the southeastern hill, “Ophel,”’ so that
the source could be reached from within the city
walls. There are today two systems of tunnels
which are usually classed as one under the name of
the “Siloam aqueduct,” but the two systems are
probably many centuries apart in age. The older
tunnel begins in a cave near the source and then
runs westward for a distance of 67 ft.; at the inner
end of the tunnel there is a perpendicu-


2. The lar shaft which ascends for over 40 ft.
Aqueduct and opens into a lofty rock-cut passage
of the which runs, with a slight lateral curva-
Canaanites ture, to the N., in the direction of the


: surface. The upper end has been
partially destroyed, and the roof, which had fallen
in, was long ago partially restored by a masonry
arch. At this part of the passage the floor is


1609


abruptly interrupted across its whole width by a
deep chasm which Warren partially excavated, but
which Parker has since conclusively shown to end
blindly. It is clear that this great gallery, which is
8 to 9 ft. wide, and in places as high or higher, was
eonstructed (a natural cavern possibly utilized in
the process) to enable the inhabitants of the walled-
in city above it to reach the spring. It is in fact
a similar work to the great water-passage at Guzen
(q.v.), which commenced in a rock-cut pit 26 ft.
deep and descended with steps, to a depth of 94 ft.
6 in. below the level of the rock surface; the slop-
ing passage was 23 ft. high and 13 ft. broad. This
passage which could be dated with certainty as before
1500 BC, and almost certainly as early as 2000 BC,
was cut out with flint knives and apparently was
made entirely to reach a great underground source of
water. The discovery of this Gezer well-passage has
thrown a flood of light upon the “Warren's Shaft”
in Jerus, which would appear to have
3. Warren’s been made for an exactly similar pur-
Shaft pose. The chasm mentioned before
may have been an effort to reach the
source from a higher point, or it may have been
made, or later adapted, to prevent ingress by means
of the system of tunnels into the city. This passage
is in all probability the ‘watercourse’ (“15% , ¢in-
nor) of 2 5 6 8 up which, apparently, Joab and
his men (1 Ch 11 6) secretly made their way;
they must have waded through the water at the
source, ascended the perpendicular shaft (a feat
performed in 1910 by some British officers without
any assistance from ladders), and then made their
way into the heart of the city along the great tunnel.
Judging by the similar Gezer water tunnel, this
great work may not only have existed in David’s
time, but may have been constructed as much as
1,000 years before.
The true Siloam tunnel is a considerably later
work. It branches off from the older aqueduct at
a point 67 ft. from the entrance, and


4, Heze- after running an exceedingly winding
kiah’s course of 1,682 ft., it empties itself
“Siloam” into the Pool of Siloam (total length
Aqueduct 1,749ft.). The whole canal is rock cut;


it is 2 to 3 ft. wide, and varies in height
from 16 ft. at the south end to 4 ft. 6 in. at the lowest
point, near the middle. Thecondition of this tunnel
has recently been greatly changed through Captain
Parker’s party having cleared out the accumulated
silt of centuries; before this, parts of the channel
could be traversed only with the greatest difficulty
and discomfort. The primitive nature of this con-
struction is shown by the many false passages made,
and also by the extensive curves which greatly add
to its length. This latter may also be partly due
to the workmen following lines of soft strata. M.
Clermont-Ganneau and others have thought that
one or more of the great curves may have been
made deliberately to avoid the tombs of the kings
of Judah. The method of construction of the
tunnel is narrated in the Siloam Inscription (see
Sttoam). It was begun simultaneously from each
end, and the two parties met in the middle. It is
a remarkable thing that there is a difference of level
of only one foot at each end; but the lofty height
of the southern end is probably due to a lowering of
the floor here after the junction was effected. It is
practically certain that this great work is that
referred to in 2 K 20 20: ‘Now the rest of the
acts of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he
made the pool, and the conduit, and brought water
into the city, are they not written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Judah?’ And in 2 Ch
32 30: “This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper
spring of the waters of Gihon, and brought them
straight down on the west side of the city of David.”


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


In addition to these two conduits, which have a
direct Scriptural intcrest, there are remains of at
least two other aqueduects which take

5. Other their origin at the Virgin’s Fount—
Aqueducts one a channel deeply cut in rock along
at Gihon the western sides of the Kidron valley,
found by Captain Parker, and the other

a built channel, lined with very good cement, which
takes its rise at a lower level than any of the other


&
Birket Mamilla &
Ague duty, Birk et


The Water-Supply.


conduits close to the before-mentioned rocky cleft
from which the water rises, and runs in a very wind-
ing direction along the western side of the Kidron.
This the present writer has described in PEFS,
1902. One of these, perhaps more probably the
former, may be the conduit which is referred to as
Shiloah (shiloh), or “conducted” (Isa 8 6), before
the construction of Hezekiah’s work (see Sito).
There are other caves and rock-cut channels
around the ancient Gihon which cannot fully be
described here, but which abundantly confirm the
sanctity of the site.
(b) Bir Eyyfb has a depth of 125 ft.; the water
collects at the hottom in a large rock-hewn chamber,
and it is clear that it has been deep-


6. Bir ened at some period, because at the
Eyyaib depth of 113 ft. there is a collecting

chamber which is now replaced by the
deeper one. Various rock-cut passages or stair-


cases were found by Warren in the neighborhood of
this well.
(2) The cisterns and tanks Every ancient site
in the hill country of Pal is riddled with cisterns
for the storage of rain water. In
7. Varieties Jerus for very many centuries the
of Cisterns private resident has depended largely
upon the water collected from the roof
of his house for all domestic purposes. Such cisterns
lie either under or alongside the dwelling. Many
of the earliest of these excavations are bottle-shaped,
with a comparatively narrow mouth cut through
the hard Mizzeh and a large rounded exeavation
made in the underlying Melekeh (see II, 1 above).
Other ancient cisterns are cavities hewn in the rock,
of irregular shape, with a roof of harder rock and
often several openings. The later forms are vaulted
over, and are either cut in the rock or sometimes
partially built in the superlying rubbish.


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1610


_ For more public purposes large cisterns were made
in the Haram, or temple-area. Some 3 dozen are
known and planned; the largest is calculated to
contain 3,000,000 gallons. Such structures were
made largely for the religious ritual, but, as we shall
see, they have been supplied by other sources than
the rainfall. In many parts of the city open tanks
have been constructed, such a tank being known in
Arab. as a birkeh, or, followed by a vowel, birket.
With most of these there is considerable doubt as
to their date of construction, but probably none of
them, in their present form at any rate, antedates
the Rom period.
Within the city walls the largest reservoir is the
Birket Israél which extends from the northeastern
angle of the Haram westward for 360
8. Birket ft. It is 125 ft. wide and was origi-


Israél nally 80 ft. deep, but has in recent years
been largely filled up by the city’s
refuse. The eastern and western ends of this pool


are partially rock-cut and partly masonry, the
masonry of the former being a great dam 45 ft.
thick, the lower part of which is continuous with
the ancient eastern wall of the temple-area. The
sides of the pool are entirely masonry because this
reservoir is built across the width of the valley
referred to before (III, 2) as ‘St. Anne’s Valley.”
Other parts of this valley are filled with débris to
the depth of 100 ft. The original bottom of the
reservoir is covered with a layer of about 19 in. of
very hard concrete and cement. There was a great
conduit at the eastern end of the pool built of mas-
sive stones, and connected with the pool by a per-
forated stone with three round holes 5} in. in diame-
ter. The position of this outlet shows that all water
over a depth of 22 ft. must have flowed away.
Some authorities consider this pool to have been
preéxilic. By early Christian pilgrims it was identi-
fied as the ‘Sheep Pool” of Jn 5 2, and at a later
period, until quite recent times, it was supposed
to have been the Pool of Bethesda.
9. Pool of The discovery, a few years ago, of the
Bethesda long-lost Piscina in the neighborhood
of the ‘Church of St. Anne,” which
was without doubt the Pool of Bethesda of the 5th
cent. AD, has caused this identification to be
abandoned. See Breruuspa.
To the W. of the Birket Israél are the ‘‘twin pools”
which extend under the roadway in the neighbor-
hood of the ‘“‘Ecce Homo” arch. The
10. The western one is 165 ft. by 20 ft. and the
Twin Pools castern 127 ft. by 20ft. M.Clermont-
Ganneau considers them to be iden-
tical with the Pool Struthius of Jos (BJ, V, xi, 4),
but others, considering that they are actually made
in the fosse of the Antonia, give them a later date
of origin. In connection with these pools a great
aqueduct was discovered in 1871, 23-3 ft. wide and
in places 12 ft. high, running from the neighborhood
of the Damascus Gate—but destroyed farther north
—and from the pools another aqueduct runs in the
direction of the Haram.
On the northwestern hill, between the Jaffa Gate
and the Church of the Sepulchre there is a large
open reservoir, known to the modern
11. Birket inhabitants of the city as Birket Ham-
Hammam mdm el Batrak, ‘the Pool of the Pa-
el Batrak triarch’s Bath.” It is 240 ft. long
(N. to §.), 144 ft. broad and 19-24
ft. deep. The cement lning of the bottom is
cracked and practically useless. | The eastern wall
of this pool is particularly massive, and forms the
base of the remarkably level street Haret en Nasara,
or “Christian Street”; it is a not improbable theory
that this is actually a fragment of the long-sought
“second” wall. If so, the pool, which is proved to
have once extended 60 ft. farther north, may have


been constructed originally as part of the fosse.
On the other hand, this pool appears to have been
the Amygdalon Pool, or “Pool of the Tower”
(posyan mo32, berekhath ha-mighdalin), men-
tioned by Jos (BJ, V, xi, 4), which was the scene
of the activities of the 10th legion, and this seems
inconsistent with the previous theory, as the events
described seem to imply that the second wall ran
outside the pool. The popular travelers’ name, ‘‘Pool
of Hezekiah,” given to this reservoir is due to the
theory, now quite discredited, that this is the pool
referred to in 2 K 20 20, ‘“He made the peek and
the conduit, and brought water into the city.”
Other earlier topographists have identified it as the
“upper pool” of Isa 7 3; 36 2.
The Birket Hammém el Batrak is supplied with
water from the Birket Mamilla, about } mile to the
. This large pool, 293 ft. long by
12. Birket 193 ft. broad and 193 ft. deep, lies
Mamilla in the midst of a large Moslem ceme-
tery at the head of the Wady Més, the
first beginning of the Wdédy er Rabébi (Hinnom).
The aqueduct which connects the two pools springs
from the eastern end of the Birket Mamilla, runs
a somewhat winding course and enters the city near
the Jaffa Gate. The aqueduct is in bad repair, and
the water it carries, chiefly during heavy rain, is
filthy. In the Middle Ages it was supposed that
this was the “Upper Pool of Gihon” (see GrHon),
but this and likewise the “highway of the FULLER’s
Fieip” (q.v.) are now located elsewhere. Wilson
and others have suggested that it is the ‘“‘Serpent’s
Pool” of Jos (BJ, V, iii, 2). Titus leveled “all the
places from Scopus to Herod’s monument which
adjoins the pool called that of the Serpent.” Like
many such identifications, there is not very much
to be said for or against it; it is probable that the
pool existed at the time of the siege. It is likely


-that this is the Beth Memel of the Talm (Talm Bab,


‘Eribhin 616; Sanhedhrin 24a; Beré’shith Rabba’ 51).
The Birket es Sulian is a large pool—or, more
strictly speaking, inclosure—555 ft. N. and 8. by
: 220 ft. E. and W. It is bounded on
13. Birket the W. and N. by a great curve of the
es Sultan low-level aqueduct as it passes along
and then across the Wddy er Rébébi.

The southern side consists of a massive dam across
the valley over which the Bethlehem carriage road
runs. The name may signify either the “great”
pool or be connected with the fact that it was re-
constructed in the 16th cent. by the sultan Suleiman
ibn Selim, as is recorded on an inscription upon a
wayside fountain upon the southern wall. This
pool is registered in the cartulary of the Holy
Sepulchre as the Lacus Germani, after the name of
a knight of Germanus, who built or renovated the
poolin 1176 AD. Probably a great part of the pool
is a catchment area, and the true reservoir is the
rock-cut birkeh at the southern end, which has
recently been cleaned out. It is extremely difficult
to believe that under any conditions any large pro-
portion of the whole area could ever have even been
filled. Today the reservoir at the lower end holds,
after the rainy season, some 10 or 12 ft. of very dirty
water, chiefly the street drainage of the Jaffa road,
while the upper two-thirds of the inclosure is used
as a cattle market on Fridays. The water is now
used for sprinkling the dusty roads in dry seasons.

The Pool of Siloam and the now dry Birket el
Hamra are described under Stroam (q.v.).

There are other tanks of considerable size in and
around the city, e.g. the Birket Sitti Miriam, near
“St. Stephen’s Gate,’ an uncemented pool in the
Wéady Jéz, conuected with which there is a rock-
cut aqueduct and others, but they are not of suffi-
cient historical importance to merit description here.


1611


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


(3) The conduits bringing water to the city from a

distance are called the “high-level” and “low-

level” aqueducts respectively, because

14. ‘*Solo- they reached the city at different levels

mon’s —the former probably somewhere

Pools” near the present Jaffa Gate, the latter
at the temple-platform.

The low-level aqueduct which, though out of

repair, can still be followed along its whole course,

conveyed water from three great pools


15. Low- in the Wady ‘Artas, 7 miles 8. of
Level Jerus. They are usually called “Solo-
Aqueduct mon’s pools,’ in reference perhaps


partly to Eecl 2 6: “I made me pools
of water, to water therefrom the forest. where trees
were reared,’’ but as any mighty work in Pal is apt
to be referred to the wise king of Israel, much stress
cannot be laid on the name. These three storage
reservoirs are constructed across the breadth of the
valley, the lowest and largest being 582 ft. long by
177 ft. broad and, at the lowest end, 50 ft. deep.
Although the overflow waters of ‘Ain es Sdleh,
commonly known as the “sealed fountain” (cf Cant
4 12), reach the pools, the chief function was
probably to collect the flood waters from the winter
rains, and the water was passed from tank to tank
after purification. There are in all four springs


o
Shafer


JERUSALEM &


Wady ef Ward


HERODIUIT


PLAN
OF THE


ENVIRONS OF JERUSALEM
e TO ILLUSTRATE THE


a AQUEDUCTS


The “Low Level“Agueduct (hus
The “High Level“Ayueduel ,,

The Wady BiarKhari2?
Aqueduct to the Herodium
Modern tron Pipe Conduit


eee


Bisket Arrib


Mee


(Modifud from Schick)


in this valley which supply the aqueduct which still
conveys water to Bethlehem, where it passes through
the hill by means of atunnel and then, after running,
winding along the sides of the hill, it enters another
tunnel now converted into a storage tank for Jerus;
from this it runs along the mountain sides and along


the southern slopes of the site of Jerus to the Haram.
The total length of this aqueduct is nearly 12 miles,
but at a later date the supply was increased by the
construction of a long extension of the conduit for
a further 28 miles to Wddy ‘Arrab on the road to
Hebron, another 5 miles directly S. of the pools.
Here, too, there is a reservoir, the Birket el ‘Arrab,
for the collection of the flood-water, and also several
small springs, which are conducted in a number of
underground rock-cut channels to the aqueduct.
The total length of the low-level aqueduct is about
40 miles, and the fall in level from Birket el ‘Arrab
(2,645 ft. above sea-level) at its far end to el Kés,
the termination in the Haram Jerus (2,410 ft. above
sea-level), is 235 ft.

The high-level aqueduct commences in a remark-
able chain of wells connected with a tunnel, about

4 miles long, in the Wddy Biar, “the
16. High- Valley of Wells.’ Upward of 50
Level wells along the valley bottom sup-
Aqueduct plied each its quotient; the water
thence passed through a pool where the
solid matter settled, and traversed a tunnel 1,700
ft. long into the ‘Artas valley. Here, where its
level was 150 ft. above that of the low-level aque-
duct, the conduit received the waters of the “sealed
fountain,” and finally ‘delivered them in Jerus at a
level of about 20 ft. above that of the Jaffa Gate’
(Wilson). The most remarkable feature of this
conduit is the inverted syphon of perforated lime-
stone blocks, forming a stone tube 15 in. in diameter,
which carried the water across the valley near
Rachel’s Tomb. On a number of these blocks,
Lat inscriptions with the names of centurions of the
time of Severus (195 AD) have been
found, and this has led many to fix
a date to this great work. So good
an authority as Wilson, however, con-
siders that these inscriptions may refer
to repairs, and that the work is more
probably Herodian. Unless the ac-
counts of Jos (BJ, V, iv, 4; II, xvii, 9) are exag-
gerated, Herod must have had some means of
bringing abundant running water into the city at
the level obtained by this conduit. The late Dr.
Schick even suggested a date as early as Hyrcanus
(135-125 BC). With regard to the low-level aque-
duct, we have two definite data. First Jos (Ant,
XVIII, ili, 2) states that Pontius Pilate “undertook
to bring a current of water to Jerus, and did it with
the sacred money, and derived the origin of the
stream from the distance of 200 furlongs,” over 22
miles; in BJ, II, ix, 4 he is said to have brought the
water “from 400 furlongs’”—probably a copyist’s
error. But these references must either be to
restorations or to the extension from Wéddy ‘Arrab
to Wddy ‘Artas (28 miles), for the low-level aqueduct
from the pools to Jerus is certainly the same con-
struction as the aqueduct from these pools to the
“Frank Mountam,” the Herodium, and that,
according to the definite statements of Jos (Ant,
XV, ix, 4; BJ, I, xxi, 10), was made by Herod the
Great. On the whole the usual view is that the
high-level aqueduct was the work of Severus, the
low-level that of Herod, with an extension south-
ward by Pontius Pilate.

Jerus still benefits somewhat from the low-level
aqueduct which is in repair as far as Bethlehem,
though all that reaches the city comes only through
a solitary 4-in. pipe. The high-level aqueduct is
hopelessly destroyed _and can be traced only in
places; the wells of Wady Bidar are choked and use-
less, and the long winding aqueduct to Wddy ‘Arrab
is quite broken.

VUI. Tombs, Antiquarian Remains, and Ec-
clesiastical Sites.—Needless to say all the known
ancient tombs in the Jerus area have been rifled of


17. Dates
of Con-
struction of
These
Aqueducts


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1612


their contents long ago. The so-called Tombs of
the Kings in the Wady el Jéz are actually the monu-
ment of Queen Helena of Adiabene,
1. The a convert to Judaism (c 48 AD). Jos
“Tombs of (Ant, XX, iv, 3) states that her bones,
the Kings” with those of members of her family,
_ were buried “at the pyramids,” which
were 3 in number and distant from Jerus 3 fur-
longs. A Heb inscription upon a sarcophagus
found here by De Sauley ran: mmzba my,
(carah malkethah), “Queen Sarah,” possibly the
Jewish name of Queen Helena.
On the western side of the Wddy
el Més (tbe higher part of Hinnom),
is a very interesting Gr
2. ‘“‘Herod’s tomb containing beauti- .
Tomb” fully carved sarcophagi. .
These are commonly Ay
known as ‘“Herod’s Tombs” (although \
Herod the Great was buried on the \
Herodium), and, according to Schick, ‘
one of the sarcophagi may have be-
longed to Mariamne, Herod’s wife. A
more probable theory is that this is
the tomb of the high priest Ananias
(BJ, V, xii, 2).
On the eastern side of the Kidron,
near the southeastern angle of the
Haram, are 3 conspicuous


3. “Absa= tombs. The most north-
lom’s erly, Tantir Fer‘on, gener-
Tomb” ally called ‘“Absalom’s


Tomb,” is a Gr-Jewish
tomb of the Hasmonean period, and,
according to Conder, possibly the tomb
of Alexander Jannaeus (HDB, art. _
“Jerusalem”). S. of this is the tra  **


'


ESN
we know by a square Heb inscription — = AR
over the pillars to be the family tomb 9-77"
of certain members of the priestly iS


family (1 Ch 24 15), of the Beni Hazir. 4
It may belong to the century before
Christ.

The adjoining traditional tomb of
Zachariah is a monolithic monument
cut out of the living rock, 16 ft. sq.
and 30ft. high. It hassquare pilasters
at the corners, Ionic pillars between,
and a pyramidal top. Its origin is
unknown; its traditional name is due
to Our Lord’s word in Mt 23 35; Lk
11 51 (see ZACHARIAH).

A little farther down the valley of
the Kidron, at the commencement of

the village of Siloam, is


4. The another _rock-cut tomb, the so-called
‘Egyptian Egyp Tomb, or according to some,
Tomb” “the tomb of Solomon’s Egyp wife.”


It is a monolith 18 ft. sq. and 11 ft.
high, and the interior has at one time been used as
a chapel. It is now Russian property. It probably
belongs to much the same period as the three before-
mentioned tombs, and, like them, shows strong Egyp
influence. _

The so-called ‘Tombs of the Judges” belong to
the Rom period, as do the scores of similar excava-
tions in the same valley. The ‘Tombs of the
Prophets” on the western slopes of the Mount of
Olives are now considered to belong to the 4th or 5th
Christian century.

Near the knoll over Jeremiah’s Grotto, to the
W. and N.W., are a great number of tombs,
mostly Christian. The more northerly members
of the group are now included in the property
of the Dommicans attached to the Church of St.
Stephen, but one, the southernmost, has attracted


ditional “Grotto of St. James,” which ARON VY


NY og
RERG
Oe
SSSR eg ERD


a great deal of attention because it was sup-
posed by the late General Gordon to be the tomb


of Christ. In its condition when
6. The found it was without doubt, like its
‘Garden neighbors, a Christian tomb of about
Tomb” the 5th cent., and it was full of


skeletons. Whether it may originally
have been a Jewish tomb is unproved; It cer-
tainly could not have been recognized as a site
of any sanctity until General Gordon promulgated
his theory (see PHFS, 1892, 120-24; see also Gotr
GOTHA).


&


18 Arch \\\


x3


f \
Present Suapacelont, .


S.q Pe
’ ¢ F


Cots ba id


Scale of Feet


i
\S3
SG


INE


Plan Showing Results of Warren's Excavations at ‘ Robinson's Arch.”


The Jews greatly venerate a tomb on the eastern

side of the Wddy el J6z, not far 8. of the great

North Road; they consider it to be

6. Tomb of the tomb of Simon the Just, but it is

‘Simon the in all probability not a Jewish tomb
Just” at all.

Only passing mention can here be
made of certain remains of interest connected with
the exterior walls of the Haram. The foundation

walls of the temple-platform are built,
7. Other specially upon the E., 8. and W., of
Antiquities magnificent blocks of smooth, drafted
masonry with an average height of 34 ft.
One line, known as the “master course,” runs for
600 ft. westward from the southeastern angle, with
blocks 7 ft. high. Near thesoutheastern angle at the
foundation itself, certain of the blocks were found
by the Palestine Exploration. Fund engineers to
be marked with Phoen characters, which it was
supposed by many at the time of their discovery
indicated their Solomonic origin. It is now gen-


1613


erally held that these ‘masons’ marks” may just
as well have been used in the time of Herod the
Great, and on other grounds it is held that all this
magnificent masonry is due to the vast reconstruc-
tion of the Temple which this great’ monarch
initiated (see TemMpLe). In the western wall of the
Haram, between the southwestern corner and the
“Jewish wailing place,” lies ‘“‘Robinson’s Arch.”
It is the spring of an arch 50 ft. wide, projecting
from the temple-wall; the bridge arising from it
had a span of 50 ft., and the pier on the farther
side was discovered by Warren. Under the bridge
ran a contemporary paved Rom street, and beneath
the unbroken pavement was found, lying inside a
rock aqueduct, a voussoir of an older ane This
bridge connected the temple-inclosure with the upper
city in the days of the Hasmonean kings. It was
broken down in 63 BC by the Jews in anticipation o
the attack of Pompey (Ant, XIV, iv, 2; BJ, I, vii,
2),, but was rebuilt Herod in 19 BC (BJ, VI,
vui, 1; vi, 2), and finally destroyed in 70 AD.
Nearly 600 ft. farther N., along this western
temple-wall is Wilson’s Arch, which lies under the
surface within the causeway which crosses the
Tyropceon to the Bab es Silseleh of the Haram;
although not itself very ancient there are here,
deeper down, arches belonging to the Herodian
causeway which here approached the temple-
platform.
With regard to the common ecclesiastical sites
visited by pious pilgrims little need be said here.
The congeries of churches that ‘is in-


8. Eccle- cluded _under that name of Church
siastical of the Holy Sepulchre includes a great
Sites many minor sites of the scenes of the


Passion which have no serious claims.
Besides the Holy Sepulchre itself—which, apart
from its situation, cannot be proved or disproved,
as it has actually been destroyed—the only impor-
tant site is that of “Mount Calvary.” All that
can be said is that if the Sepulchre is genuine, then
the site may be also; it is today the hollowed-out


Ary?
Robinson’s Arch.


shell of a rocky knoll incased in marble and other
stones and riddled with chapels. See Goueotua.
The coenaculum, close to the Moslem ‘‘Tomb of
David” (a site which has no serious claims), has
been upheld by Professor Sanday (Sacred Sites of
the Gospels) as one which has a very strong tradition


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1. Tell el-


Jerusalem


in its favor. The most important evidence is that
of Epiphanias, who states that when Hadrian visited
Jerus in 130, one of the few buildings left standing
was “the little Church of God, on the site where
the disciples, returning after the Ascension of the
Saviour from Olivet, had gone up to the Upper
room, for there it had been built, that is to say in
the quarter of Zion.”” In connection with this spot
there has been pointed out from early Christian
times the site of the House of Caiaphas and the
site of the death of the Virgin Mary—the Dormitio
Sanciae Virginis. It isin consequence of this latter
tradition that the German Roman Catholics have
now erected here their magnificent new church of
the Dormition. A rival line of traditions locates
the tomb of the Virgin in the Kidron valley near
Gethsemane, where there is a remarkable under-
ground chapel belonging to the Greeks.

IX. History.— Pre-Israelite period—The begin-
nings of Jerus are long before recorded history:
at various points in the neighborhood, e.g. at el
Bukei‘a to the S.W., and at the northern extremity
of the Mount of Olives to the N.E., were very large
settlements of Paleolithic man, long before the
dawn of history, as is proved by the enormous
quantities of celts scattered over the surface. It is
certain that the city’s site itself was occupied many
centuries before David, and it is a traditional view
that the city called Satem (q.v.) (Gen 14 18),
over which Melchizedek was king, was identical
with Jerus.

The first certain reference to this city is about
1450 BC, when the name Ur-u-salem occurs in
several letters belonging to the Am
Tab correspondence. In 7 of these


Amarna letters occurs the name Abd Khiba,
Corre- and it is clear that this man was
spondence “king,” or governor of the city, as the


representative of Pharaoh of Egypt.
In this correspondence Abd Khiba represents him-
self as hard pressed to uphold the rights of his
suzerain against the hostile forces which threaten
to overwhelm him. Incidentally we may gather
that the place was then a fortified city, guarded
partly by mercenary Egyp troops, and there are
reasons for thinking that the then ruler of Egypt,
Amenhotep IV, had made it a sanctuary of his god
Aten—the sun-disc. Some territory, possibly ex-
tending as far west as Ajalon, seems to have been
under the jurisdiction of the governor. Professor
Sayce has stated that Abd Khiba was probably a
Hittite chief, but this is doubtful. The corre-
spondence eloses abruptly, leaving us in uncer-
tainty with regard to the fate of the writer, but we
know that the domination of Egypt over Pal
suffered an eclipse about this time.
At the time of Joshua’s invasion of Canaan,
ADONI-ZEDEK (q.v.) is mentioned (Josh 10 1-27)
as king of Jerus; he united with the
2. Joshua’s kings of Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish
Conquest and Eglon to fight against the Gibeon-
ites who had made peace with Joshua;
the 5 kings were defeated and, being captured in
hiding at the cave Makkedah, were all slain. An-
other king, AnonI-BEzExK (q.v.) (whom some identify
with Adoni-zedek), was defeated by Judah after
the death of Joshua, and after being mutilated was
brought to Jerus and died there (Jgs 1 1-7), after
which it is recorded (ver 8) that Judah “fought
against Jerus, and took it .... and set the city
onfire.”’ But it is clear that the city remained in the
hands of the “Jebusites’”’ for some years more (Jgs
1 21; 19 11), although it was theoretically reck-
oned on the southern border of Benjamin (Josh 15
8; 18 16.28). David, after he had reigned 74 years
at Hebron, determined to make the place his capital
and, about 1000 BC, captured the city.


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1614,


_ Up to this event it is probable that Jerus was
like other contemporary fortified sites, a compara-
tively small place encircled with power-


3. Site of ful walls, with but one or perhaps two
the Jebu- gates; it is very generally admitted
site City that this city occupied the ridge to the


S. of the temple long incorrectly called
“Ophel,” and that its walls stood upon steep rocky
scarps above the Kidron valley on the one side, and
the Tyropoeon on the other. We have every
reason to believe that the great system of tunnels,
known as “Warren’s Shaft” (see VII, 3, above)
existed all through this period. F


Jerusalem of the Jebusites, as Captured by David.


The account of the capture of Jerus by David
is obscure, but it seems a probable explanation
of a difficult passage (2 8 5 6-9) if
4. David — we conclude that the Jehusites, relying
upon the extraordinary strength of
their position, challenged David: ‘“Thou shalt not
come in hither, but the blind and the lame shall
turn thee away” (ver 6 m), and that David directed
his followers to go up the “watercourse”’ and smite
the “lame and the blind’”—a term he in his turn
applies mocxingly to the Jebusites. “And Joab
the son of Zeruiah went up first, and was made
chief” (1 Ch 11 6). It seems at least probable
that David’s men captured the city through a sur-
prise attack up the great tunnels (see VII, 3, above).
David having captured the stronghold “Zion,”
renamed it the “City of David” and took up his
residence there; he added to the strength of the
fortifications “round about from the Mitzo [q.v.]
and onward”; with the assistance of Phoeu work-
men supplied by Hiram, king of Tyre, he built him-
self ‘“‘a house of cedar” (2 S 5 11; cf 7 2). Theark
of Jeh was brought from the house of Obed-edom
and lodged in a tent (2 8 6 17) in the “city of
David’ (cf 1K 81). The threshing-floor of
Araunah (2 8 24 18), or Ornan (1 Ch 21 15), the
Jebusite, was later purchased as the future site of
the temple.

The Jerus which David captured was small and
compact, hut there are indications that during his
reign it must have increased considerably by the
growth of suburbs outside the Jebusite walls. The
population must have been increased from several


sources. The influx of David’s followers doubtless
eaused many of the older inhabitants to be crowded
out of the walled area. There ap-


5. Expan- pear to have been a large garrison”
sion of (28 15 18; 20 7), many officials and
the City priests and thcir families (2 S 8 16—-


18; 20 23-26; 23 8 ff), and the various
members of David’s own family and their relatives
(2S 6 13-16; 14 24.28; 1 K 1 5.53, etc). It is
impossible to suppose that all these were crowded
into so narrow an area, while the incidental mention
that Absalom lived two whole years in Jerus without
seeing the king’s face implies suhurbs (2 8 14 24.
28). The new dwellings could probably extend
northward toward the site of the future temple and
northwestward into and up the Tyropceon valley
along the great north road. It is improbable that
they could have oceupied much of the western hill.

With the accession of Solomon, the increased
magnificence of the court, the foreign wives and
their establishments, the new officials
6. Solomon and the great number of work people
brought to the city for Solomon’s great
buildings must necessarily have enormously swelled
the resident population, while the recorded build-
ings of the city, the temple, the king’s house, the
House of the Daughter of Pharaoh, the House of the
Forest of Lebanon, the Throne Hall and the Pillared
Hall (1 K 7 1-8) must have altered the whole aspect
of the site. In consequence of these new buildings,
the sanctuary together with the houses of the common
folk, a new wall for the city was necessary, and we
havea statement twice made that Solomon built “the
wall of Jerus round ahout” (1 K 3 1; 9 15); it is
also recorded that he built Millo (9 15.24; 11 27),
and that “‘he repaired the breach of the city of David
his father’ (11 27). The question of the Millo is
discussed elsewhere (see Miii0); the “breach” re-
ferred to may have been the connecting wall needed
to include the Millo within the complete circle of
fortifications, or else some part of David's fortifica-
tion which his death had left incomplete.
As regards the ‘Wall of Jerus” which Solomon


| built, it is practically certain that it was, on the N.


and W., that described by Jos as the
7. Solo- First Wall (see VI, 7 above). The
mon’s City vast rock-cut scarps at the south-
Wall western corner testify to the massive-
ness of the building. Whether the
whole of the southwestern hill was included is a
matter of doubt. Inasmuch as there are indications
at Bliss’s tower (see VI, 4d above) of an ancient wall
running northeasterly, and inclosing the summit of
the southwestern hill, it would appear highly prob-
able that Solomon’s wall followed that line; in this
case this wall must have crossed the Tyropeon at
somewhat the line of the existing southern wall, and
then have run southeasterly to join the western
wall of the old city of the Jebusites. The temple
and palace buildings were all inclosed in a wall of
finished masonry which made it a fortified place by
itself—as it appears to have been through Heb history
-—and these walls, where external to the rest of the
city, formed part of the whole circle of fortification.
Although Solomon built so magnificent a house
for Jeh, he erected in the neighborhood shrines to
other local gods (1 K 11 7.8), a lapse ascribed
largely to the influence of his foreign wives and con-
sequent foreign alliances.
The disruption of the kingdom must have been
a severe blow to Jerus, which was left the capital, no
longer of a united state, but of a petty
8. The tribe. The resources which were at
Disruption the command of Solomon for the
(933 BC) building up of the city were suddenly
. cut off by Jeroboam’s avowed policy,
while the long state of war which existed between


1615


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


the two peoples—a state lasting 60 years (1 K 14
30; 15 6.16; 22 44)—must have been very inju-
rious to the growth of commerce and the arts of
peace.
In the 5th year of Rehoboam (928), Shishak
(Sheshonk) rig ae Egypt came up against Jerus
- (1 14 25 ff) and took “the fenced
9. Invasion cities of Judah” (2 Ch 12 4 AV). It
of Shishak has been commonly supposed that he
(928 BC) besieged and captured Jerus itself, but
as there is no account of the destruction
of fortifications and as the name of this city has
not been deciphered upon the Egyp records of this
campaign, it is at least as probable, and is as con-
sistent with the Scriptural references, that Shishak
was bought off with ‘‘the treasures of the house of
Jeh, and the treasures of the king’s house’ and
‘fall the shields of gold which Solomon had made”
(1 K 14 26). :
_It is clear that by the reign of Jehoshaphat th
city had again largely recovered its importance
(cf 1 K 22), but in his son Jehoram’s
10. City reign (849-842 BC) Judah was in-
Plundered vaded and the royal house was pillaged
by Arabs by Philis and Arahs (2 Ch 21 16-17).
Ahaziah (842 BC), Jehoram’s son, came
to grief while visiting his maternal relative at Jez-
reel, and after being wounded in his chariot near
Ihleam, and expiring at Megiddo, his body was
carried to Jerus and there buried (2 K 9 27-28).
Jerus was now the scene of the dramatic events
which center round the usurpation and death of
Queen Athaliah (2 K 11 16; 2 Ch 23 15) and
the coronation and reforms of her grandson Joash
(2 K 12 1-16; 2 Ch 24 1-14). After the death
of the good priest Jehoiada, it is recorded (2 Ch 24
15 ff) that the king was led astray by the princes of
Judah and forsook the house of Jeh, as a, consequence
of which the Syrians under Hazael
11. Hazael came against Judah and Jerus, slew
King of the princes and spoiled the land, Joash


Syria giving him much treasure from hoth
Bought Off palace and temple (2 K 12 17.18;
(797 BC) 2% Ch 24 23). Finally Joash was as-


sassinated (2 K 12 20.21; 2 Ch 24
25) “at the house of Millo, on the way that goeth
down to Silla.”
During the reign of Amaziah (797-729 BC), the
murdered king’s son, a victory over Edom appears
to have so elated the king that he
12. Capture wantonly challenged Jehoash of Israel
of the City to battle (2 K 14 8f). The_ two
by Jehoash armies met at Beth-shemesh, and Judah
of Israel was defeated and ‘fled every man to
his tent.”’ Jerus was unable to offer
any resistance to the victors, and Jehoash “brake
down the wall of Jerus from the gate of Ephraim
unto the corner gate, 400 cubits” and then returned
to Samaria, loaded with plunder and hostages (ver
14). Fifteen years later, Amaziah was assassinated
at Lachish whither he had fled from a conspiracy;
nevertheless they brought his body upon horses, and
he was buried in Jerus.
Doubtless it was a remembrance of the humilia-
tion which his father had undergone which made
Uzziah (Azariah) strengthen his posi-
13. Uzziah’s tion. He subdued the Philis and the
Refortifica- Arabs in Gar, and put the Ammonites
tion (779- to tribute (2 Ch 26 7.8). He ‘built
740 BC) towers in Jerus at the corner gate,
and at the valley gate, and at the
turnings [LXX] of the walls, and fortified them”
(ver 9). He is also described as having made in
Jerus “engines, invented by skilful men, to be on
the towers and upon the battlements, wherewith
to shoot arrows and great stones” (ver 15). The
cily during its long peace with its northern neigh-


bors appears to have recovered something of her
prosperity in the daysof Solomon. During his reign
the city was visited by a great earthquake (Zec 14 4;
Amiil; cf Isa9 10; 296; Am411; 8 8).
Jotham, his son, built ‘‘the upper gate of the house
of Jeh” (2 K 16 35; 2 Ch 27 3), probably the
same as the “upper gate of Benjamin” (Jer 20 2).
He also built much on the wall of Ophel—probably
the ancient fortress of Zion on the southeastern hill

(2 Ch 27 3); see OPHEL.
His son Ahaz was soon to have cause to be thank-
ful for his father’s and grandfather’s work in forti-
fying the city, for now its walls were


14. Ahaz successful in defence against the
Allies with kings of Syria and Israel (2 K 16
Assyria 5.6); but Ahaz, feeling the weakness
(736-728 of his little kingdom, hought with silver
BC) and gold from the house of Jeh the

alliance of Tiglath-pileser, king of
Assyria. He met the king at Damascus and paid


him a compliment by having an altar similar to his
made for his own ritual in the temple (vs 10-12).
His reign is darkened by a record of heathen prac-
tices, and specially by his making ‘‘his son to pass
through the fire’’—as a human sacrifice in, appar-
aay, the Valley of Hinnom (1 K 16 3-4; cf 2 Ch


8 3).

Hezekiah (727-699 BC), his son, succeeded to the

kingdom at a time of surpassing danger. Samaria,

and with it the last of Israel’s kingdom,
15. Heze- had fallen. Assyria had with diffi-
kiah’s Great culty been bought off, the people were
Works largely apostate, yet Jerus was never so

great and so inviolate to prophetic eyes
(Isa 7 4f; 8 8.10; 10 28f; 14 25-32, etc). Early
in his reign, the uprising of the Chaldaean Merodach-
baladan against Assyria relieved Judah of her greatest
danger, and Hezekiah entered into friendly relations
with this new king of Babylon, showing his messengers
all his treasures (Isa 39 1.2). At this time or soon
after, Hezekiah appears to have undertaken great
works in fitting his capital for the troublous times
which lay hefore him. He sealed the waters of Gihon
and brought them within the city to prevent the kings
of Assyria from getting access to them (2 K 20 20;
2 Ch 32 4.30). See Sitoam.

It is certain, if their tunnel was to be of any use,
the southwestern hill must have heen entirely en-
closed, and it is at least highly probable that in the
account (2 Ch $2 5), he “built up all the wall that
was broken down, and built towers thereon [ml],
and the other wall without,” the last phrase may
refer to the stretch of wall along the edge of the
southwestern hill to Siloam. On the other hand,
if that was the work of Solomon, “the other wall”
may have been the great buttressed dam, with a
wall across it which closed the mouth of the Tyro-
poeon, which was an essential part of his scheme of
preventing a besieging army from getting access to
water. He also strengthened Mix1o (q.v.), on the
southeastern hill. Secure in these fortifications,
which made Jerus one of the strongest walled cities
in Western Asia, Hezekiah, assisted, as we learn
from Sennacherib’s descriptions, hy Arab merce-
naries, was able to buy off the great Assyr king and
to keep his city inviolate @ K 18 13-16). A
second threatened attack on the city appears to be
referred to in 2 K 19 9-37.

Hezekiah undertook reforms. ‘He removed the
high places, and brake the pillars, and cut down

the Asherah: and he brake in pieces


16. His the brazen serpent that Moses had
Religious madeand ... . he called it Nehush-
Reforms tan,’ i.e. a piece of brass (2 K 18 4).


Manasseh succeeded his father when
but 12, and reigned 55 years (698-643) in Jerus
(2 K 21 1). He-was tributary to Esarhaddon


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1616


and Ashurbanipal, as we know from their inscrip-
tions; in one of the latter’s he is referred to as king
“of the city of Judah.” The king of Assyria who,
it is said (2 Ch 33 11; cf Ant, X, iii, 2), carried
Manasseh in chainsto Babylon, was probably Ashur-
banipal. How thoroughly the country was per-
meated by Assyr influence is witnessed by the two
cuneiform tablets recently found at Gezer belonging
to fee Assyr monarch’s reign (PEFS, 1905, 206,

etc).
The same influence, extending to the religious
sphere, is seen in the record (2 K 21 5) that Ma-
nasseh “‘built altars for all the host of


17. Ma- heaven in the two courts of the house
nasseh’s of Jeh.” There are other references
Alliance to the idolatrous practices introduced
with by this king (cf Jer 7 18; 2 K 23 5.
Assyria 11.12, etc). He also filled Jerus from


one end to the other with the innocent
blood of martyrs faithful to Jeh (2 K 21 16; cf
Jer 19 4). Probably during this long reign of
external peace the population of the city much in-
creased, particularly by the influx of foreigners
from less isolated regions. Of this


18. His king’s improvements to the fortifica-
Repair of tions of Jerus we have the statement
the Walls (2 Ch 33 14), “He built an outer wall


to the city of David, on the west side
of Gihon in the valley, even to the entrance at the
fish gate.” This must have been a new or rebuilt
wall for the whole eastern side of the city. He also
compassed about the OpHEn (q.v.) and raised it to
a very great height.

Manasseh was the first of the Judahic kings to be
buried away from the royal tombs. He was buried
(as was his son Amon) “in the garden of his own
house, in the garden of Uzza” (2 K 21 18). These
may be the tombs referred to (Ezk 43 7-9) as too
near the temple precincts.

In the reign of Josiah was found the “Book of
the Law,” and the king in consequence instituted

radical reforms (2 K 22, 23). Kidron


19. Josiah smoked with the burnings of the
and Reli- Asherah and of the vessels of Baal, and
gious Tophethin the Valley of Hinnom wasde-
Reforms filed. Atlength after a reign of 31 years
(640-609 (2 K 23 29.30), Josiah, in endeavor-
BC) ing to intercept Pharaoh-necoh from


: combining with the king of Babylon,
was defeated and slain at Megiddo and was buried
“in his own sepulchre” in Jerus—probably in the
same locality where his father and grandfather lay
buried. Jehoahaz, after a reign of but 3 months,
was carried captive (2 K 23 34) by Necoh to
Egypt, where he died—and apparently was buried
among strangers (Jer 22 10-12). His brother
Eliakim, renamed Jehoiakim, succeeded. In the
4th year of. his reign, Egypt was defeated at Car-
chemish by the Babylonians, and as a consequence
Jehoiakim had to change from subjection to Egypt
to that of Babylon (1 K 23 35 ff). During this time

Jeremiah was actively foretelling in
20. Jere- — streets and courts of Jerus (5 1, etc) the
miah approaching ruin of the city, messages


Prophesies which were received with contempt
the Ap- and anger by the king and court (Jer
proaching 36 23). In consequence of his revolt
Doom against Babylon, bands of Chaldaeans,


Syrians, Moabites and Ammonites
came against him (2 K 24 2), and his death was
inglorious (2 K 24 6; Jer 22 18.19).

His son Jehoiachin, who succeeded him, went
out with all his household and surrendered to the
approaching Nebuchadnezzar (597), and was car-
ricd to Babylon where he passed more than 37
years (2 K 26 27-30). Jerus was despoiled of all
its treasures and all its important inhabitants. The


king of Babylon’s nominee, Zedekiah, after 11
years rebelled against him, and consequently Jerus
was besieged for a year and a half until


21. Nehu- “famine was sore in the city.”” On the
chadnezzar 9th of Ab all the men of war “fled by
Twice night by the way of the gate between
Takes the two walls, which was by the king’s
Jerusalem garden,” ic. near the mouth of the
(586 BC) Tyropceon, and the king “went by


the way of the Arabah,” but was over-
taken and captured “in the plains of Jericho.” A
terrible punishment followed his faithlessness to
Babylon (2 K 25 1-7). The city and the temple
were despoiled and burnt; the walls of Jerus
were broken down, and none but the poorest of
the land “to be vinedressers and husbandmen”
were left behind (2 K 25 8f; 2 Ch 36 17f). It
is probable that the ark was removed also at this
time.
With the destruction of their city, the hopes of
the best elements in Judah turned with longing to
: the thought of her restoration. It is
22. Cyrus possible that some of the remnant left
and the in the land may have kept up some
First Return semblance of the worship of Jeh at
(538 BC) the temple-site. At length, however,
when in 538 Cyrus the Persian became
master of the Bab empire, among many acts of a
similar nature for the shrines of Assyr and Bab gods,
he gave permission to Jews to return to rebuild the
house of Jeh (Ezr 1 if). Over 40,000 (Ezr 1, 2)
under Sheshbazzar, prince of Judah (Ezr 1 8.11),
governor of a province, returned, bringing with them
the sacred vessels of the temple. The daily sacri-
fices were renewed and the feasts and fasts restored
(3 3-7), and later the foundations of the restored
temple were laid (3 10; 5 16), but on account of
the opposition of the people of the land and the
Samaritans, the building was not completed until
20 years later (6 15).
The graphic description of the rebuilding of the
walls of Jerus in 445 by Nehemiah gives us the
fullest account we have of these forti-


23. Nehe- fications at any ancient period. It is
miah Re- clear that Nehemiah set himself to
builds the restore the walls, as far as possible,
Walls in their condition before the exile.


The work was done hurriedly and under
conditions of danger, half the workers being armed
with swords, spears and bows to protect the others,
and every workman was a soldier {Neh 4 13.16-21).
The rebuilding took 52 days, but could not have
been done at all had not much of the material lain
to hand in the piles of ruined masonry. Doubtless
the haste and limited resources resulted in a wall
far weaker than that Nebuchadnezzar destroyed
142 years previously, but it followed the same out-
line and had the same general structure.

For the next 100 years we have scarcely any
historical knowledge of Jerus. A _ glimpse is
afforded by the papyri of Elephantine
24, Bagohi where we read of a Jewish community
Governor in Upper Egypt petitioning Bagohi, the
governor of Judaea, for permission to
rebuild their own temple to Jeh in Egypt; inci-
dentally they mention that they had already sent
an unsuccessful petition to Johanan the high priest
and his colleagues in Jerus. In another document
we gather that this petition to the Pers governor
was granted. These documents must date about
411-407 BC. Later, probably about 350, we have
somewhat ambiguous references to the destruc-
tion of Jerus and the captivity of numbers of
Jews in the time of Artaxerxes (III) Ochus (358-
337 BC).
With the battle of Issus and Alexander's Pales-
tinian campaign (c 332 BC), we are upon surer


1617


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


historical ground, though the details of the account
(Ant, XI, viii, 4) of Alexander’s visit to Jerus itself
are considered of doubtful authenticity.


26. Alex- After his death (823 BC), Pal suffered
ander the much from its position, between the
Great Ptolemies of Egypt and the Seleucidae


of Antioch. Each became in turn its

suzerain, aud indeed at one time the tribute ap-

oat been divided between them (Ant,
, iv, 1).

In 321 Ptolemy Soter invaded Pal, and, it is said

(Ant, XII, i, 1), captured Jerus by a ruse, entering

the city on the Sabbath as if anxious


26. The to offer sacrifice. He carried away
Ptolemaic many of his Jewish prisoners to Egypt
Rule and settled them there. In the

struggles between the contending


monarchies, although Pal suffered, the capital itself,
on account of its isolated position, remained undis-
turbed, under the suzerainty of Egypt. In 217
BC, Ptolemy (IV) Philopator, after his victory
over Antiochus III at Raphia, visited the temple
at Jerus and offered sacrifices; he is reported (3
Macc 1) to have entered the “Holy of Holies.”
The comparative prosperity of the city during the
Egyp domination 1s witnessed to by Hecataeus of
Abdera, who is quoted by Jos; he even puts the
population of the city at 120,000, which is probably

an exaggeration.
At length in 198, Antiochus the Great having
conquered Coele-Syria in the epoch-making battle
at Banias, the Jews of their own accord


27. Anti- went over to him and supplied his
ochus the army with plentiful provisions; they
Great assisted him in besieging the Egyp

garrison in the Axra (q.v.) (Ant, XII,
iii, 3). Jos produces letters in which Antiochus


records his gratification at the reception given him
by the Jews and grants them various privileges
(ib). We have an account of the ReoepeR yy of the
city about this time (190-180 BC) by Jesus ben
Sira in the Book of Ecclus; it is a city of crowded
life and manifold activities. He refers in glowing
terms to the great high priest, Simon ben Onias
(226-199 BC), who (Ecclus 50 1-4) had repaired
and fortified the temple and strengthened the walls
against a siege. The letter of Aristeas, dated
probably at the close of this great man’s life (c 200
BC), gives a similar picture. It is here stated that
the compass of the city was 40 stadia. The very
considerable prosperity and religious liberty which
the Jews had enjoyed under the Egyptians were soon
menaced under the new ruler; the taxes were in-
creased, and very soon fidelity to the tenets of

Judaism came to be regarded as
28. Helleni- treachery to the Seleucid rule. Under


zation of | Antiochus Epiphanes the Helleniza-
the City tion of the nation grew apace (2 Macc
under An- 4 9-12; Ant, XII, v,1); at the request
tiochus of the Hellenizing party a “place of
Epiphanes exercise’’ was erected in Jerus (1 Macc


14; 2 Mace 4 7f). The Gymna-
sium was built and was soon thronged by young
priests; the Gr hat—the pétasos—became the
fashionable headdress in Jerus. The Hellenistic
party, which was composed of the aristocracy, was
so loud in its professed devotion to the king’s wishes
that it is not to be wondered at that Antiochus, who,
on a visit to the city, had been received with rap-
turous greetings, came to think that the poor and
pious who resisted him from religious motives were
largely infected with leanings toward his enemies
in Egypt. The actual open rupture began when
tidings reached Antiochus, after a victorious though
politically barren campaign in Egypt, that Jerus
had risen in his rear on behalf of the house of Ptol-
emy. Jason, the renegade high priest, who had


been hiding across the Jordan, had, on the false
report of the death of Antiochus, suddenly returned
and re-possessed himself of the city. Only the
Akra remained to Syria, and this was crowded with
Menelaus and those of his followers who had escaped
the sword of Jason. Antiochus lost no time; he
hastened (170 BC) against Jerus with a
29. Capture great army, captured the city, massa-
of the City cred the people and despoiled the
(170 BC) temple (1 Mace 1 20-24; Ant, XII,
v, 3). Two years later Antiochus,
balked by Rome in Egypt (Polyb. xxix.27; Livy
xlv.12), appears to have determined that in Jerus,
at any rate, he would have no sympathizers with
Egypt. He sent his chief collector of tribute (1
Mace 1 29), who attacked the city
30. Capture with strong force and, by means of
of 168 BC stratagem, entered it (ver 30). After
he had despoiled it, he set it on fire and
pulled down both dwellings and walls. He massacred
the men, and many of the womenand children he sold
as slaves (1 Mace 1 31-35; 2 Macc 5 24). He sac-
rificed swine (or at least a sow) upon the holy altar,
and caused the high priest himself—
31. At- a Greek in all his sympathies—to par-
tempted take of the impure sacrificial feasts;
Suppression he tried by barbarous cruelties to sup-
of Judaism press the ritual of circumcision (Ant,
AI, v, 4).. In everything he endeav-
ored, in conjunction with the strong Hellenizing
party, to organize Jerus as a Gr city, and to secure
his position he built a strong wall, and a great tower
for the Akra, and, having furnished it well with armor
and victuals, he left a strong garrison (1 Macc 1
33-35). But the Syrians had overreached themselves
this time, and the reaction against persecution and
attempted religious suppression produced the great
uprising of the Maccabeans.
The defeat and retirement of the Syrian com-
mander Lysias, followed by the death of Antiochus
Epiphanes, led to an entire reversal
32. The of policy on the part of the Council of
Maccabean the boy-king, Antiochus V. A general
Rebellion amnesty was granted, with leave to
restore the temple-worship in its an~
cestral forms. The following year (165 BC) Judas
Maccabaeus found “the sanctuary desolate, and
the altar profaned, the gates burned up, and shrubs
growing in the courts as in a forest . . . . and the
priests’ chambers pulled down” (1 Macc 4 28).
He at once saw to the reconstruction of the altar
and restored the temple-services, an event celebrated
ever after as the ‘Feast of the Ded-


33. The ication,” or hdnukkah (1 Macc 4 52-
Dedication 59; 2 Macc 10 1-11; Ant, XII, vii, 7;
of the ef Jn 10 22). Judas also “builded up
Temple Mt. Zion,” i.e. the temple-hill, making
(1665 BC)  itafortress with “high walls and strong


towers round about,” and set a garrison

in it (1 Macc 4 41-61).
The Hellenizing party suffered in the reaction,
and the Syrian garrison in the Akra, Syria’s one
hold on Judaea, was closely invested;
34. Defeat but though Judas had defeated three
of Judas Syrian armies in the open, he could not
and Capture expel this garrison. In 163 BC a great
of the City Syrian army, with a camel corps and
many elephants, came to the relief
of the hard-pressed garrison. lLysias, accompanied
by the boy-king himself (Antiochus V), approached
the city from the S. via Bats-zor (q.v.). At
Beth-zachariah the Jews were defeated, and Judas’
brother Eleazar was slain, and Jerus was soon
captured. The fort on Mt. Zion which surrounded
the sanctuary was surrendered by treaty, but
when the king saw its strength, he broke hig
oath and destroyed the fortifications (1 Macc 6


Jerusalem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1618


62). But even in this desperate state Judas and
his followers were saved. A certain pretender,
Philip, raised a rebellion in a distant part of the
empire, and Lysias was obliged to patch up a truce
with the nationalist Jews more favorable to Judas
than before his defeat; the garrison in the Akra
remained, however, to remind the Jews that they
were not independent. In 161 BC another Syrian
general, Nicanor, was sent against Judas, but he
was at first won over to friendship and when, later,
at the instigation of the Hellenistic party, he was
compelled to attack Judas, he did so with hastily
raised levies and was defeated at Adasa, a little N.
of Jerus. Judas was, however, not long suffered
to celebrate his triumph. A month later Bacchides
appeared before Jerus, and in April, 161, Judas was

slain in battle with him at Berea.


35. His Both the city and the land were re-
Death arrisoned by Syrians; nevertheless,
(1461 BC) by 152, Jonathan, Judas’ brother, who


was residing at Michmash, was virtual
ruler of the land, and by astute negotiation between
Demetrius and Alexander, the rival claimants to
the throne of Antioch, Jonathan gained more than
any of his family had ever done. He was appointed
high priest and stratégés, or deputy for the king, in
Judaea. He repaired the city and restored the
temple-fortress with squared stones (1 Macc 10


10-11). He made the walls higher and built up a

great part of the eastern wall which
36. Jona- had been destroyed and “repaired that
than’s which was called Caphenatha”’ (1
Restora- Mace 12 36-37; Ani, XIII, v, ii);
tions he also made a great mound between


the Akra and the city to isolate the

Syrian garrison (ib).
Simon, who succeeded Jonathan, finally captured
the Akra in 139, and, according to Jos (Ant, XIII,
vi, 7), not only destroyed it, but par-


37. Sur- tially leveled the very hill on which it
render of stood (see, however, 1 Macc 14 36.37).
City to John Hyrcanus, 5 years later (134 BC),
Antiochus was besieged in Jerus by Antiochus
Sidetes Sidetes in the 4th year of his reign;
(184 BC) during the siege the Syrian king raised


100 towers each 3 stories high against
the northern wall—possibly these may subsequently
have been used for the foundations of the second
wall. Antiochus was finally bought off by the giving
of hostages and by heavy tribute, which Hyrcanus
is said to have obtained by opening the sepulcher
of David. Nevertheless the king “broke down the
fortifications that encompassed the city” (Ané, XIII,
viii, 2-4).

During the more prosperous days of the Has-
monean rulers, several important buildings were
erected. There was a great palace on


38. Has- the western (southwestern) hill over-
monean looking the temple (Ant, XX, viii, 11),
Buildings and connected with it at one time by


means of a bridge across the Tyro-
poeon, and on the northern side of the temple a
citadel—which may (see VIII, 7 above) have been
the successor of one here in preéxilic times—known
as the Baris; this, later on, Herod enlarged into
the Antonia (Ant, XV, xi, 4; BJ, V, v, 8).
In consequence of the quarrel of the later Has-
monean princes, further troubles fell upon the city.
In 65 BC, Hyrcanus Ii, under the
39. Rome’s instigation of Antipas the Idumaean,
Intervention rebelled against his brother Aristobulus,
to whom he had recently surrendered
his claim to sovereignty. With the assistance of
Aretas, king of the Nabataeans, he besieged Aristo-
bulus in the temple. The Rom general Scaurus,
bowever, by order of Pompey, compelled Aretas
to retire, and then lent his assistance to Aristo-


bulus, who overcame his brother (Ané, XIV, ii,
1-3). Two years later (63 BC) Pompey, having
been met by the ambassadors of both parties, bear-
ing presents, as well as of the Pharisees, came him-
self to compose the quarrel of the rival factions, and,

being shut out of the city, took it by
40. Pompey storm. He entered the “Holy of


Takes the Holies,” but left the temple treasures
City by unharmed. The walls of the city were
Storm demolished; Hyrcanus II was reinstated


high priest, but Aristobulus was car-
ried a prisoner to Rome, and the city became
tributary to the Rom Empire (Ant, XIV, iv, 1-4;
BJ, I, vii, 1-7). The Syrian proconsul, M. Lucin-
ius Crassus, going upon his expedition against the
Parthians in 55 BC, carried off from the temple the
money which Pompey had left (Ant, XIV, vii, 1).
In 47 BC Antipater, who for 10 years had been
gaining power as a self-appointed adviser to the weak
Hyrcanus, was made a Rom citizen
41. Julius and appointed procurator in return
Caesar for very material services which he had


Appoints been able to render to Julius Caesar
Antipater in Egypt (Ant, XIV, viii, 1, 3, 5); at
Procurator the same time Caesar granted to
(47 BC) Hyrcanus permission to rebuild the


walls of Jerus besides other privileges

(Ant, XIV, x, 5). Antipater made his eldest son,

Phasaclus, governor of Jerus, and committed Galilee
to the care of his able younger son, Herod.

In 40 BC Herod succeeded his father as procu-

rator of Judaea by order of the Rom Senate, but the

same year the Parthians under Pacorus

42. Parthian and Barzapharnes captured and plun-


Invasion dered Jerus (Ant, XIV, xiii, 3.4) and
reéstablished Antigonus (BJ, 1, xiii,
13). Herod removed his family and treasures to


Massada and, having been appointed king of Judaea
by Antony, returned, after various adventures, in
37 BC. Assisted by Sosius, the Rom proconsul, he
took Jerus by storm after a 5 months’ siege; by the
promise of liberal reward he restrained the soldiers

from sacking the city (Ant, XIV, xvi, 2-3).
During the reign of this great monarch Jerus as-
sumed a magnificence surpassing that of all other ages.
In 24 BC the king built his vast palace


43. Reign in the upper city on the southwestern
of Herod hill, near where today are the Turkish
the Great barracks and the Armenian Quarter.
(87-4 BC) He rebuilt the fortress to the N. of the


temple—the ancient Baris—ou a great
scale with 4 lofty corner towers, and renamed it the
Antonia in honor of his patron. He celebrated games
in a new theater, and constructed a hippodrome
(BJ, II, iii, 1) or amphitheater (Ant, XV, viii, 1).
He must necessarily have strengthened and repaired
the walls, but such work was outshone by the 4
great towers which he erected, Hippicus, Pharsael

and Mariamne, near the present Jaffa
44, Herod’s Gate—the foundations of the first two
Great are supposed to be incorporated in the
Buildings present so-called ‘Tower of David’—

and the lofty octagonal tower, Psephi-
nus, farther to the N.W. The development of
Herod’s plans for the reconstruction of the temple
was commenced in 19 BC, but they were not com-
pleted till 64 AD (Jn 2 20; Mt 241.2; Lk 21
5.6). The sanctuary itself was built by 1,000
specially trained priests within a space of 18 months
(11-10 BC). The conception was magnificent, and
resulted in a mass of buildings of size and beauty
far surpassing anything that had stood there before.
Practically all the remains of the foundations of the
temple-enclosure now surviving in connection with
the Haram belong to this period. In 4 BC—the
year of the Nativity—occurred the disturbances fol-
lowing upon the destruction of the Golden Eagle


1619


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem


which Herod had erected over the great gate of the
temple, and shortly afterward Herod died, having
prowelely shut up many of the leading Jews in the

podrome with orders that they should be slain
when he passed away (BJ, I, xxxiii, 6). The ac-
cession of Archelaus was signalized by Passover
riots which ended in the death of 3,000, an after-
result of the affair of the Golden Eagle.


Thinking that order had been restored, Archelaus
set out for Rome to have his title confirmed. During
his absence Sabinus, the Rom proc-
45. Herod urator, by mismanagement and greed,
Archelaus raised the city about his ears, and the
(4BC-6AD)next Passover was celebrated by a
massacre, street, fighting and open
robbery. Varus, the governor of Syria, who had
hastened to the help of his subordinate, suppressed
the rebellion with ruthless severity and crucified
2,000 Jews. Archelaus returned shortly afterward as
ethnarch, an office which he retained until _his exile
in 6 AD. During the procuratorship of Coponius
(6-10 AD) another Passover riot occurred in conse-
quence of the aggravating conduct of some Sa-
maritans.
During the procuratorship of Pontius Pilate
(26-37 AD) there were several disturbances, cul-
minating in a riot consequent upon
46. Pontius his taking some of the ‘“‘corban” or
Pilate sacred offerings of the temple for the
construction of an aqueduct (Ant,
XVIU, iii, 2)—probably part at least of the “low-
level aqueduct” (see VII, 15, above). Herod
Agrippa I inclosed the suburbs, which had grown
up N. of the second wall and of the temple, by what
Jos calls the ‘“Third Wall’ (see V, above).
His son, King Agrippa, built—about 56 AD—a
large addition to the old Hasmonean palace, from
which he could overlook the temple-
47. King area. This act was a cause of offence
Agrippa to the Jews who built a wall on the
western boundary of the Inner Court
to shut off his view. In the quarrel which ensued
the Jews were successful in gaining the support of
Nero (Ant, XX, viii, 11). In 64 AD the long
rebuilding of the temple-courts, which had been
begun in 19 BC, was concluded. The 18,000 work-
men thrown out of employment appear to have
been given “unemployed work” in “paving the city
with white stone’ (Ant, XX, ix, 6-7).
Finally the long-smouldering discontent of the
Jews against the Romans burst forth into open
rebellion under the criminal incom-


48. Rising petence of Gessius Florus, 66 AD
against (Ant, XX, xi, 1). Palaces and pub-
Florus and lic buildings were fired by the angered
Defeat of multitude, and after but two days’
Gallus siege, the Antonia itself was captured,


set on fire and its garrison slain (BJ,


IL, xvii, 6-7), Cestius Gallus, hastening from Syria,


was soon engaged in a siege of the city. The third
wall was captured and the suburb BuzEetua (q.v.)
burnt, but, when about to renew the attack upon
the second wall, Gallus appears to have been seized
with panic, and his partial withdrawal developed
into an inglorious retreat in which he was pursued
by the Jews down the pass to the Beth-horons as

far as Antipatris (BJ, TI, xix).
This victory cost the Jews dearly in the long run,
as it led to the campaign of Vespasian and the
eventual crushing of all their national


49. The hopes. Vespasian commenced the con-
City Be- quest in the north, and advanced by
sieged by slow and certain steps. Being recalled
Titus to Rome as emperor in the midst of
(70 AD) the war, the work of besieging and

capturing the city itself fell to his son
Titus. None of the many calamities which had


happened to the city are to be compared with this
terrible siege. In none had the city been so mag-
nificent, its fortifications so powerful, its population
so crowded. It was Passover time, but, in addition
to the crowds assembled for this event, vast num-
bers had hurried there, flying from the advancing
Rom army. The loss of life was enormous; ref-
ugees to Titus gave 600,000 as the number dead
(BJ, V, xiii, 7), but this seems incredible. The
total population today within the walls cannot be
more than 20,000, and the total population of
modern Jerus, which covers a far greater area than
that of those days, cannot at the most liberal esti-
mate exceed 80,000. Three times this, or, say, a
quarter of a million, seems to be the utmost that
is credible, and many would place the numbers at
far less.

The siege commenced on the 14th of Nisan, 70
AD, and ended on the 8th of Elul, a total of 134


days. The city was distracted by
50. Party internal feuds. Simon held the upper
Divisions and lower cities; John of Gischala, the
within the temple and ‘‘Ophel’; the Idumaeans,
Besieged introduced by the Zealots, fought only
Walls for themselves, until they relieved the


city of their terrors. Yet another
party, too weak to make its counsels felt, was for
peace with Rome, a policy which, if taken in time,
would have found in Titus a spirit of reason and
mercy. The miseries of the siege and the destruc-
tion of life and property were at least as much the
work of the Jews themselves as of their conquerors.
On the 15th day of the siege the third wall (Agrip-
pa’s), which had been but hastily finished upon the
approach of the Romans, was captured; the second
wall was finally taken on the 24th day; on the 72d
day the Antonia fell, and 12 days later the daily
sacrifice ceased. On the 105th day—the ominous
9th of Ab—the temple and the lower
61. Capture city were burnt, and the last day
and Utter found the whole city in fiames. Only
Destruction the three great towers of Herod, Hip-
of the City picus, Pharsael and Mariamne, with
the western walls, were spared to pro-
tect the camp of the Xth Legion which was left to
guard the site, and ‘in order to demonstrate to
posterity what kind of city it was and how well
fortified”; the rest_of the city was dug up to its
foundations (BJ, VII, i, 1).
For 60 years after its capture silence reigns over Jerus.
We know that the site continued to be garrisoned, but
it was not to any extent rebuilt. In 130
AD it was visited by Hadrian, who found
52. Rebel- but few buildings standing. Two years
lion of Bar- later (132-35 AD) occurred the last, great
Cochba rebellion of the Jews in the uprising of
Bar-Cochba (‘‘son of a star’’), who was
encouraged by the rabbi Akiba. With
the suppression of this last effort for freedom by Julius
Severus, the remaining traces of Judaism were stamped
out, and it is even said (Talm Jerus, Te'dénith 4) that the
very site of the temple was ploughed up by T. Annius


Jrmaem ew THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusalem,


1620


Rufus. An altar of Jupiter was placed upon the temple-
site, and Jews were excluded from Jerus on pain of death.
In 138 Hadrian rebuilt the city, giving it the name
Alia Capitolina. The line of the Southern wall of Alia
ee penal Nena ay the outers

a ortification o e grea om legionary

53, Hadrian camp on the western (southwestern) hill,


Builds and it is probahle that it was the general
Elia line of the existing southern wall. At any
Capitolina rate, we know that the area occupied by
the coenaculum and the traditional ‘* Tomb
of David"’ was outside the walls in the
4th cent. An equestrian statue of Hadrian was placed


on the site of the ‘' Holy of Holies’’ (Jerome, Comm. on
Isa 2 8; Mt 24 15). An inscription now existing in
the southern wall of the temple-area, in which occurs the
name of Hadrian, may have belonged to this monument,
while a stone head, discovered in the neighborhood of
Jerus some 40 years ago, may have belonged to the
statue. Either Hadrian himself, or one of the Antonine
erences erected a temple of Venus on the northwestern
hill, where subsequently was built the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre (Kuseb., Life of Constantine, III, 36).
The habit of pilgrimage to the holy sites, which appears
to have had its roots far back in the 2d cent. (see Turner,
Journal of Theological Studies, I, 551, quoted by Sanday,
Sacred Sites of the Gospels, 75-76), seems to have increas-


ingly flourished in the next two centuries; beyond this

In 333 AD, by order of Constantine, the new church

of the Anastasis, marking the supposed site of the Holy
regarding this site and the Holy Cross
oe alleged to have heen found there, are re-
of doubtful veracity. The building must
of the have been magnificent, and covered a
Anastasis existing church. In 362 Julian is said to
have attempted to rebuild the temple, but

doubtful. ‘

At some uncertain date before 450 the coenaculum and
walls. This is the condition depicted in the Madeba
Mosaic and also that described by Eucherius who, writing
“now receives within itself Mt. Zion, which was once
outside, and which, lying on the southern side, overhangs
of the emperor Valentinian who is known to have done
some reconstruction of the walls.

II, took up her residence in Jerus and rebuilt the walls
upon their ancient lines, bringing the


we know little of the city.
Sepulchre, was begun. The_ traditions
corded some time after the events and are
the Church
considerably larger area than that of the
the work was interrupted by an explosion. The story is
‘Church of the Holy Zion’’ were incorporated within the
between 345-50 AD, states that the circuit of the walls
the city like a citadel.’’ It is possible this was the work
In 450 the empress Eudoxia, the widow of Theodosius
whole of the southwestern hill, as well as


56. The the Pool of Siloam, within ‘the circuit
Empress §(Evagarius, Hist. Eccles., I, 22). At any
Eudoxia rate, this inclusion of the pool existed in
Rebuilds the walls described by Antoninus Martyr

in 560 AD, and it is confirmed by Bliss’s
the Walls work (see above VI, 4). She also built


the church of St. Stephon, that at the Pool
of Slloam and others. |
The emperor Justinian, who was perhaps the greatest
of the Christian builders, erected the great Church of
St. Mary, the remains of which are now
considered by some authorities to be in-
corporated in the el 4ksa Mosque; he built
also a ‘'Church of St. Sophia’”’ in the
“Pretorium,’’i.e. on the site of the Antonia
(see, however, Pratorium), and a hospital to the W. of
the temple. The site of the temple itself appears to have
remained in ruins down to the 7th cent.
In 614 Pal was conquered by the Pers
Chosroes I1, and the Jerus churches, includ-


56. Justin-
ian


57. Chos- ing that of the Holy Sepulchre, were de-
roes II stroyed, an event which did much to prepare
Captures the way for the Moslem architects of half
the Ci a century later, who freely used the columns

eCity of these ruined churches in the building of


the ''Dome of the Rock.” ‘
In 629 Heracleus, aeene meanwhile made peace with
the successor of Chosroes II, reached Jerus in triumph,
bearing back the captured fragment of the
He entered the city through the


cross.

58. Herac- “Golden Gate,’’ which indeed is believed
leus Enters by many to have reached its arenenit form
It in through sr restore ons. a pata
‘ of Christendom was but short. Seven
Triumph years earlier had occurred the historic


fiight of Mohammed from Mecca (the
Hegira), and in 637 the victorious followers of the
Prophet appeared in the Holy City. After a short siege,
it capitulated, but the khalif Omar treated the Christians
with generous mercy. The Christian sites


2 - were spared, but upon the temple-site,
Be ra which up to this had apparently been oc-
ency 9 cupied by no important Christian building
Omar but was of peculiar sanctity to the Mos-


lems through Mohammed’s alleged visions
there, a wooden mosque was erected, capable of accom-


modating 3,000 worshippers. This was replaced in 691
AD by the magnificent Kubbet es Sahrah, or ** Dome of the
Rock,” built by ‘Abd’ul Malek, the YOth khalif. For some
centuries the relations of the Christians and Moslems ap-
pear to have been friendly: the historian el Mukaddasi,
writing in 985, describes the Christians and Jews as
having the upper hand in Jerus. In 969 Pal passed into
the power of the Egyp dynasty, and in 1010 her ruler,
the mad Hakim, burnt many of the churches, which, how-

ever, were restored in a poor way. ks
In 1077 Isar el Atsis, a leader of the Seljuk Turks con-
quered Pal from the N., drove out the Egyptians and
massacred 3,000 of the inhabitants of


60. The Jerus. The cruelty of the Turks—in
Seli contrast, be it noted, with the conduct of
eljuk the Arab Moslems—was the immediate
Turks and cause of the Crusades. In 1098 the city
Their was retaken by the Egyp Arabs, and the
a following year was again captured after
Cruelties 4 40 days’ seige by the soldiers of the First


Crusade, and Godfrey de Bouillon became
the first king. Great huilding activity marked the next
80 peaceful years of Lat rule: numbers of churches

were built, but, until toward the end of
61. Cru. this period, the walls were neglected. In

iB 3 1177 they were repaired, but 10 years
saders Cap- jater failed to resist the arms of the vic-
ture the torious Saladin. The city surrendered, but
City in 1099 the inhabitants were spared. In 1192

y Saladin repaired the walls, but in 1219

they were dismantled by orders of the sul-
tan of Damascus. In 1229 the emperor Frederick IT of
Germany obtained the Holy City by treaty, on condition
that he did not restore the fortifications, a stipulation
which, being broken by the inhabitants 10 years later,
brought down upon them the vengeance of the emir of
Kerak. Nevertheless, in 1243 the city was again restored
to the Christians unconditionally.

The following year, however, the Kharizimian Tartars
—a wild, savage horde from Central Asia—hurst into
Pal, carrying destruction before them;
they seized Jerus, massacred the people,


62. The and rifled the tombs of the Lat kings.
Khari- Three years later they were ejected from
zimians Pal by the Egyptians who in their turn
retained it until,-in 1517, they were con-
quered by the Ottoman Turks, who still
hold it. The greatest of their sultans, Suleiman the


Magnificent, huilt the present walls in 1542. In 1832
Mohammed Ali with his Egyp forces came
63. Ottoman and captured the city, but 2 years later
: the fellahin rose against his rule and for
Turks Ob- a time actually gained possession of the
tain the city, except the citadel, making their
City in 1517 entrance through the main drain. The
y besieged citadel was relieved by the arrival
of Ibrahim Pasha from Egypt with rein-
forcements. The city and land were restored to the
Ottoman Turks by the Great Powers in 1840.
X. Modern Jerusalem.—The modern city of Jerus has
about 75,000 inhabitants, of whom over two-thirds are
Jews. Until about 50 years ago the city
1. Jews and Was confined within its 16th-cent. walls,
“Zionism”? the doors of its gates locked every night,
ionism'” and even here there were considerable
2 ,areas unoccupied. Since then, and par-
ticularly during the last 25 years, there has been a
rapid growth of suburbs to the N., N.W., and W. of
the old city. This has been largely due to the steady
stream of immigrant Jews from every part of the
world, particularly from Russia, Roumania, Yemin,
Persia, Bokhara, the Caucasus, and from all parts of the
Turkish empire. This influx of Jews, a large proportion
of whom are extremely poor, has led to settlements or
‘‘colonies’’ of various classes of Jews being erected all
over the plateau to the N.—an area never huilt upon
before—but also on other sides of the city. With the
exception of the Bokhara Colony, which has some fine
huildings and occupies a lofty and salubrious situation,
most of the settlements are mean cottages or ugly alms-
houses. With the exception of a couple of hospitals,
there is no Jewish public building of any architectural
pretensions. The “Zionist” movement, which has
drawn so many Jews to Jerus, cannot be called a suc-
cess, as far as this city is concerned, as the settlers and
thelr children as a rule either steadily deteriorate physi-~
cally and morally—from constant attacks of malaria,
combined with pauperism and want of work—or, in the
case of the energetic and enlightened, they emigrate—
to America esp.; this emigration has been much stimu-
lated of late by the new law whereby Jews and Chris-
tians must now, like Moslems, do military service.
, The foreign Christian pounce represents all na-
tions and all sects; the Roman church is rapidly sur-
passing all other sects or religions in the importance of
their buildings. The Russians are well represented by
their extensive enclosure, which includes a large cathe-
dral, a hospital, extensive hospice in several blocks, and
a handsome residence for the consul-general, and hy
the churches and other buildings on the Mount of Olives.
The Germans have a successful colony belonging to the
“Temple"’ sect to the W. of Jerus near the railway sta-


1621 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Jerusalem


Jerusalem, New


tlon, and are worthily represented hy several handsome
huildings, e.g. the Protestant ‘‘ Church of the Redeemer,”
bullt on the site and on the fround lan of a fine church
helonging to the Knights of St. John, the new (Roman
Catholic) Church of the Dormition on ‘‘Mount Zlon,"
with an adjolning Benedictine convent, a very handsome
Roman Catholic hospice outside the Damascus Gate,
the Kaiserin Augusta Victoria Sanatorium on the Mount
of Olives, and a Protestant J ohanniter Hospice In the city,
a large general hospital and a leper hospltal, a consulate
and two large schools. In influence, both secular and
religious, the Germans have rapidly galned ground in the
last 2 decades. British influence has much diminished,
relatively, The British Ophthalmic Hospital, belonging
to the “Order of the Knights of St. John,” the Eng.
Mision Boe Palneinn te te pander

+ te ews Society, the Bishop Gobat's Schoo

2. Christian 379 Eng. College connected with the
Buildings Church Missionary Society, 3 Anglican
and 4 areacuns oF ae ea aeons St.
are eorge's Collegiate Church adjoins the re-
Institutions sigence of the Anglican bishop, and a few
: small schools comprise the extent of public
bulldings connected with British societies. France and
the Roman Catholic church are worthily represented by


talked-of improvements. There are numerous hotels,
hesides extensive accommodations in the religious hos-
pices, and no less than 15 hospitals and asylums.


Litsraturs.—This is enormous, but of very unequal
value and much of it out of date. For all purposes the
best hook of reference is Jerus from the Earliest Times
to AD 70, 2 vols, hy Principal G. A. Smith. It contains
references to all the lit. To this book and to its author
it is impossible for the present writer adequately to ex-
press his indehtedness, and no attempt at acknowledg-
ment in detail has heen made in this art. In supple-
ment of the ahove, Jerus, by Dr. Selah Merrill, and
Jerus in Bible Times, hy Professor Lewis B. Paton, will
be found useful. The latter is a condensed account, esp.
valuable for its illustrations and its copious references.
Of the arts. in the recent Bible Dictionaries on Jerus,
that hy Conder in HDB is perhaps the most valuable.
Ot guide-books, Baedeker’s Guide to Pal and Syria (1911),
by Socin and Benzinger, and Barnahe Meistermann’s
(R.C.) New Guide to the Holy Land (1909), will he found
useful; also Hanauer's Walks about Jerus.

On ele Climate and ieee Senay: Hull's
“Memoir on Physical Geography and Geology of Ara-
bian Petraea, Pal, and Adjoining Districts,” PEF; and


Mopvern JeRvusALEM (wiTH Poo, of Hezegian IN ForeGRrounp).


the Dominican monastery and seminary connected with
the handsome church of St. Stephen—rehuilt on the plan
of an old Christian church—hy the Ratisbon (Jesuit)
Schools, the Hospital of St. Louis, the hospice and Church
of St. Augustine, and the monastery and seminary of the
“white fathers” or Fréres de la mission algérienne,
whose headquarters center round the heautifully re-
stored Church of 8t. Anne. Not far from here are the
convent and school of the Seurs de Sion, at the Ecce
Homo Church. Also inside the walls near the New
Gate is the residence of the Lat Patriarch—a cardinal
of the Church of Rome—with a church, the school of
the Fréres de la doctrine chrétienne, and the schools, hospi-
tal and convent of the Franciscans, who are recognized
among their coreligionists as the ‘‘ parish priests’’ in the
city, having been established there longer than the
numerous other orders. .
All the various nationalities are under their respective
consuls and enjoy extra-territorial rights. Besides the
Turkish post-office, which is very inefficiently managed,
the Austrians, Germans, French, Russians and Italians
all have post-offices open to all, with special ‘‘ Levant
stamps. The American mail is delivered at the French
post-office. There are four chief hanks, French, Ger-
man, Ottoman and Anglo-Pal (Jewish). As may be
supposed, on account of the demand for land for Jewish
settlements or for Christian schools or convents, the
price of such property has risen enormously. Unfortu-
nately in recent years all owners of land—and Moslems
have not been slow to copy, the foreigners—have taken
to inclosing their property with high and unsightly walls,
greatly spoiling both the walks around the city and the
prospects from many points of view. The increased
development of carriage traffic has led to considerahle
dust in the dry season, and mud in winter, as the roads
are metaled with very soft limestone. The Jerus-Jaffa
Railway (a Fr. company), 54 miles long, which was opened
in 1892, has steadily increased its traffic year by year,
and is now a very paying concern. There is no real
municipal water-supply, and no public sewers for the
new suhurbs—though the old city is drained by a leaking,
ill-constructed mediaeval sewer, which opens just below
the Jewish settlement in the Kidron and runs down the
Wady en Nér. A water-supply, new sewers, electric
trams and electric lights for the streets, are all much-


Blankenhorn," Geology of the Nearer Environsof Jerus,”
ZDPV, 1905; Chaplin, ‘‘Climate of Jerus," PEFS,
1883; Glaisher, ‘‘ Meteorol. Observations in Pal,’”’ special
pamphlet of the Palestine Exploration Fund; ilder-
scheid, ‘‘Die Niederschlagsverhiltnisse Pal in alter
u. neuer Zeit,” ZDPV (1902); Huntington, Pal and Its
Transformation (1911); Andrew Watt, ‘Climate in
Hebron,"’ etc, Journal of the Scottish Meteorological So-
ciety (1900-11); Schick, ‘‘Die Wasserversorgung der
Stadt Jerus,” ZDPV, 1878; Wilson ‘‘Water Supply of
Jerus,"’ Proceedings of the Victoria Institute, 1906; Mas-
terman, in BW, 1905.

On Archaeology and Topography: PEF, vol on
Jerus, with accompanying maps and plans; Clermont-
Ganneau, Archaeological Researches, I, 1899 (PEF);
William, Holy City (1849); Rohinson, Bib. Researches
(1856); Wilson, Recovery of Jerus (1871); Warren
Underground Jerus (1876); Vincent, Underground Je-
rusalem (1911); Guthe, ''Ausgrabungenin Jerus,"" ZDPV,
V; Bliss and Dickie, Excavations in Jerus (1894-97):
Sanday, Sacred Sites of the Gospels (1903); Mitchell,
“The Wall of Jerus according to the Book of Neh,”
JBL (1903); Wilson, Golgotha and the Holy Sepulchre
(1906); Kuemmel, Materialien z. Topographie des alten
Jerus; also numerous reports in the PEFS; Zeitschrift
des deutschen Pal Vereins; and the Revue biblique.

On History: hesides Bible, Apoc, works of Jos, and
History of Tacitus: Besant and Palmer, History of Jerus;
Conder, Judas Maccabaeus and Latin Kingdom of
Jerus; Le Strange, Pal under the Mosiems (1890); C. F.
Kent, Biblicai Geography and History (1911). Bevan,
Jerus under the High-Priests; Watson, The Story of Jerus.

E. W. G. Masrerman

JERUSALEM, NEW (Iepovoadhp xawh, Hie-
rousalém kainé): This name occurs in Rev 21 2
(ver 10, “holy city’). The conception is based on
prophecies which predict a glorious future to Jerus
a‘ter the judgment (Isa 562 1). In Rev, however,
it is not descriptive of any actual locality on earth,
but allegorically depicts the final state of the
church (‘‘the bride,” “the wife of the Lamb,” 21
2.9), when the new heaven and the new earth shall


Jerusha
Jesse


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1622


have come into being. The picture is drawn from
a twofold point of view: the new Jerus is a restora-
tion of Paradise (21 6; 22 1.2.14); it is also the
ideal of the theocracy realized (21 3.12.14.22). The
latter viewpoint explains the peculiar representa-
tion that the city descends “out of heaven from
God”’ (21 2.10), which characterizes it as, on the
one hand, a product of God’s supernatural work-
manship, and as, on the other hand, the culmination
of the historic process of redemption. In other NT
passages, where the theocratic point of view is less
prominent, the antitypical Jerus appears as having
its seat in heaven instead of, as here, coming down
from heaven to earth (cf Gal 4 26; He 11 10; 12
22). See also REVELATION oF JOHN.
. GEERHARDUS Vos

JERUSHA, jé-ro0’sha (NWI, yrasha’, ‘taken
possession of,” i.e. “married’): In 2 K 15 33=
“Jerushah” (MWIN), yerishah, same meaning) of
2 Ch 27 1, the mother of King Jotham of Judah.
Zadok was her father’s name; he may be the priest
of 1 Ch 6 12 (Heb & 38).


JESHAIAH, jé-sha’ya, jé-shi’a ([a] IW), yesha'-
yaha; [b] WWW, yshatyah, “deliverance of Jeh”;
[2] [3] below have form [a], the others form [6]):

(1) Son of Hananiah, and grandson of Zerub-
babel, according tc 1 Ch 3 21, AV “Jesaiah.”

But commentators follow Heb (and RVm) in the first
part of the verse, and LXX, Vulg, Syr in the second part,
thus reading, ‘‘And the son of Hananiah [was] Pelatiah,
and Jeshaiah [was] his son, and Arnan his son,”’ etc, thus
making J. a grandson of Hananiah.

(2) A “son” of Jeduthun, and like him a temple
musician; head of the family of that name (1 Ch
25 3.15).

(3) A Levite, ancestor of Shelemoth, one of
David’s treasurers (1 Ch 26 25).

(4) A descendant of Elam; he went with Ezra
from Babylon to Jerus (Ezr 8 7)=‘“‘Jesias” (RV),
“Josias’ (AV), 1 Esd 8 33.

(5) A descendant of Merari and a contemporary
of Ezra (Ear 8 19)=‘“‘Osaias’” of 1 Esd 8 48.

(6) A Benjamite (Neh 11 7), AV “Jesaiah.”

Davin Francis RoBEeRtTs

JESHANAH, jesh’a-na, jé-sha’na (IW, ysha-
nah): A town named with Bethel and Ephron
among the places taken by Abijah from Jeroboam
(2 Ch 18 19). Most scholars are agreed that
the same name should be read instead of JWO,
ha-shen, in 1 S$ 7 12. Itis probably identical with
the Iedvas, Isénas, of Jos (Ant, XIV, xv, 12). It is
represented by the modern ‘Ain Sinia, 3} miles N.
of Bethel, with a spring and interesting ancient
remains.


JESHARELAH, jesh-a-ré’la (MEN W, sar’ alah,
meaning doubtful): One of the (or probably a
family of) Levitical musicians (1 Ch 25 14), called
“Asharelah” in ver 2. The names should be
written “‘Asarelah’’ and ‘‘Jesarelah.”


JESHEBEAB, jé-sheb’é-ab (ANW", yeshebh’abh,
meaning uncertain): A Levite of the 14th course (1
Ch 24 13). Kittel and Gray (HPN, 24) read with
LXX, A, “Ishbaal”; the name is omitted in LXX,
B, and the change in MT as well as the omission in
LXX may be due to the word bae‘al forming part
of the name. Cf JERUBBESHETH.


JESHER, jé’shér (alh > yesher, or Ww. yesher,
“uprightness”): A son of Caleb (1 Ch 2 18).
JESHIMON, jé-shé’mon, jesh’i-mon (jaw "4,


ha-y’shimon, “the desert,’ and in RV so tr¢; but
in AV, Nu 21 20; 28 28; 1S 23 19.24; 26 1.3,


“Jeshimon” as a place-name. In Nu LXX reads


4 Epnpos, hé érémos, “the desert”; inl] S LXX reads
Teroatpdv, Tessaimin): In these passages probably
two districts are referred to: (1) The “desert” N.
of the Dead Sea, which was overlooked from Pisgah
(Nu 21 20; 23 28). This is the bare and sterile
land, saturated with salt, lying on each side of the
Jordan N. of the Dead Sea, where for miles practi-
cally no vegetable life can exist. (2) The sterile
plateau W. of the steep cliffs bordering the western
shores of the Dead Sea. Here between the lower
slopes of the Judaean hills, where thousands of Bed-


-ouin live and herd their flocks, and the more fertile


borders of the sea with their oases (‘Ain Feshkhah,
‘Ain Jidy, etc), is a broad strip of utterly waterless
land, the soft chalky hills of which are, for all but a
few short weeks, destitute of practically any vegeta-
tion. The Hill of Hachilah was on the edge of this
desert (1 S 23 19; 26 1.3), and the Arabah was to
its south (1 S 28 24). It is possible that the refer-
ences in Nu may also apply to this region.

The word “Jeshimon” (y‘shimén) is often used as
a common noun in referring to the desert of Sinai
(Dt 32 10; Ps 78 40; 106 14; Isa 43 19, etc),
and except in the first two of these references, when
we have “wilderness,” it is always tr’ “desert.”
Althongh used in 7 passages in poetical parallelism
to midhbar, tr? “wilderness,” it really means a
much more hopeless place; in a midhbaér animals
can be pastured, but a y*shtmon is a desolate waste.

E. W. G. MastermMan

JESHISHAI, je-shish’4-1 (UW 2", yshishay,

“aged’’): A Gadite chief (and family?) (1 Ch 5 14).


JESHOHAIAH, jesh--ha’ya, jesh-6-hi’a as,
yshohayah, meaning unknown): A prince in Simeon
(1 Ch 4 36).


JESHDUA, jesh’ii-a, JESHUAH, je-shi’a (102,
yeshu**, “Jeh is deliverance’ or ‘opulence’; cf
JOSHUA):

(1) AV ‘Jeshuah,” head of the 9th course of
priests, and possibly of “the house of Jeshua”’
(1 Ch 24 11; Ezr 2 36; Neh 7 39).

(2) A Levite of Hezekiah’s time (2 Ch $1 15).

(3) Son of Jozadak=Joshua the high priest (Ezr
23;3 2.8; 43; 52; 10 18; Neh 7 7; 12 1.7.10.
ne ise JosHua (4)=“Jesus’’ (1 Esd 5 48 and Sir

(4) A man of Pahath-moab, some of whose de-
scendants returned from Babylon to Jerus with
creas (Ezr 2 6; Neh 7 11)=“Jesus” (1 Esd

8).
(5) Head of a Levitical house which had over-
sight of the workmen in the temple (Ezr 2 40;
39; Neh 7 43). He is mentioned agam in Neh
8 7 as taking part in explaining the Torah to the
people, in 9 4f (cf 12 8) as leading in the wor-
ship, and in 10 9 (Heb 10) as sealing the covenant;
this J. is called son of Azaniah (Neh 10 9). To
these references should be added probably Neh 12
24, where commentators read, “Jeshua, Binnui, Kad-
miel” for ‘“Jeshua the son of Kadmiel.”’ Perhaps
Jozabad (Ezr 8 33) is a “‘son”’ of this same Jeshua;
ef Ezr 8 33=1 Esd 8 63, where AV is “Jesu,” RV
“Jesus.” He is the same as Jessue (AV), Jesus (RV)
(1 Esd 5 26). ;

2 a Father of Ezer, a repairer of the wall (Neh


(7) Josuva, son of Nun (Neh 8 17) (q.v.).
Davip Francis Roperts
JESHOUA, jesh’t-a, jé-shi’a (9107, yeshue'): A
place occupied by the children of Judah after their
return from captivity (Neh 11 26), evidently, from
the places named with it, in the extreme S. of Judah.
It may correspond with the Shema of Josh 16 26,


1623


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jerusha
Jesse


and possibly to the Sheba of 19 2. The site may
be Khirbet Sd‘weh, a ruin upon a prominent hill,
Tell es Sa‘weh, 12 miles E.N.E. of Beersheba. The
hill is surrounded by a wall of large blocks of stone.
PEF, III, 409-10, Sh XXV.


JESHURUN, jéshi’run, jesh’d-run (77,
yshurdn, “upright one,’”’? Dt 32 15; 33 5.26; Isa
44 2): LXX tr® it “the beloved one” (qyarnuéves,
égapéménas, the perf. part. passive of agapdd), and
in Isa 44 2 adds ‘Israel’; Vulg has dilectus in Dt
32 15, elsewhere rectissimus; Aq., Symm., Theod.
have “upright.” For the form, Duhm compares
WR0aT, zbhulun, Zebulun. (1) The name used to
be explained as a diminutive form, a pet name,
and some, e.g. Cornill, Schultz (OT Thea. ET, H,
29, n.12) still explain it so, “the righteous little
people.” But there is no evidence that the ending
-tn had a diminutive force. (2) Most moderns take
it as a poetical or ideal title of Israel, derived from


“W", ydshar, “upright’’; it is held to contain a tacit
reference to the word Israel (oxen , yisra@ él), of


which the first three consonants are almost the same
as those of “Jeshurun”; in Nu 23 10 the term ‘the
righteous ones” (O"7|", ysha@rim) is supposed to
contain a similar reference. Most commentators
compare also ‘‘the Book of Jashar,’’ and it has been
held that ‘Jashar’ is similarly a name by which
Israel is called. See JasHan.

Following Bacher (ZATW, 1885, 161 ff), com-
mentators hold that in Isa this new name, a coinage
due to the author of Second Isaiah and adopted in
Dt, stands in contrast to Jacob, ‘the supplanter,”
as his name was explained by the Hebrews (cf Hos
12 2-4). Israel is here given a new name, “the
upright, pious one,” and with the new name goes a
new chance in life, to live up to its meaning. Driver
(Dt, 361) says that in Dt 32 15 ‘‘where the context
is of declension from its ideal [it is] applied reproach-
fully. ‘Nomen Recti pro Israele ponens, ironice
eos perstringit qui a rectitudine defecerant’ (Calv.).
Elsewhere it is used as a title of honor.” AV has
‘Jesurun” in Isa 44 2.

Davip Francis RoBerts

JESIAH, jé-si’a (1 Ch 23 20AV). Sce Issurau.


_ JESIAS, jé-si’as (Ierlas, [esias; AV Josias
[1 Esd 8 33]): Corresponding to Jeshaiah, son of
Athaliah (Ezr 8 7).


JESIMIEL, jé-sim’i-el OND, y’simi’ él, “God
establishes”): A prince of Simeon (1 Ch 4 36).


JESSE, jes’é (UH, yishay, meaning doubtful;
according to Gesenius it=‘“‘wealthy”; Olshausen,
Gram., §§ 277 f, conjectures 17 UW, yésh yah, “Jeh
exists’; Wellhausen [1 5 14 49] explains it as
"WAN, 'dbhishay [see ApisHat]; "lecoat, Jessai;
Ruth 4 17.22; 158 16; 17; 20; 22; 25 10; 28
201; 231; 1K 1216; 1Ch10 14; 12 18;
Ps 72 20; Isa 11 1.10 [=Rom 15 12]); Mt 1 5.6;
Acts 13 22): Son of Obed, grandson of Boaz, and
father of King David. The grouping of the refer-
ences to J. in 1 S is bound up with that of the
grouping of the whole narrative of David and Saul.
See SamurL, Booxs or. There seem to be three
main veins in the narrative, so far as J. is concerned.

(1) In1 § 16 1-18, where J. is called the Bethle-
hemite. Samuel is sent to seek among J.’s sons a
successor to Saul.

Both Samuel and J. fail to discern at first Jeh’s choice,
Samuel thinking that it would be the eldest son (ver 6),


while J. had not thought it worth while to call the young-
est to the feast (ver 11).


(2) (2) In 18 16 14-23, Saul is mentally dis-
turbed, and is advised to get a harpist. David
“the son of J. the Bethlehemite’”’ is recommended
by a courtier, and Saul sends to J. for David.


“And J. took ten loaves [so emend and translate, and
not as RV, ‘an ass laden with bread"’], and, a [skin]
bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent them" to Saul as a
present with David, who becomes a courtier of Saul's
with his father’s consent.


(b) The next mention of J is in three contemp-
tuous references by Saul to David as ‘‘the son of J.”
in 20 27.30.31, part of the quarrel-scene between
Saul and Jonathan. (But it is not quite certain
if ch 20 belongs to the same source as 16 14-23.)
In answer to the first reference, Jonathan calls his
friend ‘‘David,’’ and Saul repeats the phrase “the
son of J.,” abusing Jonathan personally (ver 30,
where the meaning is uncertain). The reference to
David as “the son of J.’ here and in the following
verse is contemptuous, not because of any reproach
that might attach itself to J., but, as Budde remarks,
because ‘“‘an upstart is always contemptuously
referred to under his father’s name” in courts and
society. History repeats itself!


(c) Further references of a like kind are in the
2 6-23, viz. in vs 7.8.13 by Saul, and repeated
in ver 9. ‘ ane
(d) The final one of this group is in 25 10, where Nabal
See asks ‘‘Who is David? and who is the son
6 i


(3) The parts of 17—18 5 which are omitted by
LXX B, ie. 17 12-31.41.48b.50.55—18 6a. Here
J. is mentioned as ‘an Ephrathite of Beth-lehem-
judah” (ver 12, not ‘‘that” Ephrathite, which is a
grammatically impossible tr of the MT), Ephrath
or Ephrathah being another name for Bethlehem, or
rather for the district. He is further said to have
eight sons (ver 12), of whom the three eldest had
followed Saul to the war (ver 18).


J. sends David, the shepherd, to his brothers with pro-
visions (ver17). Afterward David, on being brought to
Saul and asked who he is, answers, ‘‘I am the son of thy
servant J. the Bethlehemite'’ (ver 58). J. is also de-
scribed (ver 12) as being ‘'in the days of Saul an old
man, advanced in years” (so emend and translate, not
as RV, ‘‘stricken in years among men"’). The mention
of his having 8 sons in ver 12 is not in agreement with
1 Ch 2 13-15, which gives only 7 sons with two sisters,
but where Syr gives 8, adding, from 27 18, Elihu which
MT has there probably by corruption (Curtis, Ch, 88).
1 8 16 10 should be tr¢ ‘‘and J. made his 7 sons to pass
before Samuel” (not as RV, AV, ‘'seven of his sons"’).
Budde (Kurz. Hand-Komm., '‘Samuel,"’ 114) holds 16
1-13 to be a late Midr, and (ib, 123 f) omits (a) ‘'that’’
in 17 12; (6) also ‘and he had 8 sons" as due to a wrong
inference from 16 10; (c) the names of the 3 eldest in
17 13; (d) ver 14b; he then changes 15a, and reads thus:
(12) ‘' Now D. was the son of an Ephrathite of Bethlehem-
Judah, whose name was J., who was .... [years] old
at the time of Saul. (3) And the 3 eldest sons of J.
had marched with Saul to the war, (14) and David was
the youngest, (15) and David had remained to feed his
iauhere sheepat Bethlehem. (16) Now the Philis came,”
etc.


According to all these narrativesin 1 8, whether
all 3 be entirely independent of one another or not,
J. had land in Bethlehem, probably outside the
town wall, like Boaz (see Boaz) his grandfather
(Ruth 4 17). In 22 3.4 David intrusts his father
and mother to the care of the king of Moab, but
from 20 29 some have inferred that J. was dead
(although most critics assign 22 3 at any rate to the
same stratum as ch 20).

Jonathan tells Saul that David wanted to attend a
family sacrificial feast at. Bethlehem (20 29). MT reads,
“And he, my brother, has commanded me,’’ whereas we
should probably read with LX X, ‘‘and my brethren have
commanded me,"'i.e. the members of the clan, as we have
farther on in the verse, ‘‘Let me get away, I pray thee,and
see my brethren.” As to J.’s daughters, see ABroarL;

AHASH.


(4) Of the other references to J., the most note-
worthy is that in Isa 11 1: ‘’There shall come forth
a shoot out of the stock of Jesse, and a branch out of


assage,
y Doeg


Jesting
Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1624


his roots shall bear fruit,” ie. out of Jesse's roots
(ef Rev 6 5). “Why J. and not David?” asks
Duhm; and he answers, ‘“‘Becanse the Messiah will
be a second David, rather than a descendant of
David.” Marti explains it to mean that he will
be, not from David, but from a collateral line of
descent. Duhm’s explanation suggests a paral-
lelism between David and Christ, of whom the
former may be treated as a type similar to Aaron
and Melchizedek in He. Saul might pour contempt
upon ‘‘the son of J.,” but Isaiah has given J. here a
name above all Heb names, and thus does Provi-
dence mock “society.”’? See also Root oF JESSE.
Davin Francis RoBeRtTs

JESTING, jest’ing: Used from Tindale down as
the tr of evrpaweda, eutrapelia (Eph 5 4). Aris-
totle uses the original in his Ethics iv.14 as an
equivalent of “quick-witted,” from its root mean-
ing “something easily turned,” adding that, since
the majority of people love excessive jesting, the
word is apt to be degraded. This is the case here,
where it clearly has a flavor of the coarse or licen-
tions.


JESUI, jes’ti-i.
JESUITES, jes’ti-its. See Isuvr.
JESURUN, jé-si’run, jes’i-run.


JESUS, jé’zus (Inoods, Tésous, for PWW,
ychoshu*):

(1) Joshua, son of Nun (AV Acts 7 45; He 4 8;
ef 1 Mace 2 55; 2 Esd 7 37).

(2) (8) High priest and Levite. Sce Jesuva, 2, 5.

(4) Son-of Sirach. See Srracu.

(5) An ancestor of Jesus (Lk 3 29, AV “Jose”’).

(6)- (7) See the next three articles.


JESUS CHRIST, jée’zus krist (Incots Xpiorrds,
Tésous Christés) :


Tus Names
OrpER or TREATMENT


See Isxvt.


See JEsHURUN.


I.
Ti.


Parr I. Inrropuctory


I. Tus Sources
1. In General
2. Denial of Existence of Jesus
3. Extra-Christian Notices
4. The Gospels
(1) The Synoptics
(2) The Fourth Gospel
Tur PREPARATION
1. Both Gentile and Jewish
2. OT Preparation
3. Post-exilian Preparation
THE OvutrwaRp SITUATION
1. The Land
Its Divisions
2. Political Situation
Changes in Territory
3. The Religious Sects
(1) The Scribes
(2) The Pharisees
(3) The Sadducees
(4) The Essenes
Tue CaRONOLOGY
1. Date of the Birth of Jesus
2. Date of Baptism
3. Length of Ministry
4, Date of Christ's Death


Part II. Tse Propiems or THE Lire or Jesus


I. Tue Mirac.es

1. The “Modern” Attitude

2. Supernatural in the Gospels

Tue MusstansHip Fier
1. Reserve of Jesus and Modern Criticism
2. A Growing Revelation

Kinepom anp ArocaLyPsE

1. The Kingdom—Present or Future?
2. Apocalyptic Beliefs

Tae CHARACTER AND CLAIMS

1. Denial of Christ’s Moral Perfection
2. Sinlessness and the Messianic Claim


Part III. Covurss or tran Earra.y Lire or Jesus


1. Divisions of the History
2. Not a Complete “Life”


TL,


III.


Iv.


II.


III.


IV.


A.


I.


II.


III


Iv.


III.


IV.


FROM THE NATIVITY TO THE BAPTISM AND
TEMPTATION


Tue Nativity


Oboe


6.
7


. Hidden Piety in Judaism

. Birth of the Baptist

. The Annunciation and Its Results
. The Birth at Bethlehem


(1) The Census of Quirinius
(2) Jesus Born


. The Incidents of the Infancy


(1) The Visit of the Shepherds APN

(2) The Circumcision and Presentation in the
Temple

(3) Visit of the Magi

Flight to Egypt and Return to Nazareth

Questions and Objections

(L) The Virgin Birth

(2) The Genealogies


Tur YEaRs or SILENCE—TxHE TWELFTH YEAR


1.
2.


The Human Development
Jesus in the Temple


Tue FoRERUNNER AND THE BartisM


1.
2.


The Preaching of John
The Coming Christ
Jesus Is Baptized


THE TEMPTATION


1.
2.
3.


Temptation Follows Baptism
Nature of the Temptation
Stages of the Temptation

Its Typical Character


B. THE EARLY JODAEAN MINISTRY


Tae TusTIMONIEs OF THE Baptist


1.
2.


The Synoptics and John
Threefold Witness of the Baptist


Tse First Discretes


1.
2.


Spiritual Accretion
“Son of Man” and ‘“‘Son of God’


Tue First Events


1.
2.
3.
A.


The First Miracle

The First Passover, and Cleansing of the Temple
The Visit of Nicodemus

Jesus and John


JOURNEY TO GALILEE—THE WoMAN OF SAMARIA
1. Withdrawal to Galilee


. The Living Water
. The True Worship
. Work and Its Reward


GALILEAN MINISTRY AND VISITS TO THE FEASTS


- The Scene
. The Time


First Pertod—-From the Beginning of the Minisiry in


I.


II.


III.


Galilee till the Mission of the Twelve


Oprenino INcIDENTS


POOR


. Healing of Nohleman’s Son
. The Visit to Nazareth

. Call of the Four Disciples

. At Capernaum


a) Christ’s Teaching

b) The Demoniac in the Synagogue
Demon-Possession: Its Reality

c) Peter’s Wife’s Mother

d) The Eventful Evening


From tHe First GaLiLbeaAN CIRCUIT TILL THE
CHOICE OF THE APOSTLES
1.


2.


3.


The First Circuit

Capernaum Incidents

a) Cure of the Paralytic .
b) Call and Feast of Matthew
The Unnamed Jerusalem Feast
a) The Healing at Bethesda

6b) Son and Father

ce) The Threefold Witness


. Sabbath Controversies


a) Plucking of the Ears of Grain
b) The Man with the Withered Hand
ce) Withdrawal to thé Sea


. The Choosing of the Twelve


a) The Apostolic Function
b) The Lists
ec) The Meu


From THE SERMON ON THE Mount TILL THE ParR-
ABLES OF THE Kinopom—A Sxconp Circovlt


1.


The Sermou on the Mount
a) The Blessings
b) True Righteousness—the Old and the New


Law

ce) Religion and Hypocrisy—True and False
Motive

d) The True Good and Cure for Care

e) Relation to the World’s Evil—the Conclu-


sion
. Intervening Incidents


a) Healing of the Centurlon's Servant

b) The Widow of Nain’s Son Raised

c) Embassy of John’s Disciples—Christ and His
Generation

d) The First Anointing—the Woman Who Was

a Sinner


o>


1625


3.


4.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Jesting


Jesus Christ


Second Galilean Circuit—Events at Capernaum
a) Galilee Revisited
b) Cure of Demoniac—Discourse ou Blasphemy
The Sign of Jonah
¢) Christ’s Mother and Brethren
eaching in Parables
Parables of the Kingdom


IV. From THe Crossina To GADARA TO THE MissI0N
oF THE TweL_ve—A TuHIRp Circuir


1.


2.
3.


Crossing of the Lake—Stilling of the Storm

a) Aspirants for Discipleship

b) The Storm Calmed

The Gadarene (Gerasene) Demoniac

ate Daughter Raised—Womanu with Issue of
oo

a) Jairus’ Appeal and Its Result

db) The Afflicted Woman Cured


. Incidents of Third Circuit
. The Twelve Sent Forth—Discourse of Jesus


a) The Commission
b) Counsels and Warnings


Second Peritod—After the Mission of the Twelve till the


Departure from Galilee


I. From tas Doeatsa or ton Baptist tity tHE Dis-
COURSE ON THE BREAD OF LIFE


1.
2.
3.
4,


The Murder of the Baptist and Herod’s Alarms
The Feeding of the Five Thousand

Walking on the Sea

Gennesaret—Discourse on the Bread of Life
Peter’s First Confession


II, From Disrutes wity TRH PHARISEES TILL THE
TRANSFIOURATION


1.
2.


Jesus and Tradition—Outward and Inward


‘urity
Retirement to Tyre and Sidon—the Syrophoeni-
cian Woman


3. At Decapolis—New Miracles


a) The Deaf Man
b) Feeding of the Four Thousand


4, Leaven of the Pharisees, etc—-Cure of Blind


5.


an
At Caesarea Philippi—the Great Confession—
First Announcement of Passion


6. The Transfiguration—the Epileptic Boy
III. From Private JouRNnY THROUOH GALILEE TILL
RetuRN FROM THE Feast oF TanERNACLES


1.


Galilee and Capernaum
a) Second Announcement of the Passion
b}) The Temple Tax
ce) Discourse on Greatness and Forgiveness
(1) Greatness in Humility
(2) Tolerance
(3) The Erring Brother
(4) Parable of Unmerciful Servant


2. The Feast of Tabernacles—Discourses, etc


a) The Private Journey—Divided Opinions
b) Christ’s Self-Witness
ec) The Woman Taken in Adultery
d) The Cure of the Blind Man
e) The Good Shepherd
Chronological Note


D. LAST JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM—JESUS IN PERAEA


I. From Leavine GALILEB TILL THE FEAST OF THE
DeEpDicaTION
1. Rejected by Samaria
2. Mission of the Seventy


3.
4.


The Lawyer's Question—Parable of Good
Samaritan

Discourses, Parables, and Miracles

a) Original to Luke

bd) The Infirm Woman—the Dropsied Man

ec) Parable of the Great Supper

d) Counting the Cost


5. Martha and Mary


6.


Feast of the Dedication


II. From tse Anops aT BETHABARA TILL THE Rals-
INO OF LAZARUS


1.
2.
3.


Parables of Lost Sheep, Lost Piece of Silver
and Prodigal Son_ |

Parables of the Unjust Steward and the Rich
Man and Lazarus

The Summons to Bethany—Raising of Lazarus


III, From tue Retirement To EPuHRaIM TILL THE
ARRIVAL aT BETHANY
1. Retreat to Ephraim


Poy


on


. The Journey Resumed
. Cure of the Lepers
. Pharisaic Questionings


a) Divorce

bd) Coming of the Kingdom

c) Parable of the Unjust Judge

he Spirit of the Kingdom

a) Parable of Pharisee and Publican
b) Blessing of the Babes

c) The Rich Young Ruler


. Third Announcement of the Passion


The Rewards of the Kingdom
a) Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard
b) The Sons of Zebedee


8. Jesus at Jericho
a) The Cure of Bartimacus
b) Zacchaeus the Publican
c) Parable of the Pounds
Arrival at Bethany


E. THE PASSION WEERK—BETRAYAL, TRIAL, AND
CRUCIFIXION


I. Tae Events Precepino tue Last Supper
1, The Chronology
2. The Anointing at Bethany
3. The Entry into Jerusalem
Jesus Weeping over Jerusalem—Return to Betl-


any
4. Cursing of the Fig Tree—Second Cleansing of
the Temple
Were There Two Cleansings ?
5. The Eventful Tuesday
a) The Demand for Authority—Parables
1) The Two Sons—the Wicked Husbandmen
2) The Marriage of the King’s Son
b) Ensnaring Questions, etc
(1) Tribute to_Caesar—the Resurrectlon—
the Great Commandment
(2) David's Son and Lord
ce) The Great Deuunciation
d) The Widow's Offering
e) The Visit of the Greeks
f) Discourse on the Last Things
g) Parables of Ten Virgins, Talents and Last
Judgment
6. A Day of Retirement
7. An Atmosphere of Plotting—Judas and the
Priests
II, From tee Last SuprPak TILL TRE Cross
1. The Chronology
2. The Last Supper
a) The Preparation
b) Dispute about Precedence—Washing of the
Disciples’ Feet—Departure of Judas
Fy The Lord's Supper
d) The Last Discourses—Intercessory Prayer
e) The Departure and Warning
3. Gethsemane—the Betrayal and Arrest
a) Agony in the Garden
b) Betrayal by Judas—Jesus Arrested
4. Trial before the Sanhedrin
Legal and Historical Aspects
a) Before Annas and Caiaphas—the Unjust
Judgment
b) The Threefold Denial
ec) Remorse and Suicide of Judas
5. Trial before Pilate
a) The Attitude of the Accusers
b) The Attitude of Pilate
(1) Jesus Sent to Herod
(2) “‘Not This Man, but Barabbas"
(3) ‘‘Ecce Homo”
(4) A Last Appeal—Pilate Yields
ce) The Attitude of Jesus
III. Tue Crucifixion aNpD BuRIAL
1. The Crucifixion
a) On the Way ‘
b) Between the Thieves—the Superscription—
the Seamless Robe
The Mocking—the Penitent Thief—Jesus and
His Mother
d) The Great Darkness—the Cry of Desertion
2) Last Words and Death of Jesus
f) The Spear-Thrust—Earthquake and Rending
of the Veil
2. The Burial
a) The New Tomb
b) The Guard of Soldiers


F, THE RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION


The Resurrection a Fundamental Fact
1. The Resurrection
a) The Easter Morning—the Open Tomb
(1) The Angel and the Keepers
2) Visit of the Women
3) The Angelic Message
Visit of Peter and John— Appearance to Mary
Report to the Disciples—Incredulity
Other Easter-Day Appearances (Kmmaus,
Jerusalem)
d) The Second Appearance to the Eleven—the
Doubt of Thomas
The Galilean Appearances
(1) At the Sea of Tiberias—the Draught of
Fishes—Peter's Restoration
(2) On the Mountain—the Great Commis-
sion— Baptism
f) Appearance to James
g) The Last Meeting
2. The Ascension


nd


&


b


Need


€.


~


€


Part IV. Eprirooun: Tue Apostouic TEacuino


1. After the Ascension

2. Revelation through the Spirit
3. Gospels and Epistles _

4, Fact of Christ's Lordship


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1626


5. Significance of Christ’s Person

6. Significance of the Cross and Resurrection

7. Hope of the Advent
LITERATURE
_ Jesus Christ: The Founder of the Christian re-
ligion; the promised Messiah and Saviour of the
world; the Lord and Head of the Christian church.

I. The Names.—(1) “Jesus” ([ésous) is the Gr
equivalent of the Heb “Joshua” (QWW, yhdshu'),
meaning ‘Jehovah is salvation.” It
stands therefore in the LXX and
Apoc for “Joshua,” and in Acts 7 45
and He 4 8 likewise represents the OT Joshua;
hence in RV is in these passages rendered “Joshua.”
In Mt 1 21 the name is commanded by the angel
to be given to the son of Mary, “for it is he that
shall save his people from their sins” (see below on
“Nativity”). It is the personal name of the Lord
in the Gospels and the Acts, but generally in the
Epistles appears in combination with “Christ’’ or
other appellative (alone in Rom 3 26; 4 24; 1 Cor
12 3; 2 Cor 11 4; Phil 2 10; 1 Thess 4 14; He
7 22: 10 19, etc).

(2) “Christ” (Christos) is the Gr equivalent of
the Heb ‘Messiah’ (T°WA, mashith; cf in the

NT, Jn 141; 425, ‘Messiah”),
2. Christ meaning “anointed” (see Messtau).

It designates Jesus as the fulfiller of
the Messianic hopes of the OT and of the Jewish
people. it will be seen below that Jesus Himself
made this claim. After the resurrection it became
the current title for Jesus in the apostolic church.
Most frequently in the Epistles He is called ‘Jesus
Christ,’ sometimes “Christ Jesus” (Rom 8 1.2.39;
1 Cor 1 2.30; 415; Eph 11; Phil 11; Coll
4.28 AV; 1 Thess 2 14, etc), often ‘“‘Christ” alone
(Rom 116 AV; 5 6.8; 6 48.9; 8 10, etc). In
this case “Christ” has acquired the force of a proper
name. Very frequently the term is associated with
“Lord” (kuérios)—“the [or “‘our’’] Lord Jesus Christ”
(Acts 11 17; 15 11 AV; 1631 AV; 20 21; 28
31; Rom 17; 6 1.11; 13 14; 1 Cor 16 28, etc).

IL Order of Treatment.—Iin studying, as it is
proposed to do in this art., the earthly history of
Jesus and His place in the faith of the apostolic
church, it will be convenient to pursue the following
order:

First, as introductory to the whole study, certain
questions relating to the sources of our knowledge
of Jesus, and to the preparation for, and circum-
stances of, His historical appearance, invite care-
ful attention (Part I).

Next, still as preliminary to the proper narra-
tive of the life of Jesus, it is desirable to consider
certain problems arising out of the presentation
of that life in the Gospels with which modern
thought is more specially concerned, as determining
the attitude in which the narratives are approached.
Such are the problems of the miracles, the Messiah-
ship, the sinless character and supernatural claims
of Jesus (Part II).

The way is then open for treatment in order of the
actual events of Christ’s life and ministry, so far
as recorded. These fall into many stages, from
His nativity and baptism till His death, resurrection
and ascension (Part JII).

A final division will deal with Jesus as the exalted
Lord in the aspects in which He is presented in the
teaching of the Epistles and remaining writings of
the NT (Part 1V).


Part I. InrropucTory


I, The Sources.—The principal, and practically
the only sources for our knowledge of Jesus Christ
are the four Canonical Gospels—distinction being
made in these between the first three (Synop-
tic) Gospels, and the Gospel of John. Nothing,


1. Jesus


either in the few notices of Christ in non-Christian
authors, or in the references in the other books of the
NT, or in later Christian lit., adds to
1. InGen- the information which the Gospels
eral already supply. The so-called apocry-
phal Gospels are worthless as authori-
ties (see s.v.); the few additional sayings of Christ
(cf Acts 20 35) found in outside writings are of
doubtful genuineness (cf a collection of these in
Westcott’s Intro to the Study of the Gospels, Appendix
C; see also Loata).
It marks the excess to which skepticism has gone
that writers are found in recent years who deny the
very existence of Jesus Christ (Kalt-
2. Denial hoff, Das Christus-Problem, and Die
of Existence Enistehung des Christenthums; Jensen,
of Jesus Das Gilgamesch-Epos, 1; Drews, Die
Christusmythe; cf on Kalthoff, Schweit-
zer, The Quest of the Historical Jesus, ET, 313 ff;
Jensen is reviewed in the writer’s The Resurrection
of Jesus, ch ix). The extravagance of such skep-
ticism is its sufficient refutation.
Of notices outside the Christian circles the fol-
lowing may be referred to.
(1) Josephus—There is the famous


3. Extra- passage in Jos, Ant, XVIII, ii, 3,
Christian commencing, ‘(Now there was about
Notices this time, Jesus, a wise man, if it be


lawful to call him a man,” etc. It
is not unlikely that Jos had some reference to Jesus,
but most agree that the passage in question, if
not entirely spurious, has been the subject of Chris-
tian interpolation (on the lit. and different views,
see Schirer, Jewish People in the Time of Christ,
Div II, vol II, 143 ff; in support of interpolation,
Edersheim on “Josephus,” in Dict. of Christ. Biog.).

(2) Tacitus—-The Rom historian, Tacitus, in a
well-known passage relating to the persecution of
Nero (Ann. xv.44), tells how the Christians, already
“a great multitude” (ingens multitudo), derived their
name ‘from one Christus, who was executed iu the
reign of Tiberius by the procurator of Judaea,
Pontius Pilate.”

(3) Suetonius also, in his account of Claudius,
speaks of the Jews as expelled from Rome for the
raising of tumults at the instigation of one ‘‘Chres-
tus” (impulsore Chresto), plainly a mistake for
“Christus.” The incident is doubtless that referred
to in Acts 18 2.

The four Gospels, then, with their rich contents,
Temain as our primary sources for the knowledge
of the earthly life of Jesus.

4. The (1) The Synoptics—It may be taken
Gospels for granted as the result of the best
criticism that the first three Gospels
(Mt, Mk, Lk) all fall well within the apostolic
age (cf Harnack, Alichr. Lit., Pref; see GospE.s).
The favorite theory at present of the relations of
these Gospels is, that Mk is an independent. Gospel,
resting on the teaching of Peter; that Mt and Lk
have as sources the Gospel of Mk and a collection
of discourses, probably attributable to the apostle
Matthew (now commonly called Q); and that Lk
has a third, well-authenticated source (Lk 1 1-4)
peculiar to himself. The present writer is disposed
to allow more independence to the evangelists in
the embodying of a tradition common to all; in
any case, the sources named are of unexceptionable
authority, and furnish a strong guaranty for the
reliability of the narratives. Thesupreme guaranty
of their trustworthiness, however, is found in the
narratives themselves; for who in that (or any) age
could imagine a figure so unique and perfect as that
of Jesus, or invent the incomparable sayings and
parables that proceeded from His lips? Much of
Christ’s teaching is high as heaven above the minds
of men still.


1627


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


(2) The Fourth Gospel.—The Fourth Gospel stands
apart from the Synoptics in dealing mainly with
another set of incidents (the Jerusalem ministry),
and discourses of a more private and intimate kind
than those belonging to the Galilean teaching. Its
aim, too, is doctrinal—to show that Jesus is “the
Son of God,” and its style and mode of conception
are very different from those of the Synoptic
Gospels. Its contents touch their narratives in
only a few points (as in Jn 6 4-21). Where they
do, the resemblance is manifest. It is obvious
that the reminiscences which the Gospel contains
have been long brooded over by the apostle, and
that a certain interpretative element blends with
his narration of incidents and discourses. This,
however, does not warrant us in throwing douht,
with so many, on the genuineness of the Gospel, for
which the external evidence is exceptionally strong
(cf Sanday, The Criticism of the Fourth Gospel;
Drummond, Character and Authorship of the Fourth
Gospel; and see Jon, GosPEL or). The Gospel is
accepted here as a genuine record of the sayings and
doings of Jesus which it narrates.

Il. The Preparation.—In the Gospels and
throughout the NT Jesus appears as the goal of

OT revelation, and the point to which
1. Both all providential developments tended.
Gentile and He came, Paul says, in “the fulness
Jewish of the time’ (Gal 4 4). It has often

been shown how, politically, intellec-
tually, morally, everything in the Graeco-Roman
world was ready for such a universal religion as
Jesus brought into it (cf Baur’s Hist of the Church
in the First Three Cents., ET, ch i). The prepa-
ration in Israel is seen alike in God’s revelations
to, and dealings with, the chosen people in the
patriarchal, Mosaic, monarchical and prophetic
periods, and in the developments of the Jewish
mind in the centuries immediately before Christ.

As special lines in the OT preparation may be
noted the ideas of the Messianic king, a ruler of

David’s house, whose reign would be
2. OT Prep- righteous, perpetual, universal (cf Isa
aration 7 13—9 7; 32 1.2; Jer 33 15.16; Ps

2 1-10, etc); of a Righteous Sufferer
(Ps 22, etc), whose sufferings are in Isa 53 declared
to have an expiatory and redeeming character; and
of a Messianic kingdom, which, breaking the bounds
of nationalism, would extend through the whole
earth and embrace all peoples (cf Isa 60; Ps 87;
Dni 2 44; 7 27, etc). The kingdom, at the same
time, is now conceived of under a more spiritual
aspect. Its chief blessings are forgiveness and
righteousness.

The age succeeding the return from exile wit-
nessed a manifold preparation for the advent of


Christ. Here may be observed the
3. Post- decentralization of the Jewish religious
exilian ideals through the rise of synagogue


Preparation worship and the widespread dispersion

of the race; the contact with Hellenic
culture (as in Philo); but esp. the marked sharpen-
ing of Messianic expectations. Some of these were
of a crude apocalyptic character (see APOCALYPTIC
LITERATURE; EscHATOLOGY oF THE OT); many
were political and revolutionary; but some were of
a purer and more spiritual kind (cf Lk 2 25.38).
To these purer elements Jesus attached Himself in
His preaching of the kingdom and of Himself as
its Lord. Even in the gentile world, it is told, there
was an expectation of a great One who about this
time would come from Judaea (Tac. Hist. v.13;
Suet. Vespas. 4).

I, The Outward Situation.—Of all lands Pal
was the most fitted to be the scene of the culminat-
ing revelation of God’s grace in the person and
work of Jesus Christ, as before it was fitted to be


the abode of the pcople chosen to receive and pre-
serve the revelations that prepared the way for
that final manifestation. At once cen-
1. The tral and secluded—at the junction of
Land the three great continents of the Old
World, Asia, Africa and Europe—the
highway of nations in war and commerce—touching
mighty powers on every hand, Egypt, Syria,
Assyria, kingdoms of Asia Minor, as formerly more
ancient empires, Hittite and Babylonian, now in
contact with Greece and Rome, yet singularly
inclosed by mountain, desert, Jordan gorge, and
Great Sea, from ready entrance of foreign influ-
ences, Pal has a place of its own in the history of
revelation, which only a Divine wisdom can have
given it (cf Stanley, Sinat and Palestine, Part II,
ch ii; G. A. Smith, Hist. Geog. of the Holy Land,
Book I, chs i, ii; Lange, Life of Christ, I, 246 ff).
Its divisions —Pal, in the Rom period, was di-
vided into four well-defined provinces or districts—
Judaea, with Jerus as its center, in the S., the strong-
hold of Jewish conservatism; Samaria, in the middle,
peopled from Assyrian times by mixed settlers (2 K
17 24-34), preponderatingly heathen in origin, yet
now professing the Jewish religion, claiming Jewish
descent (cf Jn 4 12), possessing a copy of the law
(Sam Pent), and a temple of their own at Gerizim
(the original temple, built by Manasseh, ¢ 409 BC,
was destroyed by John Hyrcanus, 109 BC); Galilee
—Galilee of the Gentiles’ (Mt 4 15; cf Isa 9 1)
—in the N., the chief scene of Christ’s ministry,
freer and more cosmopolitan in spirit, through a
large infusion of gentile population, and contact
with traders, etc, of varied nationalities: these in
Western Pal, while on the E. , “beyond Jordan,” was
Peraea, divided up into Peraea proper, Batanaea,
Gaulonitis, Ituraea, Trachonitis, Decapolis, ete (cf
Mi 4 25; 19 1; Lk 31). The feeling of bitterness
between Jews and Samaritans was intense (Jn 4 9).
The language of the people throughout was ARAMAIC
(q.v.), but a knowledge of the Gr tongue was widely
diffused, especially in the N., where intercourse with
Gr-speaking peoples was habitual (the NT writings
arein Gr). Jesus doubtless used the native dialect
in His ordinary teaching, but it is highly probable
that He also knew Gr, and was acquainted with OT
Scriptures in that language (the LXX). In this
case He may have sometimes used it in His pireach-
ing (cf Roberts, Discussions on the Gospels).
The miserable story of the vicissitudes of the
Jewish people in the cent. succeeding the great
persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes
2. Political and the Maccabean revolt—a story
Situation made up of faction, intrigue, wars,
murders, massacres, of growing degen-
eracy of rulers and nation, of repeated sackings of
Jerus and terrible slaughters—till Herod, the
Idumaean, misnamed ‘‘the Great,’ ascended the
throne by favor of the Romans (87 BC), must be
read in the books relating to the period (Ewald,
Hist of Israel, V; Milman, Hist of Jews; Schiiver,
Hist of the Jewish People in Time of Christ, Div I,
Vol I; Stanley, Jewish Church, III, etc). Rome’s
power, first invited by Judas Maccabaeus (161 BC),
was finally established by Pompey’s capture of Jerus
(63 BC). Herod’s way to the throne was tracked
by crime and bloodshed, and murder of those most
nearly related to him marked every step in his
advance. His taste for splendid buildings—palace,
temple (Mt 24 1; Jn 2 20), fortresses, cities (Se-
baste, Caesarea, etc)—and lavish magnificence of
his royal estate and administration, could not con-
ceal the hideousness of his crafty, unscrupulous
selfishness, his cold-blooded cruelty, his tyrannous
oppression of his subjects. ‘Better be Herod’s hog
than his son,’”’ was the comment of Augustus, when
he heard of the dying king’s unnatural doings.


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1628


_Changes in territory—aAt the time of Christ’s
birth, the whole of Pal was united under Herod’s
rule, but on Herod’s death, after a long reign of 37
(or, counting from his actual accession, 34) years,
his dominions were, in accordance with his will,
confirmed by Rome, divided. Judaea and Samaria
(a few towns excepted) fell to his son Archelaus
(Mt 2 22), with the title of “ethnarch”; Galilee and
Peraea were given to Herod Antipas, another son,
with the title of “‘tetrarch” (Mt 14 1; Lk 3 1.19;
23 7; Acts 18 1); Herod Philip, a third son, re-
ceived Ituraea, Trachonitis, and other parts of the
northern trans-Jordanic territory, likewise as ‘“te-
trarch” (Lk 3 1; cf Mt 14 3; Mk 6 17). A few
years later, the tyranny of Archelaus provoked an
appeal of his subjects to Augustus, and Archelaus,
summoned to Rome, was banished to Gaul (7 AD).
Thereafter Judaea, with Samaria, was governed by
a Roman procurator, under the oversight of the
prefect of Syria. ?

In the religious situation the chief fact of interest
is the place occupied and prominent part played

y the religious sects—the Pharisees,

3. The Re- the Sadducees, and (though unmen-

ligious tioned in the Gospels, these had an

Sects important influence on the early

history of the church) the Essenes.

The rise and characteristics of these sects can here
only be alluded to (see special arts.).

(1) The scribes.—From the days of Ezra zealous
attention had been given to the study of the law,
and an order of men had arisen—the “scribes’’—
whose special business it was to guard, develop and
expound the law. Through their labors, scrupulous
observance of the law, and, with it, of the innumer-
able regulations intended to preserve the law, and
apply it in detail to conduct (the so-called “tradi-
tion of the elders,” Mt 15 2 ff), became the ideal
of righteousness. Thesects first appear in the Mac-
cabean age. The Maccabean conflict reveals the
existence of a party known as the ‘‘Assidaeans”
(Heb hésidhim), or ‘pious’ ones, opposed to the
lax Hellenizing tendencies of the times, and staunch
observers of the law. These in the beginning gave
brave support to Judas Maccabaeus, and doubtless
then embraced the best elements of the nation.

(2) The Pharisees—From them, by a process of
deterioration too natural in such cases, developed
the party of legalists known in the Gospels as the
“Pharisees” (‘‘separated”’), on which Christ’s stern-
est rebukes fell for their self-righteousness, ostenta-
tion, pride and lack of sympathy and_ charity
(Mt 6 2ff; 23; Lk 18 9-14). They gloried in an
excessive scrupulosity in the observance of the ex-
ternals of the law, even in trivialities. To them the
multitude that knew not the law were ‘‘accursed”
(Jn 7 49). To this party the great body of the
scribes and rabbis belonged, and its powerful influ-
ence was eagerly sought by contending factions in
the state. ; :

(3) The Sadducees.—Alongside of the Pharisees
were the “‘Sadducees” (probably from ‘‘Zadok’’)—
rather a political and aristocratic clique than a
religious sect, into whose possession the honors of
the high-priesthood and other influential offices
hereditarily passed. They are first met with by
name under John Hyrcanus (135-106 BC). The
Sadducees received only the law of Moses, inter-
preted it in a literal, secularistic spirit, rejected the
Pharisaic traditions and believed in neither resur-
rection, angel nor spirit (Acts 23 8). Usually in
rivalry with the Pharisees, they are found combin-
ing with these to destroy Jesus (Mt 26 3-5.57).

(4) The Essenes.—The third party, the ‘“Essenes,”
differed from both (some derive also from the As-
sidaeans) in living in fraternities apart from the
general community, chiefly in the desert of Engedi,


on the N.W. shore of the Dead Sea, though some
were found also in villages and towns; in rejecting
animal sacrifices, etc, sending only gifts of incense to
the temple; in practising celibacy and community of
goods; in the wearing of white garments; in certain
customs (as greeting the sunrise with prayers) sug-
gestive of oriental influence. They forbade slavery,
war, oaths, were given to occult studies, had secret
doctrines and books, etc. As remarked, they do
not appear in the Gospel, but on account of cer-
tain resemblances, some have sought to establish a
connection between them and John the Baptist and
Jesus. In reality, however, nothing could be more
opposed than Essenism to the essential ideas and
spirit of Christ’s teaching (cf Schirer, as above,
Div II, Vol II, 188 ff; Kuenen, Hibbert Lects on
National Religions and Universal Religions, 199-
208; Lightfoot, Colossians, 114~79). .
IV. The Chronology.—The leading chronological
questions connected with the life of Jesus are dis-
cussed in detail elsewhere (CHRON oF THE NT;
Quirintvs, etc); here it is sufficient to indicate the
general scheme of dating adopted in the present art.,
and some of the grounds on which it is preferred.
The chief questions relate to the dates of the birth
and baptism of Jesus, the duration of the ministry
and the date of the crucifixion.
Though challenged by some (Caspari, Bosanquet,
Conder, etc, put it as late as 1 BC) the usual date
for the death of Herod the Great,
1. Date of March, 4 BC (year of Rome 750), may
the Birth be assumed as correct (for grounds of
of Jesus this dating, see Schiirer, op. cit., Div
I, Vol I, 464-67). The birth of Jesus
was before, and apparently not very long before,
this event (Mt 2). It may therefore be placed with
probability in the latter part of the previous year
(5 BC), the ordinary dating of the commencement of
the Christian era being thus, as is generally recog-
nized, four years too late. There is no certainty as
to the month or day of the birth. The Christmas
date, December 25, is first met with in the W. in the
4th cent. (the eastern date was January 6), and
was then possibly borrowed from a pagan festival.
December, in the winter season, seems unlikely, as
unsuitable for the pasturing of flocks (Lk 2 8),
though this objection is perhaps not decisive
(Andrews, Conder). A more probable date is a
couple of months earher. The synchronism with
Quirinius (Lk 2 2) is considered in connection with
the nativity. The earlier datings of 6, 7, or even
8 BC, suggested by Ramsay, Mackinlay and others,
on grounds of the assumed Rom census, astronomi-
cal phenomena, etc, appear to leave too long an
interval before the death of Herod, and conflict
with other data, as Lk 3 1 (see below).
John is said by Luke to have begun to preach and
baptize “in the fifteenth year of Tiberius” (Lk 3
1), and Jesus “was about thirty years
2. Date of of age” (ver 23) when He was bap-
Baptism tized by John, and entered on His
: ministry. If the 15th year of Tiberius
is dated, as seems most likely, from his association
with Augustus as colleague in the government,
765 AUC, or 12 AD (Tac. Ann. i8; Suet. on
Augustus, 97), and if Jesus may be supposed to
have been baptized about 6 months after John
commenced his work, these data combine in bring-
ing us to the year 780 AUC, or 27 AD, as the year
of Our Lord’s baptism, in agreement with our
former conclusion as to the date of His birth in
5 BC. To place the birth earlier is to make Jesus
32 or 33 years of age at His baptism—an unwar-
rantable extension of the “about.” In accord with
this is the statement in Jn 2 20 that the temple had
been 46 years in building (it began in 20-19 BC)
at the time of Christ’s first Passover; therefore in


1629


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


780 AUC, or 27 AD (cf Schiirer, op. cit., Div I,
Vol I, 410).
The determination of the precise duration of Our
Lord’s ministry involves more doubtful elements.
Setting aside, as too arbitrary, schemes
3. Length which would, with some of the early
of Ministry Fathers, compress the whole ministry
into little over a single year (Browne,
Hort, etc)—a view which involves without authority
the rejection of the mention of the Passover in
Jn 6 4—there remains the choice between a two
years’ and a three years’ ministry. Both have
able advocates (Turner in art. ‘Chronology,”
and Sanday in art. “Jesus Christ,” in HDB,
advocate the two years’ scheme; Farrar, Ramsay,
D. Smith, etc, adhere to the three years’ scheme).
An important point is the view taken of the un-
named “feast” in Jn 6 1. John has already named
a Passover—Christ’s first—in 2 13.23; another,
which Jesus did not attend, is named in 6 4; the
final Passover, at which He was crucified, appears
in all the evangelists. If the “feast” of Jn 5 1
(the art. is probably to be omitted) is also, as some
think, a Passover, then John has four Passovers,
and a three years’ ministry becomes necessary.
It is claimed, however, that in this case the ‘‘feast’”’
would almost certainly have been named. It still
does not follow, even if a minor feast—say Purim—
is intended, that we are shut up to a two years’
ministry. r. Turner certainly goes beyond his
evidence in affirming that “while two years must,
not more than two years can, be allowed for the
interval from Jn 2 13.23 to Jn 11 55.” The
two years’ scheme involves, as will be seen on con-
sideration of details, a serious overcrowding and
arbitrary transposition of incidents, which speak to
the need of longer time. We shall assume that the
ministry lasted for three years, reserving reasons till
the narrative is examined.
On the hypothesis now accepted, the crucifixion
of Jesus took place at the Passover of 30 AD. On
the two years’ scheme it would fall a


4. Date of year earlier. On both sides it is
Christ’s agreed that it occurred on the Friday
Death of the week of the Passover, but it


is disputed whether this Friday was
the 14th or the 15th day of the month. The Gospel
of John is pleaded for the former date, the Synoptics
for the latter. The question will be considered in
connection with the time of the Last Supper.
Meanwhile it is to be observed that, if the 15th is
the correct date, there seems reason to believe that
the 15th of Nisan fell on a Friday in the year just
named, 783 AUC, or 30 AD. We accept this pro-
visionally as the date of the crucifixion.


Parr II. Tse Prospiems or THE Lire or Jrsus


I. The Miracles.—Everyone is aware that the
presence of miracle in the Gospels is a chief ground
of the rejection of its history by the

1. The representatives of the ‘‘modern”’ school.
“Modern” It is not questioned that it is a super-
Attitude natural person whose picture is pre-
sented in the Gospels. There is no

real difference between the Synoptics and John in
this respect. “Even the oldest Gospel,” writes
Bousset, ‘is written from the standpoint of faith;
already for Mark, Jesus is not only the Messiah
of the Jewish people, but the miraculous eternal
Son of God, whose glory shone in the world” (Was
wissen wir von Jesus? 54, 57). But the same writer,
interpreting the “modern” spirit, declares that no
account embracing supernatural events can be
accepted as historical. ‘The main characteristic
of this modern mode of thinking,” he says, “rests
upon the determination to try to explain every-
thing that takes place in the world by natural


causes, or—to express it in another form—it rests
on the determined assertion of universal laws to
which all phenomena, natural and spiritual, are
subject” (What Is Religion? ET, 283).

With such au assumption it is clear that the

Gospels are condemned before they are read. Not

only is Jesus there a supernatural
2. Super- person, but He is presented as super-
natural in natural in character, in works, in
the Gospels claims (see below); He performs

miracles; He has a supernatural birth,
and a supernatural resurrection. All this is swept
away. It may be allowed that He had remarkable
gifts of healing, but these are in the class of “faith-
cures” (thus Harnack), and not truly supernatural.
When one seeks the justification for this self-
confident dogmatism, it is difficult to discover it,
except on the ground of a pantheistic or monistic
theory of the universe which excludes the personal
God of Christianity. If God is the Author and Sus-
tainer of the natural system, which He rules for
moral ends, it is impossible to see why, for high ends
of revelation and redemption, a supernatural econ-
omy should not be engrafted on the natural, achiev-
ing ends which could not otherwise be attained.
This does not of course touch the question of eyi-
dence for any particular miracle, which must be
judged of from its connection with the person of the
worker, and the character of the apostolic witnesses,
The well-meant effort to explain all miracles through
the action of unknown natural laws—which is
what Dr. Sanday calls ‘making both ends meet”
(Life of Christ in Recent Research, 302)—breaks down
in the presence of such miracles as the instanta-
neous cleansing of the leper, restoration of sight to
the blind, the raising of the dead, acts which plainly
imply an exercise of creative power. In such a life
as Christ’s, transcendence. of the ordinary powers
of Nature is surely to be looked for.

I. The Messiahship.—aA difficulty has been found
in the fact that in all the Gospels Jesus knew Him-

self to be the Messiah at least from
1. Reserve the time of His baptism, yet did not,
of Jesus even to His disciples, unreservedly
and Modern announce Himself as such till after
Criticism Peter’s great confession at Caesarea

Philippi (Mt 16 13 ff). On this seem-
ing secrecy the bold hypothesis has been built
that Jesus in reality never made the claim to Mes-
siahship, and that the passages which imply the
contrary in Mk (the original Gospel) are unhis-
torical (Wrede; cf on this and other theories,
Schweitzer, The Quest of the Historical Jesus, ET;
Sanday, The Life of Christ in Recent Research).
So extreme an opinion is rejected by most; but
modern critics vic with each other in the freedom
with which they treat the testimony of the evangel-
ists on this subject. Baldensperger, e.g., supposes
that, Jesus did not attain full certainty on His
Messiahship till near the time of Peter’s confession,
and arbitrarily transposes the earlier sections in
which the title ‘Son of Man” occurs till after that
event (Das Selbsibewusstsein Jesu, 2d ed, 246).
Bousset thinks that Jesus adopted the Messianic
réle as the only one open to Him, but bore it as a
“hurden’’ (cf his Jesus). Schweitzer connects it
with apocalyptic ideas of a wildly fantastic char-
acter (op. cit., ch xix).

There is, however, no need for supposing that
Peter’s confession marks the first dawn of this
knowledge in the minds of the apostles,
Rather was it the exalted expression
Growing of a faith already present, which had
Revelation long been maturing. The baptism

and temptation, with the use of the
title “Son of Man,” the tone of authority in His
teaching, His miracles, and many special incidents,


«


2. A


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1630


show, as clearly as do the discourses in John,
that Jesus was from the beginning fully conscious
of His vocation, and His reserve in the use of the
title sprang, not from any doubt in His own mind
as to His right to it, but from His desire to avoid
false associations till the true nature of His Messiah-
ship should be revealed. The Messiahship was
in process of self-revelation throughout to those who
had eyes to see it (cf Jn 6 66-71). What it in-
volved will be seen later.
HI. Kingdom and Apocalypse.—Connected with
the Messiahship is the idea of the “Kingdom of
God” or “of heaven,” which some in
1. The modern times would interpret in a
Kingdom— purely eschatological sense, in the
Present or light of Jewish apocalyptic conceptions
Future ? (Johannes Weiss, Schweitzer, etc).
The kingdom is not a. thing of the
present, but wholly a thing of the future, to be
introduced by convulsions of Nature and the
Parousia of the Son of Man. The language of
the Lord’s Prayer, “Thy kingdom come,” is quoted
in support of this contention, but the next petition
should guard against so violent an inference.
“Thy will be done,” Jesus teaches His disciples to
pray, ‘‘as in heaven, so on earth” (Mt 6 10). The
kingdom is the reign of God in human hearts and
lives in this world as well as in the next. It would
not be wrong to define it as consisting essentially in
the supremacy of God’s will in human hearts and
human affairs, and in every department of these
affairs. As Jesus describes the kingdom, it has,
in the plain meaning of His words, a present heing
on earth, though its perfection is in eternity. The
parables in Mt 13 and elsewhere exhibit it as
founded by the sowing of the word of truth (Sower),
as a mingling of good and evil elements (Tares),
as growing from small beginnings to large propor-
tions (Mustard Seed), as gradually leavening hu-
manity (Leaven), as of priceless value (Treasure;
Pearl; cf Mt 6 33); as terminating in a judgment
(Tares, Dragnet); as perfected in the world to
come (Mt 13 43). It was a kingdom spiritual in
nature (Lk 17 20.21), universal in range (Mt 8 11;
21 43, etc), developing from a principle of life
within (Mk 4 26-29), and issuing in victory over
all opposition (Mt 21 44).
[t is difficult to pronounce on the extent to which
Jesus was acquainted with current apocalyptic
beliefs, or allowed these to color the


2. Apoca- imagery of parts of His teachings.
lyptic These beliefs certainly did not furnish
Beliefs the substance of His teaching, and it


may be doubted whether they more
than superficially affected even its form. Jewish
apocalyptic knew nothing of a death and resurrec-
tion of the Messiah and of His return in glory to
bring in an everlasting kingdom. What Jesus
taught on these subjects sprang from His ,own
Messianic consciousness, with the certainty He
had of His triumph over death and His exaltation
to the right hand of God. It was in OT prophecy,
not in late Jewish apocalypse, that His thoughts of
the future triumph of His kingdom were grounded,
and from the vivid imagery of the prophets He
borrowed most of the clothing of these thoughts.
Isa 53, e.g., predicts not only the rejection and
death of the Servant of Jehovah (vs 3.7-9.12),
but the prolongation of His days and His victorious
reign (vs 10-12). Dnl, not the Book of En, is
the source of the title, ‘Son of Man,” and of the
imagery of coming on the clouds of heaven (Dnl 7
13). The ideas of resurrection, etc, have their
ground in the OT (see EscHaToLocy oF THE OT).
With the extravagant, unspiritual forms into which
these conceptions were thrown in the Jewish apoca-
lyptic books His teaching had nothing in common.


The new apocalyptic school represented by Schweit-
zer reduces the history of Jesus to folly, fanaticism

and hopeless disillusionment.
IV. The Character and Claims.—Where the
Gospels present us in Jesus with the image of a
flawless character—in the words of the


1. Denial writer to the Hebrews, “holy, guileless,
of Christ’s undefiled, separated from sinners” (He
Moral Per- 7 26)—modern criticism is driven by
fection an inexorable necessity to deprive Jesus


of His sinless perfection, and to impute
to Him the error, frailty, and moral infirmity that
belong to ordinary mortals. In Schweitzer’s por-
traiture (cf op. cit.), He is an apocalyptic enthusias-
tic, ruled by illusory ideals, deceiving Himself and
others as to who He was, and as to the impending
end of the world. Those who show a more ad-
equate appreciation of Christ’s spiritual greatness
are still prevented by their humanitarian estimate
of His person and their denial of the supernatural
in history from recognizing the possibility of His
sinlessness. It may confidently be said that there
is hardly a single writer of the modern school who
grants Christ’s moral perfection. To do so would
be to admit a miracle in humanity, and we have
heard that miracle is by the highest rational neces-
sity excluded. This, however, is precisely the point
on which the modern so-called “historical-critical”
mode of presentation most obviously breaks down.
The ideal of perfect holiness in the Gospels which
has fascinated the conscience of Christendom for
18 cents., and attests itself anew to every candid
reader, is not thus lightly to be got rid of, or ex-
plained away as the invention of a church gathered
out (without the help of the ideal) promiscuously
from Jews and Gentiles. It was not the church—
least of all such a church—that created Christ, but
Christ that created the church.

(1) The sinlessness assured —The sinlessness of
Jesus is a datum in the Gospels. Over against a
sinful world He stands as a Saviour who is Himself
without sin. His is the one life in humanity in
which is presented a perfect knowledge and unbroken
fellowship with the Father, undeviating obedience
to His will, unswerving devotion under the severest
strain of temptation and suffering to the highest.
ideal of goodness. The ethical ideal was never
raised to so absolute a height as it is in the teaching
of Jesus, and the miracle is that, high as it is in its
unsullied purity, the character of Jesus corresponds
with it, and realizes it. Word and life for once in
history perfectly agrec. Jesus, with the keenest
sensitiveness to sin in thought and feeling as in deed,
is conscious of no sin in Himself, confesses no sin,
disclaims the presence of it, speaks and acts con-
tinually on the assumption that He is without it.
Those who knew Him best declared Him to be
without sin (1 Pet 2 22; 1 Jn 35; cf 2 Cor 5
21). The Gospels must be rent in pieces before
He image of a perfect holiness can be effaced from
them.

(2) What this implies ——How is this phenomenon
of a sinless personality in Jesus to be explained?
It is itself a miracle, and can only be made credible
by a creative miracle in Christ’s origin. It may be
argued that a Virgin Birth does not of itself secure
sinlessness, but it will hardly be disputed that at
least a sinless personality implies miracle in its
production. It is precisely because of this that
the modern spirit feels bound to reject it. In the
Gospels it is not the Virgin Birth by itself which is
invoked to explain Christ’s sinlessness, but the
supernatural conception by the Holy Spirit (Lk
1 35). It is because of this conception that the
birth is a virgin one. No explanation of the super-
natural element in Christ’s Person is more rational
or credible (see below on “‘Nativity’’).


1631


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


If Jesus from the first was conscious of Himself
as without sin, and if, as the converse of this, He
knew Himself as standing in an un-
2. Sinless- broken filial fellowship with the Father,
nessand He must early have become conscious
the Mes- of His special vocation, and learnt to
sianic Claim distinguish Himself from others as
one called to bless and save them.
Here is the true germ of His Messianic consciousness,
from which everything subsequently is unfolded.
He.stood in a rapport with the Father which opened
His spirit to a full, clear revelation of the Father’s
will regarding Himself, His mission, the kingdom
He came to found, His sufferings as the means of
salvation to the world, the glory that awaited Him
when His earthly work was done. In the light of
this revelation He read the OT Scriptures and saw
His course there made plain. When the hour had
come He went to John for baptism, and His brief,
eventful ministry, which should end in the cross,
began. Thisis the reading of events which intro-
duces consistency and purpose into the life of Jesus,
and it is this we mean to follow in the sketch now
to he given.


Part III. Course or THE Eartaiy Lire or


JESUS


The wonderful story of the life of the world’s
Redeemer which we are now to endeavor to trace
falls naturally into several divisions:
1. Divisions A. From the Nativity to the Bap-
of the His- tism and Temptation.
tory B. The Early Judaean Ministry.
C. The Galilean Ministry and Visits
to the Feasts.
D. The Last Journey to Jerusalem.
E. The Passion Week—Betrayal, Trial, and Cru-
cifixion.
F. The Resurrection and Ascension.
To avoid misconception, it is important to
remember, that, rich as are the narratives of the
Gospels, materials do not exist for


2. Nota a complete biography or “Life” of
Complete Jesus. There is a gap, broken only
“Life” by a single incident, from His infancy


till His 30th year; there are cycles of
events out of myriads left unrecorded (Jn 21 25);
there are sayings, parables, longer discourses, con-
nected with particular occasions; there are general
summaries of periods of activity comprised in a
few verses. The evangelists, too, present their
materials each from his own standpoint—Matthew
from the theocratic, Mark from that of Christ’s
practical activity, Luke from the universalistic and
human-sympathetic, John from the Divine. In re-
producing the history respect must be had to this
focusing from distinct points of view.


A. FROM THE NATIVITY TO THE BAPTISM AND
TEMPTATION

I. The Nativity.—OT prophecy expired with the
promise on its lips, ‘‘Behold, I send my messenger,
and he shall prepare the way before
1. Hidden. me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, will
Piety in suddenly come to his temple; and the
Judaism messenger of the covenant, whom ye
desire, behold, he cometh, saith Je-
hovah of hosts” (Mal 3 1). In the years immedi-
ately before Christ’s birth the air was tremulous
with the sense of impending great events. The
fortunes of the Jewish people were at their lowest
ebb. Pharisaic formalism, Sadducean unbelief,
fanatical Zealotry, Herodian sycophantism, Roman
oppression, seerned to have_crushed out. the last
sparks of spiritual religion. Yet in numerous quict
circles in Judaea, and even in remote Galilee, little
godly bands still nourished their souls on the prom-


ises, looking for “the consolation of Israel’? and
“redemption of Jerusalem” (Lk 2 25.38). _Glimpses
of these are vouchsafed in Zacharias and Elisabeth,
in Simeon, in Anna, in Joseph and Mary (Lk 1, 2;
Mt 1 18 ff). It was in hearts in these circles that
the stirrings of the prophetic spirit began to make
themselves felt anew, preparing for the Advent (cf
Lk 2 27.36).
In the last days of Herod—perhaps in the year
748 of Rome, or 6 BC—the aged priest Zacharias,
of the course of Abijah (1 Ch 24 10;
2, Birth of cf Schirer, Div II, Vol I, 219 ff), was
the Baptist ministering in the temple at the altar
(Lk 1) of incense at the hour of evening
prayer. Scholars have reckoned, if
on somewhat precarious grounds, that the ministry
of the order to which Zacharias belonged fell in
this year in the month of April or in early October
(cf Andrews, Life of Our Lord). Now a wonderful
thing happened. Zacharias and his wife Elisabeth,
noted for their blameless piety, were up to this
time childless. On this evening an angel, appear-
ing at the side of the altar of incense, announced
to Zacharias that a son should be born to them, in
whom should be realized the prediction of Malachi
of one ‘coming in the spirit and power of Elijah to
prepare the way of the Lord (cf Mal 4 5.6). His
name was to be called John. Zacharias hesitated
to believe, and was stricken with dumbness till the
promise should be fulfilled. It happened as the angel
had foretold, and at the circumcision and naming of
his son his tongue was again loosed. Zacharias, filled
with the Spirit, poured forth his soul in a hymn of
praise—the Benedictus (Lk 1 5-25.57-80; cf JoHn
THE BaPTIst).
Meanwhile yet stranger things were happening in
the little village of Nazareth, in Galilee (now en-


Nasirah). There resided a young
8. The An- maiden of purest character, named
nunciation Mary, betrothed to a carpenter of the


and Its Re- village (cf Mt 13 55), called Joseph,
sults (Lk 1: who, although in so humble a station,
26-56; Mt was of the lineage of David (cf Isa 11
1:18-25) 1). Mary, most probably, was like-

wise. of Davidic descent (Lk 1 32;
on the genealogies, see below). The fables relating
to the parentage and youth of Mary in the Apoc-
ryphal Gospels may safely be discarded. To
this maiden, three months before the birth of the
Baptist, the same angelic visitant (Gabriel)
appeared, hailing her as “highly favored” of God,
and announcing to her that, through the power of
the Holy Spirit, she should become the mother of
the Saviour. The words ‘Blessed art thou among
women,” in AV of ver 28 are omitted by RV, though
found below (ver 42) in Elisabeth’s salutation.
They give, in any case, no support to Mariolatry,
stating simply the fact that Mary was more honored
than any other woman of the race in being chosen
to be the mother of the Lord.

(1) The amazing message-—The announcement
itself was of the most amazingimport. Mary herself
was staggered at the thought that, as a virgin, she
should become a mother (ver 34). Still more sur-
prising were the statements made as to the Son she
was to bear. Conceived of the Holy Spirit (Lk 1
35; Mt 1 18), He would he great, and would be
called “the Son of the Most High” (Lk 1 32)—
“the Son of God” (ver 35); there would be given
to Him the throne of His father David, and His
reign would be eternal (vs 32.33; cf Isa 9 6.7);
He would be “holy” from the womb (ver 35).
His name was to be called Jesus (ver 31; cf Mt 1
21), denoting Him as Saviour. The holiness of
Jesus is here put in connection with His miraculous
conception, and surely rightly. In no case in the
history of mankind has natural generation issued


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1632


in a being who is sinless, not to say superhuman.
The fact that Jesus, even in His human nature, was
supernaturally begotten—was ‘‘Son of God’’—does
not exclude the higher and eternal Sonship according
to the Divine nature (Jn 1 18). The incarnation of
such a Divine Being as Paul and John depict, itself
implies miracle in human origin. On the whole
message being declared to her, Mary accepted what
was told her in meek humility (Lk 1 38).

(2) The visit to Elisabeth—With the announce-
ment to herself there was given to Mary an indica-
tion of what had befallen her kinswoman Elisabeth,
and Mary’s first act, on recovering from her astonish-
ment, was to go in haste to the home of Elisabeth
in the hill country of Judaea (vs 39ff). Very
naturally sbe did not rashly forestall God’s action
in speaking to Joseph of what had occurred, but
waited in quietness and faith till God should reveal
in His own way what He had done. The meeting
of the two holy women was the occasion of a new
outburst of prophetic inspiration. Elisabeth,
moved by the Spirit, greeted Mary in exalted lan-
guage as the mother of the Lord (vs 42-45)—a
confirmation to Mary of the message she had
received; Mary, on her part, broke forth in rhyth-
mical utterance, ‘“My soul doth magnify the Lord,”
etc (vs 46-56). Her hymn—the sublime Magnificat
—is to be compared with Hannah’s (1 § 2 1-11),
which furnishes the model of it. Mary abode with
Elisabeth about three months, then returned to her
own house.

(3) Joseph’s perplexity. Here a new trial awaited
her. Mary’s condition of motherhood could not long
be concealed, and when Joseph first became aware of
it, the shock to a man so just (Mt 1 19) would be
terrible in its severity. The disappearance of Joseph
from the later gospel history suggests that he was a
good deal older than his betrothed, and it is possible
that, while strict, upright and conscientious, his dis-
position was not as strong on the side of sympathy
as so delicate a case required. It is going too far
to say with Lange, ‘‘He encountered the modest,
but unshakably firm Virgin with decided doubt;
the first Ebionite’’; but so long as he had no support
beyond Mary’s word, his mind was in a state of
agonized perplexity. His first thought was to give

ary a private “bill of divorcement’”’ to avoid
scandal (ver 19). Happily, his doubts were soon
set at rest by a Divine intimation, and he hesitated
no longer to take Mary to be his wife (ver 24).
Luke’s Gospel, which confines itself to the story of
Mary, says nothing of this episode; Matthew’s
narrative, which bears evidence of having come
from Joseph himself, supplies the lack by showing
how Joseph came to have the confidence in Mary
which enabled him to take her to wife, and become
sponsor for her child. The trial, doubtless, while
it lasted, was not less severe for Mary than for
Joseph—a prelude of that sword which was to
“pierce through [her] own soul” (Lk 2 35). There
is no reason to believe that Joseph and Mary
did not subsequently live in the usual relations of
wedlock, and that children were not born to them
(ef Mt 18 55.56, etc).


Matthew gives no indication of where the events |


narrated in his first chapter took place, first men-
tioning Nazareth on the occasion of


_ 4. The the return of the holy family from
Birth at Egypt (2 23). In 2 1 he transports
Bethlehem us to Bethlehem as the city of Christ’s
(Mt 2:1; birth. It is left to Luke to give an
Lk 2:1-7) account of the circumstances which


brought Joseph and Mary to Bethle-

hem—thus fulfilling prophecy (Mic 5 2; Mt 2 5.6)

—at this critical hour, and to record the lowly manner
of Christ’s birth there.

(1) The census of Quirinius—The emperor


Augustus had given orders for a general enrolment
throughout the empire (the fact of periodical enrol-
ments in the empire is well established by Professor
W. M. Ramsay in his Was Christ Born at Bethlehem ?),
and this is stated to have been given effect to in
Judaea when Quirinius was governor of Syria (Lk 2
1.2). The difficulties connected with the enrolment
or census here mentioned are discussed in the art.
Quiminius. It is known that Quirinius did con-
duct, a census in Judaea in 6 AD (cf Acts 5 37),
but the census at Christ’s birth is distinguished from
this by Luke as “the first enrolment.” The diffi-
culty was largely removed when it was ascertained,
as it has been to the satisfaction of most scholars,
that Quirinius awas twice governor of Syria—first,
after Herod’s death, 4-1 BC, and again in 6-11 AD.
The probability is that the census was begun under
Varus, the immediate predecessor of Quirinius—
or even earlier under Saturninus—but was delayed
in its application to Judaea, then under Herod’s
jurisdiction, and was completed by Quirinius, with
whose name it is officially connected. That the
enrolment was made by each one going to his own
city (ver 3) is explained by the fact that the census
was not made according to the Rom method, but,
as befitted a dependent kingdom, in accordance
with Jewish usages (cf Ramsay). ‘

(2) Jesus born.—It must be left undecided whether
the journey of Mary to Bethlehem with Joseph was
required for any purpose of registration, or sprang
simply from her unwillingness to be separated from
Joseph in so trying a situation. To Bethlehem, in
any case, possibly by Divine monition, she came, and
there, in the ancestral city of David, in circum-
stances the lowliest conceivable, brought forth her
marvelous child. In unadorned language—very
different from the embellishments of apocryphal
story—Luke narrates how, when the travelers
arrived, no room was found for them in the “inn’—
the ordinary eastern khan or caravanserai, a Square
enclosure, with an open court for cattle, and a
raised recess round the walls for shelter of visitors—
and how, when her babe was born, Mary wrapped
Him in swaddling clothes, and laid Him ina manger.
The wearied pair having, according to Luke, been
crowded out of, and not merely within, the inn,
there is every probability that the birth took place,
not, as some suppose, in the courtyard of the inn,
but, as the oldest tradition asserts (Justin Martyr,
Dial. with Trypho, 78), in a cave in the neighbor-
hood, used for similar purposes of lodgment and
housing of cattle. High authorities look favorably
on the “cave of the nativity” still shown, with its
inscription, Hic de virgine Maria Jesus Christus
natus est, as marking the sacred spot. In such
incredibly mean surroundings was “the only begot-
ten of the Father” ushered into the world He came
to redeem. How true the apostle’s word that He
“emptied” Himself (Phil 2 7)! A problem lies in
the very circumstances of the entrance into time of
such a One, which only the thought of a voluntary
humiliation for saving ends can solve.

Born, however, though Jesus was, in a low con-
dition, the Father did not leave Him totally with-

out witness to His Sonship. There
5. The In- were rifts in the clouds through which
cidents of thehidden glory streamed. The scenes
the Infancy in the narratives of the Infancy exhibit
(Lk 2:8-39; a strange commingling of the glorious
Mt 2:1-12) and the lowly.

(1) The visit of the shepherds.—To
shepherds watching their flocks by night in the fields
near Bethlehem the first disclosure was made. The
season, one would infer, could hardly havebeen winter,
though it is stated that there is frequently an interval
of dry weather in Judaea between the middle of
December and the middle of February, when such


1633


a keeping of flocks would be possible (Andrews).
The angel world is not far removed from us, and as
angels preannounced the birth of Christ, so, when
He actually came into the world (cf He 1 6),
angels of God made the night vocal with their songs.
First, an angel appearing in the midst of the Divine
glory—the “Shekinah”—announced to the sorely
alarmed shepherds the birth of a ‘Saviour who was
Christ the Lord” at Bethlehem; then a whole chorus
of the heavenly host broke in with the refrain,
“Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace
among men in whom He is well pleased” (lit. ‘men
of good pleasure’’)—since, the Christmas hymn of
the generations (Lk 2 1~14)._ Theshepherds, guided
as to how to recognize the babe (ver 12), went at
once, and found it to be even as they had been told.
Thence they hastened to spread abroad the tidings—
the first believers, the first worshippers, the first
preachers (vs 15~20). Mary cherished the sayings
in the stillness of her heart.

(2) The circumcision and presentation in the temple.
—Jewish law required that on the 8th day the male
child should be circumcised, and on the same day
He received His name (cf. Lk 1 59-63). Jesus,
though entirely pure, underwent the rite which de-
noted the putting off of fleshly sin (Col 2 11), and
became bound, as a true Israelite, to render obedience
to every Divine commandment. The name “Jesus”
was then given Him (Lk 2 21). On the 40th day
came the ceremony of presentation in the temple
at Jerus, when Mary had to offer for her purifying
(Lev 12; Mary’s was the humbler offering of the
poor, ‘‘a pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons”
[Lev 12 8; Lk 2 24]), and when the first-born son
had to be redeemed with 5 shekels of the sanctuary
(Nu 18 15.16; about $3.60). The observance was
an additional token that Christ—personally sin-
less—did not shrink from full identification with our
race in the responsibilities of its sinful condition.
Ere it was completed, however, the ceremony was
lifted to a Diviner level, and a new attestation was
given of the dignity of the child of Mary, by the
action and inspired utterances of the holy Simeon
and the aged ‘prophetess Anna. To Simeon, a
righteous and devout man, “looking for the con-
solation of Israel,’’ it bad been revealed that he
should not die till he had seen the Lord’s Christ,
and, led by the Spirit into the temple at the very
time when Jesus was being presented, he recognized
in Him the One for whom he had waited, and,
taking Him in his arms, gave utterance to the beau-
tiful words of the Nunc Dimittis—‘Now lettest thou
thy servant depart, Lord,” etc (Lk 2 25-32). He
told also how this child was set for the falling and
rising of many in Israel, and how, through Him, a
sword should pierce through Mary’s own soul
(vs 34.35). Entering at the same hour, the proph-
etess Anna—now in extreme old age (over 100; a
constant frequenter of the temple, ver 37)—con-
firmed his words, and spoke of Him to all who, like
herself, looked “‘for the redemption of Jerus.”’

(3) Visit of the Magi—It seems to have been
after the presentation in the temple that the
incident took place recorded by Matthew of the
visit of the Magi. The Magi, a learned class
belonging originally to Chaldaea or Persia (see
Mact), had, in course of time, greatly degenerated
(cf Simon Magus, Acts 8 9), but those who now
came to seek Christ from the distant East were
of a nobler order. They appeared in Jerus in-
quiring, “Where is He that is born King of the
Jews?” and declaring that they had seen His star
in the East, and had come to worship Him (Mt 2
2). Observers of the nightly sky, any significant,
appearance in the heavens would at once attract
their attention. Many (Kepler, Ideler, etc; cf
Ramsay, op. cit., 215 ff) are disposed to connect


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


this “‘star’’ with a remarkable conjunction—or series
of conjunctions—of planets in 7-6 BC, in which
case it is possible that two years may have elapsed
(cf the inquiry of Herod and his subsequent action,
vs 7.16) from their observation of the sign. On the
other hand, the fact of the star reappearing and
seeming to stand over a house in Bethlehem (ver 9)
rather points to a distinct phenomenon (cf BrTauE-
HEM, STaR OF). The inquiry of the Magi at once
awakened Herod’s alarm; accordingly, having ascer-
tained from the scribes that the Christ should be
born at Bethlehem (Mic 5 2), he summoned the
Magi, questioned them as to when exactly the star
appeared, then sent them to Bethlehem to search
out the young child, hypocritically pretending that
he also wished to worship Him (Mt 2 7.8). Herod
had faith enough to believe the Scriptures, yet was
foolish enough to think that he could thwart God’s
purpose. Guided by the star, which anew appeared,
the wise men came to Bethlehem, offered their gifts,
and afterward, warned by God, returned by another
road, without reporting to Herod. It is a striking
picture—Herod the king, and Christ the King;
Christ a power even in His cradle, inspiring terror,
attracting homage! The faith of these sages, unre-
polled by the lowly surroundings of the child they
ad discovered, worshipping, and laying at His feet
their gold, frankincense and myrrh, is a splendid
anticipation of the victories Christ was yet to win
among, the wisest as well as the humblest of our race.
Herod, finding himself, as he thought, befooled by
the Magi, avenged himself by ordering a massacre
of all the male children of two years old, and under,
in Bethlehem and its neighborhood (vs 16-19). This
slaughter, if not recorded elsewhere (cf, however,
Macrobius, quoted by Ramsay, op. cit., 219), is
entirely in keeping with the cruelty of Herad’s dis-
position. Meanwhile, Joseph and Mary had been
withdrawn from the scene of danger (ver 17 con-
nects the mourning of the Bethlehem mothers with
Rachel’s weeping, Jer 31 15).
The safety of Mary and her threatened child was
provided for by a Divine warning to retire for a time
to Egypt (mark the recurring expres-
6. Flight to sion, “the young child and his mother”


Egypt and —the young child taking the lead, vs
Return to 11.13.14.20.21), whither, accordingly,
Nazareth they were conducted by Joseph (ver
(Mt 2:18- 14). The sojourn was not a long one.
15.19-23) Herod’s death brought permission to


return, but as Archelaus, Herod’s son
(the worst of them), reigned in Judaea in his father’s
stead (not king, but “ethnarch’’), Joseph was
direeted to withdraw to Galilee; hence it came
about that he and Mary, with the babe, found
themselves again in Nazareth, where Luke anew
takes up the story (2 39), the thread of which had
been broken by the incidents in Mt. Matthew sees
in the return from Egypt a refulfiling of the ex-
periences of Israel (Hos 11 1), and in the settling in
Nazareth a connection with the OT prophecies of
Christ’s lowly estate (Isa 11 1, néger, ‘branch’;
Zec 8 8; 6 12, etc). p


The objections to the credibility of the narratives
of the Virgin Birth have already partly been adverted
ue re ae the SaaS Mary;
i HE Virgin. Birra; and ‘the vwriter’s

7. ora volume, The Virgin Birth of Christ.)
an jec= (1) Phe Virgin Birth_—The narrativesin
ions Mt and Lk are attested by all MSS and
3 VSS genuine Parts of their respective Gos-
pels, and as coming to usin theirintegrity. Thenarrative
of Lk is generally recognized as resting on an Aram. basis,
which, from its diction and the primitive character of its
conceptions, belongs to the earliest age. While in Luke's
narrative everything is presented from the standpoint of
Mary, in Mt it is Joseph who is in the forefront, sug-
gesting that the virgin mother is the source of information
in the one case, and Joseph himself in the other. The
narratives are complementary, not contradictory. That
Mk and Jn do not contaiu narratives of the Virgin Birth


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1634


cannot be wondered at, when it is remembered that
Mark's Gospel begins of purpose with the Baptism of
John, and that the Fourth Gospel aims at setting forth
the Divine descent, not the circumstances of the earthly
nativity. ‘‘The Word became flesh” (Jn 1 14)—every-
thing is already implied in that. Neither can it be
objected to that Paul does not in his letters or public
preaching base upon so essentially private a fact as the
miraculous conception—at a time, too, when Mary
probably still lived. With the exception of the narrow-
est sect of the Jewish Ebionites and some of the gnostic
sects, the Virgin Birth was universally accepted in the
early church. .

(2) The genealogies (Mt 1 1-17; Lk 3 23-28).—Difi-
culty is felt with the genealogies in Mt and Lk (one de-
scending, the other ascending), which, while both profess-
ing to trace the descent of Jesusfrom David and Abraham
(Lk from Adam), yet go entirely apart in the pedigree
after David. See on this the art. GENEALOGIES OF JESUS
Curtist. A favorite view is that Mt exhibits the legal, Lk
the natural descent of Jesus. There is plausibility in the
supposition that though, in form, a genealogy of Joseph,
Lk’s is really the genealogy of Mary. It was not custom-
ary, itis true, to make out pedigrees of females, but the
case here was clearly exceptional, and the passing of Jo-
seph into the family of his father-in-law Heli would enable
the list to be made out in his name. Celsus, in the
2d cent., appears thus to have understood it when he
derides the notion that through so lowly a woman as the
carpenter's wife, Jesus should trace His lineage up to
the first man (Origen, Con. Cel., ii.32; Origen's reply pro-
ceeds onthesame assumption. Cf art. on ‘ Genealogies”
in Kitto, IT).


II. The Years of Silence—the Twelfth Year.—
With the exception of one fragment of incident—
that of the visit to Jerus and the

1. The Temple in His 12th year—the Canoni-
Human De- cal Gospels are silent as to the history


velopment of Jesus from the return to Nazareth
(Lk 2:40. till His baptism by John. This long
52) period, which the Apocryphal Gospels


crowd with silly fables (see APocRYPHAL
GosPeEzs), the inspired records leave to be regarded
as being what it was—a period of quiet development
of mind and body, of outward uneventfulness, of
silent garnering of experience in the midst of the
Nazareth surroundings. Jesns “grew, and waxed
strong, filled with wisdom; and the grace of God
was upon him... . advanced in wisdom and
stature, and in favor with God and men” (Lk 2
40.52). The incarnation was a true acceptance
of humanity, with all its sinless limitations of growth
and development. Not a hint is offered of that
omniscience or omnipotence which theology has not
infrequently imputed to Jesus even as child and
boy. His schooling was probably that of the ordi-
nary village child (He could read, Lk 4 17 ff, and
write, Jn 8 6-8); He wrought at the carpenter's
bench (cf Mk 6 3; Justin Martyr, following tra-
dition, speaks of Him as making “ploughs and
yokes,” Dial., 88). His gentleness and grace of
character endeared Him to all who knew Him (Lk 2
52). No stain of sin clouded His vision of Divine
things. His after-history shows that His mind was
nourished on the Scriptures; nor, as He pondered
psalms and prophets, could His soul remain un-
visited by presentiments, growing to convictions,
that He was the One in whom their predictions were
destined to be realized.
Every year, as was the custom of the Jews,
Joseph and Mary went, with their friends and
neighbors, in companies, to Jerus to
2. Jesusin the Passover. When Jesus was 12
the Temple years old, it would seem that, for
(Lk 2:41- the first time, He was permitted to
50) accompany them. It would be to
Him a strange and thrilling experience.
Everything He saw—the hallowed sites, the motley
crowd, the service of the temple, the very shocks
His moral] consciousness would receive from contact
with abounding scandals—would intensify His feel-
ing of His own unique relation to the Father. Every
relationship was for the time suspended and merged
to His thought in this higher one. It was His
Father’s city whose streets He trod; His Father’s


house He visited for prayer; His Father’s ordi-
nance the crowds were assembled to observe;
His Father's name, too, they were dishonoring
by their formalism and hypocrisy. It is this
exalted mood of the boy Jesus which explains the
scene that follows—the only one rescned from
oblivion in this interval of growth and preparation.
When the time came for the busy caravan to return
to Nazareth, Jesus, acting, doubtless, from highest
impulse, ‘“tarried behind” (ver 43). In the large
company His absence was not at first missed, but
when, at the evening halting-place, it became known
that He was not with them, His mother and Joseph
returned in deep distress to Jerus. Three days
elapsed before they found Him in the place where
naturally they should have looked first—His
Father’s house. There, in one of the halls or cham-
bers where the rabbis were wont to teach, they
discovered Him seated “in the midst,” at the feet
of the men of learning, hearing them discourse,
asking questions, as pupils were permitted to do,
and giving answers which awakened astonishment
by their penetration and wisdom (vs 46.47). Those
who heard Him may well have thought that before
them was one of the great rabbis of the future!
Mary, much surprised, asked in remonstrance,
“Son, why hast thon thus dealt with us?” evoking
from Jesus the memorable reply, ‘(How is it that
ye sought me? knew ye not that I must be in my
Father’s honse?”’ or ‘‘about my Father’s business?”
AV (vs 48.49). Here was the revelation of a self-
consciousness that Mary might have been prepared
for in Jesus, but perhaps, in the common inter-
course of life, was tending to lose sight of. The
lesson was not unneeded. Yet, once it had been
given, Jesus went back with Joseph and Mary to
Nazareth, and ‘‘was subject unto them’; and
Mary did not forget the teaching of the incident

(ver 51).
Wf. The Forerunner and the Baptism—~Time
passed, and when Jesns was nearing His 30th year,
Judaea was agitated by the message


1. The of a stern preacher of righteousness
Preaching who had appeared in the wilderness
of Jo by the Jordan, proclaiming the immi-
(Mt 3:1-— nent approach of the kingdom of
12; Mk 1: heaven, summoning to repentance,
1-8; Lk 3: and baptizing those who confessed
1-18) their sins. Tiberius had succeeded


Augustus on the imperial throne;
Judaea, with Samaria, was now a Rom province,
under the procurator Pontius Pilate; the rest of
Pal was divided between the tetrarchs Herod
(Galilee) and Philip (the eastern parts). The
Baptist thus appeared at the time when the land
had lost the last vestige of self-government, was
politically divided, and was in great ecclesiastical
confusion. Nurtured in the deserts (Lk 1 80),
John’s very appearance was a protest against the
luxury and self-seeking of the age. He had been a
Nazarite from his birth; he fed on the simplest
products of nature—locusts and wild honey; his
coarse garb of camel’s hair and leathern girdle was
a return to the dress of Elijah (2 K 1 8), in whose
spirit and power he appeared (Lk 1 17) (see Jonn
THE Baptist).

The coming Christ.—John’s preaching of the king-
dom was unlike that of any of the revolutionaries of
his age. It was a kingdom which could be entcred
only through moral preparation. It availed nothing
for the Jew simply that he was a son of Abraham.
The Messiah was at hand. He (John) was but a
voice in the wilderness sent to prepare the way for
that Greater than himself. The work of the Christ
would be one of judgment and of mercy. He would
lay the axe at the root of the tree—would winnow
the chaff from the wheat—yet would baptize with


1635


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


the Holy Spirit (Mt 3 10-12; Lk 815-17). Those
who professed acceptance of his message, with its
condition of repentance, John baptized with water
at the Jordan or in its neighborhood (cf Mt 3 6;
Jn 1 28; 3 23).
_ John’s startling words made a profound impres-
sion. All classes from every part of the land,
including Pharisees and Sadducees


2. Jesus Is (Mt 3 7), came to his baptism. John
Baptized was not deceived. He saw how little
(Mt 3:13- change of heart underlay it all. The
17; Mk 1: Regenerator had not yet come. But
9-11; Lk one day there appeared before him
3:21.22) One whom he intuitively recognized


; as different from all the rest—as,
indeed, the Christ whose coming it was his to
herald. John, up to this time, does not seem
to have personally known Jesus (cf Jn 1 31). He
must, however, have heard of Him; he had, besides,
received a sign by which the Messiah should be
recognized (Jn 1 33); and now, when Jesus pre-
sented Himself, Divinely pure in aspect, asking
baptism at his hands, the conviction was instantane-
ously flashed on his mind, that this was He. But
how should he, a sinful man, baptize this Holy
One? “TI have need to be baptized of thee, and
comest thou to me?” (Mt 3 14). The question
is one which forces itself upon ourselves—How
should Jesus seek or receive a “baptism of re-
pentance”’? Jesus Himself puts it orf the ground
of meetness. “Suffer it now: for thus it becometh
us to fulfil all righteousness” (ver 15). The Head
was content to enter by the same gateway as the
members to His specific vocation in the service of
the kingdom. In submitting to the baptism, He
formally identified Himself with the expectation of
the kingdom and with its ethical demands; sepa-
rated Himself from the evil of His nation, doubtless
with confession of its sins; and. devoted Himself
to His life-task in bringing in the Messianic salva-
tion. The significance of the rite as marking His
consecration to, and entrance upon, His Messianic
career, is seen in what follows. As He ascended
from the water, while still ‘‘praying” (Lk 3 21), the
heavens were opened, the Spirit of God descended
like a dove upon Him, and a voice from heaven
declared: ‘‘This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased” (Mt 3 16.17). It is needless to
inquire whether anyone besides John (cf Jn 1 33)
and Jesus (Mt 3 16; Mk 1 10) received this
vision or heard these words; it was for them, not
for others, the vision was primarily intended. To
Christ’s consecration of Himself to His calling, there
was now added the spiritual equipment necessary
for the doing of His work. He went forward with
the seal of the Father’s acknowledgment upon Him.
IV. The Temptation.—On the narrative of the
baptism in the first three Gospels there follows at
once the account of the temptation of

1. Tempta- Jesus in the wilderness. The psy-
tion Follows chological naturalness of the incident
Baptism is generally acknowledged. The bap-
(Mt 4:1-_ tism of Jesus was a crisis in His experi-
11; Mk 1: ence. He had been plenished by the
13.14; Lk Spirit for His work; the heavens had
4:1-13) been opened to Him, and His mind
was agitated by new thoughts and

emotions; He was conscious of the possession of
new powers. There was need for a period of retire-
ment, of still reflection, of coming to a complete
understanding with Himself as to the meaning of
the task to which He stood committed, the methods
He should employ, the attitude He should take up
toward popular hopes and expectations. He would
wish to be alone. The Spirit of God led Him (Mt
41; Mk 112; Lk 41) whither His own spirit
also impelled. It is with a touch of similar motive


-end (Mt 4 2ff; Lk 4 2 ff).


that Buddhist legend makes Buddha to be tempted
by the evil spirit Mara after he has attained en-
lightenment.

The scene of the temptation was the wilderness


of Judaea. Jesus was there 40 days, during which,

it is told, He neither ate nor drank
2. Nature (cf the fasts of Moses and Elijah,
of the Ex 24 18; 34 28; Dt 9 18; 1 K 19
Temptation 8). Mk adds, “He was with the wild


beasts” (ver 13). The period was
probably one of intense self-concentration. During
the whole of it He endured temptations of Satan
(Mk 1 13); but the special assaults came at the
We assume here a
real tempter and real temptations—the question of
diabolic agency being considered after. This,
however, does not settle the form of the temptations.
The struggle was probably an inward one. It can
hardly be supposed that Jesus was literally trans-
ported by the devil to a pinnacle of the temple, then
to a high mountain, then, presumably, back again
to the wilderness. The narrative must have come
from Jesus Himself, and embodies an ideal or para-
bolic element. ‘‘The history of the temptation,”
Lange says, ‘Jesus afterwards communicated to
His disciples in the form of a real narrative, clothed
in symbolical language” (Comm. on Mt, 83, ET).
The stages of the temptation were three—each
in its own way a trial of the spirit of obedience.
(1) The first temptation was to distrust. Jesus,
after His long fast, was an hungered. He had


become conscious also of super-
8. Stages natural powers. The point on which
of the the temptation laid hold was His


Temptation sense of hunger—the most over-
mastering of appetites. “If thou art
the Son of God, command that these stones become
bread.”’. The design was to excite distrustful and
rebellious thoughts, and lead Jesus to use the
powers entrusted to Him in an unlawful way, for
private and selfish ends. The temptation was
promptly met by a quotation from Scripture:
“Man shall not live by bread alone,” etc (Mt 4 4;
Lk 4 4; cf Dt 8 3). If Jesus was in this position,
it was His Father who had brought Him there for
urposes of trial. Man has a higher life than can
Be sustained on bread; a life, found in depending
on God’s word, and obcying it at whatever cost.

(2) The second temptation (in Lk the third) was
to presumption. Jesus is borne in spirit (cf Ezk
40 1.2) to a pinnacle of the temple. From this
dizzy elevation He is invited to cast. Himself down,
relying on the Divine pee “He shall give His
angels charge over thee,” etc (cf Ps 91 11.12).
In this way an easy demonstration of His Messiah-
ship would be given to the crowds below. The
temptation was to overstep those bounds of humility
and dependence which were imposed on Him as
Son; to play with signs and wonders in His work as
Messiah. But again the tempter is foiled by the
word: ‘Thou shalt not make trial of [try experi-
ments with, propose tests, put to the proof] the
Lord thy God” (Mt 4 7; Lk 4 12; cf Dt 6 16).

(3) The third temptation (Lk’s second) was to
worldly sovereignty, gained by some small concession
to Satan. From some lofty elevation—no place on
a geographical map—the kingdoms of the world and
the glory of them are flashed before Christ’s mind,
and all are offered to Him on condition of one little
act of homage to the tempter. It was the tempta-
tion to choose the easier path by some slight pander-
ing to falsehood, and Jesus definitely repelled it by
the saying: ‘‘Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shalt thou serve’ (Mt 4 10; Lk 4
8). Jesus had chosen His path. The Father's way
of the cross would be adhered to.

Typical character—The stages of the tempta-


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1636


tion typify the whole round of Satanic assault on
man through body, mind, and spirit (Lk 4 13; cf
1 Jn 2 16), and the whole round of Messianic
temptation. Jesus was constantly being tempted
(a) to spare Himself; (6) to gratify the Jewish sign-
seekers; (c) to gain power by sacrifice of the right.
In principle the victory was gained over all at the
commencement. His way was henceforth clear.


B. THE EARLY JUDAEAN MINISTRY


I. The Testimonies of the Baptist—While the
Synoptics pass immediately from the temptation of
Jesus to the ministry in Galilee after

1. The


Synoptics 412; Mk 114.15; Lk 4 14), the
and John Fourth Gospel furnishes the account,
full of interest, of the earlier ministry
of Jesus in Judaea while the Baptist. was still at
liberty.
The Baptist had announced Christ’s coming; had
baptized Him when He appeared; it was now his
privilege to testify to Him as having
2. Threefold come, and to introduce to Jesus His
Witness of first disciples.
the Baptist John’s work had assumed propor-
(Jn 1:19- tions which made it impossible for the
37) ecclesiastical authorities any longer to
ignore it (cf Lk 3 15). A deputation
consisting of priests and Levites was accordingly
sent to John, where he was baptizing at Bethany
beyond Jordan, to put to him categori-
a) First cal questions about his mission. Who
Testimony was he? And by what authority did
—Jesus and he baptize? Was he the Christ? or
Popular Elijah? or the expected prophet? (cf 6
Messianic 14; 7 4; Mt 16 14). To these ques-
Expectation tions John gave distinct and straight-
(vs 19-28) forwardreplhes. He was not the Christ,
not Elijah, not the prophet. His an-
swers grow briefer every time, ‘I am not the Christ’’;
“T am not’; “No.” Who was he then? The
answer was emphatic. He was but a “voice” (cf
Isa 40 3)—a preparer of the way of the Lord. In
their midst already stood One—not necessarily in
the crowd at that moment—with whose greatness
his was not to be compared (vs 26.27). John utter-
ly effaces himself before Christ.
The day after the interview with the Jerus depu-
ties, John saw Jesus coming to him—probably
fresh from the temptation—and bore a
b) Second second and wonderful testimony to His
Testimony Messiahship. Identifying Jesus with
—Christ the subject of his former testimonies,
and the Sin and stating the ground of his knowl-


of the edge in the sign God had given him
World (vs (vs 30-84), he said, ‘‘Behold, the Lamb
29-34) of God, that taketh away the sin of


the world” (ver 29). The words are
rich in suggestion regarding the character of Jesus,
and the nature, universality and efficacy of His
work (cf 1 Jn 35). The “Lamb” may point
specifically to the description of the vicariously
Suffering Servant of Jeh in Isa 53 11.
The third testimony was borne “again on the
morrow,” when John was standing with two of
his disciples (one Andrew, ver 40, the


c) Third other doubtless the evangelist himself).
Testimony Pointing to Jesus, the Baptist repeated
—Christ his former words, “Behold, the Lamb
and the of God.” While the words are the


Duty of the same, the design was different. In the
Disciple first “behold” the idea is the recogni-
(vs 35-37) tion of Christ; in the second there is a

call to duty—a hint to follow Jesus.
On this hint the disciples immediately acted (ver
37). Itis next to be seen how this earliest ‘follow-
ing” of Jesus grew.


the imprisonment of the Baptist (Mt -


Il. The First Disciples——John's narrative shows
that Jesus gathered His disciples, less by a series of
distinct calls, than by a process of

1. Spiritual spiritual accretion. Men were led to


Accretion Him, then accepted by Him. This
(Jn 1: process of selection left Jesus_at the
37-61) close of the second day with five real


and true followers. The history con-
futes the idea that it was first toward the close of
His ministry that Jesus became known to His dis-
ciples as the Messiah. In all the Gospels it was as
the Christ that the Baptist introduced Jesus; it was
as the Christ that the first disciples accepted and
confessed Him (vs 41.45.49).
The first of the group were Andrew and John—
the unnamed disciple of ver 40. These followed
Jesus in consequence of their Master’s
a) Andrew testimony. It was, however, the few
and John— hours’ converse they had with Jesus
Discipleship in His own abode that actually decided
as the Fruit them. To Christ’s question, “What
of Spiritual seek ye?’’ their answer was practically
Converse ‘Thyself.’ ‘The mention of the time
(vs 87-40) —the 10th hour, i.e. 10 AM—is one
of the small traits that mark St. John.
He is here looking back on the date of his own spirit-
ual birth” (Westcott). :
John and Andrew had no sooner found Christ for
themselves (‘‘We have found the Messiah,” ver 41)
‘than they hastened to tell others of
b) Simon their discovery. Andrew at once
Peter— sought out: Simon, his brother, and
Discipleship brought him to Jesus; so, a ae


a Result of sought Nathanael (ver 45). Christ’s
Personal unerring eye read at once the quality
Testimony of the man whom Andrew introduced
(vs 41.42) to Him. “Thou art Simon the son of


John: thou shalt be called Cephas’—
“Rock” or “Stone” (ver 42). Mt 16 18, therefore,
is not the original bestowal of this name, but the con-
firmation of it. The name is the equivalent of
“Peter’’ (Péiros), and was given to Simon, not with
any official connotation, but because of the strength
and clearness of his convictions. His general stead-
fastness is not disproved by His one unhappy failure.
(Was it thus the apostle acquired the name ‘‘Peter’’?)
The fourth disciple, Philip, was called by Jesus
Himself, when about to depart for Galilee (ver 43).
Friendship may have had its influence
c) Philip— on Philip (like the foregoing, he also
the Result was from Bethsaida of Galilee, ver 44),
of Scriptural but that which chiefly decided him was
Evidence the correspondence of what he found
(vs 43.44) in Jesus with the prophetic testimonies
(ver 45).
Philip sought Nathanael (of Cana of Galilee, 21
2)—the same probably as Bartholomew the Apostle
—and told him he had found Him of
d) Nathan- whom Moses in the law and the proph-
ael—Disci- ets had written (ver 45). Nathanael


pleship an doubted, on the ground that the Mes-
Effect of siah was not likely to have His origin
Heart- in an obscure place like Nazareth (ver
Searching 46; cf_7 52). Philip’s wise answer
Power was, “Come and see”; and when Na-
(vs 45-51) thanael came, the Lord met him with a

ae. word which speedily rid him of his
hesitations. First, Jesus attested His seeker’s sin-


cerity (‘“‘Behold, an Israelite indeed,” etc, ver 47);
then, on Nathanael expressing surprise, revealed to
him His knowledge of a recent secret act of medita-
tion or devotion (“when thou wast under the fig
tree,” etc, ver 48). The sign was sufficient to con-
vince Nathanael that he was in the presence of a
superhuman, nay a Divine, Being, therefore, the
Christ—‘‘Son of God . . . . King of Israel’”’ (ver 49).
Jesus met his faith with further self-disclosure. Na-


1637


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


thanael had believed on comparatively slight evi-
dence; he would see see things: heavens opened,
and the angels of God ascending and descending
upon the Son of Man (ver 51). The allusion is to
Jacob’s vision (Gen 28 10-22)—a Scripture which
had possibly been the theme of Philip’s meditation
in his privacy. Jesus puts Himself in place of that
mystic ladder as the medium of reopened communi-
cation between heaven and earth.


The name ‘Son of Man"’—a favorite designation of
Jesus for Himself—appears here for the first time in the


Gospels. It is disputed whether it was a

9. “Son of Current. Messlanic title (see Son or Man),
Paes but at jieast it had this force on the lipsof
Man’ and Jesus Himself, denoting Hlm as the pos-
“Son of sessor of a true humanity, and as standing
God” in a representative relation to mankind unl-


versally. It is probably borrowed from
Dnl 7 13and appearsin the Book of En (see
Apocatyptic Lirerators). The higher title, ‘‘Son of
God,” given to Jesus by Nathanael, could not, of course,
as yet carry with it the transcendental associations of
John's Prologue (1 1.14.18), but it evidently conveyed an
idea of superhuman dignity and unique relation to God,
snch as the better class of minds would seem to have
sean to the Messiah (cf Jn § 18; 10 33ff; Mt


HWE. The First Events-—-An interval of a few
weeks is occupied by a visit of Jesus to Cana of Gali-
lee (Jn 2 1 ff) and a brief sojourn in Capernaum
(ver 12); after which Jesus returned to Jerus to the
Passover as the most appropriate place for His public
manifestation of Himself as Messiah (vs 13 ff).
The notes of time in Jn suggest that the Passover
(beginning of April, 27 AD) took place about three
months after the baptism by John (cf 1 43; 2 1.12).

Prior to His public manifestation, a more private
unfolding of Christ’s glory was granted to the disci-

ples at the marriage feast of Cana of
1. The First Galilee (cf ver 11). The marriage was
Miracle doubtless that of some relative of the
(Jn 2:1-11) family, and the presence of Jesus at the

feast, with His mother, brethren and
disciples (as Joseph no more appears, it‘may be con-
cluded that he was dead), is significant as showing
that His religion is not one of antagonism to natural
relations. The marriage festivities lasted seven
days, and toward the close the wine provided for the
guests gave out. Mary interposed with an indirect
suggestion that Jesus might supply the want.
Christ’s reply, lit. “Woman, what is that to thee
and to me?” (ver 4), is not intended to convey the
least tinge of reproof (cf Westcott, in Joc.), but inti-
mates to Mary that His actions were henceforth to
be guided by a rule other than hers (cf Lk 2 51).
This, however, as Mary saw (ver 5), did not pre-
clude an answer to her desire. Six waterpots of
stone stood near, and Jesus ordered these to be filled
with water (the quantity was large; about 50 gal-
lons); then when the water was drawn off it was
found changed into a nobler element—a wine purer
and better than could have been obtained from any
natural vintage. Theruler of the feast, in ignorance
of its origin, expressed surprise at its quality (ver 10).
The miracle wassymbolical—a “‘sign’”’ (ver 11)—and
may be contrasted with the first miracle of Moses—
turning the water into blood (Ex 7-20). It points
to the contrast between the old dispensation and the
new, and to the work of Christ as a transforming,
enriching and glorifying of the natural, through
Divine grace and power.

After a brief stay at Capernaum (ver 12), Jesus
went up to Jerus to keep the Passover. There it
was His design formally to manifest Himself. Other
“sions’’ He wrought at the feast, leading many to
believe on Him—not, however, with a deep or
enduring faith (vs 23-25)—but the special act
by which He signalized His appearance was His
public cleansing of the temple from the irreligious
trafficking with which it had come to be associated.


A like incident is related by the Synoptics at
the close of Christ’s ministry (Mt 21 12.13; Mk
11 15-18; Lk 19 45.46), and it is a


2. The question whether the act was actually
First repeated, or whether the other evan-
Passover, gelists, who do not narrate the events


and Cleans- of the early ministry, simply record it
ing of the out of its chronological order. In any
Temple case, the act was a fitting inaugura-
(vs 13-25) tion of the Lord’s work. A regular

market was held in the outer court of
the temple. Here the animals needed for sacrifice
could be purchased, foreign money exchanged, and
the doves, which were the offerings of the poor, be
obtained. It was a busy, tumultuous, noisy and
unholy scene, and the “‘zeal” of Jesus burned within
Him—had doubtless often done so before—as He
witnessed it. Arming Himself with a scourge of
cords, less as a weapon of offence, than as a symbol
of authority, He descended with resistless energy
upon the wrangling throng, drove out the dealers
and the cattle, overthrew the tables of the money-
changers, and commanded the doves to be taken
away. Let them not profane His Father’s house
(Jn 2 14-16). Noone seems to have opposed. All
felt that a prophet was among them, and could not
resist the overpowering authority with which He
spake and acted. By and by, when their courage
revived, they asked Him for a “sign” in evidence
of His right todo such things. Jesus gave them no
sign such as they demanded, but uttered an enig-
matic word, and left them to reflect on it, “Destroy
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up”’ (ver
19). The authenticity of the saying is sufficiently
vouched for by the perverted use made of it at
Christ's trial (Mt 26 61 ||). It is a word based on
the foresight which Christ had that the conflict now
commencing was to end in His rejection and death.
“The true way to destroy the Temple, in the eyes of
Jesus, was to slay the Messiah. .... If it is in
the person of the Messiah that the Temple is laid in
ruins, it is in His person it shall be raised again”’
(Godet). The disciples, after the resurrection, saw
the meaning of the word (Jn 2 22).

As a sequel to these stirring events Jesus had a

nocturnal visitor in the person of Nicodemus—a

Pharisee, a ruler of the Jews, a “‘teach-
3. The Visit er of Israel” (ver 10), apparently no
of Nicode- longer young (ver 4). His coming by
mus (Jn 3: night argues, besides some fear of man,
1-12) a constitutional timidity of disposition

(cf 19 39); but the interesting thing
is that he did come, showing that he had been really
impressed by Christ’s words and works. One rec-
ognizes in him a man of candor and uprightness of
spirit, yet without adequate apprehensions of Christ
Himself, and of the nature of Christ’s kingdom.
Jesus he was prepared to acknowledge as a Divinely *
commissioned teacher—one whose mission was ac-
credited by miracle (ver 2). He was interested in
the kingdom, but, as a morally living man, had no
doubt of his fitness to enter into it. Jesus had but
to teach and he would understand.

(1) The new birth—Jesus in His reply laid His
finger at once on the defective point in His visitor’s
relation to Himself and to His kingdom: ‘Except
one be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of
God” (ver 3); “Except one be born of water and
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God”’
(ver 5). Nicodemus was staggered at this demand
for a spiritual new birth. Thereis reason to beheve
that proselytes were baptized on being received into
the Jewish church, and their baptism was called
a “new birth.’ Nicodemus would therefore be
familiar with the expression, but could not see that
it had any applicability to him. Jesus teaches him,
on the other hand, that he also needs a new birth,


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1638


and this, not through water only, but through the
Spirit. The change was mysterious, yet plainly
manifest in its effects (vs 7.8). If Nicodemus did
not understand these “earthly things” — the evidence
of which lay all around him—how should he under-
stand “heavenly things,” the things pertaining to
salvation?

(2) ‘Heavenly things.’’—These “heavenly things”
Jesus now proceeds to unfold to Nicodemus: ‘‘As
Moses lifted up the serpent,” ete (ver 14). The
“lifting up” is a prophecy of the cross (cf 12 32-34).
The brazen serpent is the symbol of sin conquered
and destroyed by the death of Christ. What follows
in 3 16-21 is probably the evangelist’s expansion of
this theme—God’s love the source of salvation
(ver 16), God’s purpose not the world’s condemna-
tion, but its salvation (vs 17.18) the self-judgment
of sin (vs 19 ff). :

Retiring from Jerus, Jesus commenced a ministry
in Judaea (ver 22). It lasted apparently about 6


months. The earlier Gospels pass over
4. Jesus it. This is accounted for by the fact
and John that the ministry in Judaea was still
(Jn 3:22- preparatory. Jesus had publicly as-


36) serted His Messianic authority. A little
space is now allowed to test the result.

Meanwhile Jesus descends again to the work of pro-
phetic preparation. His ministry at this stage is
hardly distinguishable from John’s. He summons
to the baptism of repentance. His disciples, not
Himself, administer the rite (3 23; 4 2); hence the
sort of rivalry that sprang up between His baptism
and that of the forerunner (3 22-26). John was
baptizing at the time at Aenon, on the western side
of the Jordan; Jesus somewhere in the neighbor-
hood. Soon the greater teacher began to eclipse
theless. ‘All men came to Him” (ver 26). John’s
reply showed how pure his mind was from the nar-
row, grudging spirit which characterized his follow-
ers. To him it was no grievance, but the fulfilment
of his joy, that men should be flocking to Jesus. He
was not the Bridegroom, but the friend of the Bride-
groom. They themselves had heard him testify,
“T am not the Christ.’ It lay in the nature of
things that Jesus must increase; he must decrease
(vs 27-30). Explanatory words follow (vs 31-36).
IV. Journey to Galilee—the Woman of Samaria.
—Toward the close of this Judaean ministry the
Baptist appears to have been cast into


1. With- rison for his faithfulness in reproving
drawal to Herod Antipas for taking his brother
Galilee Philip’s wife (cf Jn 3 24; Mt 14 3-


5 ||). It seems most natural to connect
the departure to Galilee in Jn 4 3 with that narrated
in Mt 3 13 |, though some think the imprisonment
of the Baptist did not take place till later. The
motive which Jn gives was the hostility of the

“Pharisees, but it was the imprisonment of the
Baptist which led Jesus to commence, at the time
He did, an independent ministry. The direct road
to Galilee lay through Samaria; hence the mem-
orable encounter with the woman at that place.

Jesus, being wearied, paused to rest Himself at
Jacob’s well, near a town called Sychar, now ’ Askar.
It was about the sixth hour—or 6


2. The o’clock in the evening. The time of
Living year is determined by ver 35 to be
Water “four months” before harvest, i.e.

December (there isno reason fornot tak-
ing this literally). It suits the evening hour that the


woman of Samaria came out to draw water. (Some,
on a different reckoning, take the hour to be noon.)
Jesus opened the conversation by asking from the
woman a draught from her pitcher. The prover-
bial hatred between Jews and Samaritans filled the
woman with surprise that Jesus should thus address
Himself to her. Still greater was her surprise when,


as the conversation proceeded, Jesus announced
Himself as the giver of a water of which, if a man
drank, he should never thirst again (vs 13.14). Only
gradually did His meaning penetrate her mind, ‘‘Sir,
give me this water,” etc (ver 15). The request of
Jesus that she would call her husband led to the
discovery that Jesus knew all the secrets of her life.
She was before a prophet (ver 19). As in the case
of Nathanael, the heart-searching power of Christ’s

word convinced her of His Divine claim. |
The conversation next turned upon the right place
of worship. The Samaritans had a temple of their
own on Mount Gerizim; the Jews, on


3. The the other hand, held to the exclusive
True validity of the temple at Jerus. Which
Worship was right? Jesus in His reply, while


pronouncing for the Jews as the cus-
todians of God’s salvation (ver 22), makes it plain
that distinction of places is no longer a matter of
any practical importance. A change was immi-
nent which would substitute a universal religion
for one of special times and places (ver 20). He
enunciates the great principle of the new dispensa-
tion that God is a Spirit, and they who worship Him
must do so in spirit and in truth. Finally, when
she spoke of the Messiah, Jesus made Himself defi-
nitely known to her as the Christ. To this poor
Samaritan woman, with her receptive heart, He
unveils Himself more plainly than He had done to
priests and rulers (ver 26).
The woman went home and became an evangelist
to her people, with notable results (vs 28.39). Jesus
abode with them two days and con-


4, Work firmed the impression made by her tes-
and Its timony (vs 40-42). Meanwhile, He
Reward impressed on His disciples the need of


i earnest sowing and reaping in the serv-
ice of the Kingdom, assuring them of unfailing re-
ward for both sower and reaper (vs 35-38). He
Himself was their Great Example (ver 34). :


Cc. THE GALILEAN MINISTRY AND VISITS 'fO THE
FEASTS


Galilee was divided into upper Galilee and lower
Galilee. It has already been remarked that upper
Galilee was inhabited by a mixed pop-
1. The ulation—hence called “Galilee of the
Scene Gentiles” (Mt 4 15). The highroads
of commerce ran through it. It was
“the way of the sea” (AV)—a scene of constant
traffic. The people were rude, ignorant, and super-
stitious, and were densely crowded together in
towns and villages. About 160 BC there were only
a few Jews in the midst of a large heathen popula-
tion; but by the time of Christ the Jewish element
had greatly increased. The busiest portion of this
busy district was round the Sea of Galilee, at the
N.E. corner of which stood Capernaum—wealthy
and cosmopolitan. In Nazareth, indeed, Jesus met
with a disappointing reception (Lk 4 16-30; Mt
13 54-57; cf Jn 4 43-45); yet in Galilee generally
He found a freer spirit and greater receptiveness
than among the stricter traditionalists of Judaea.
It is assumed _here that Jesus returned to Galilee in
December, 27 AD, and that His ministry there lasted till
late in 29 AD (see Chronology” above).
2. The On the two years’ scheme of the public
Time ministry, the Passover of Jn 6 4 has to be
taken as the second in Christ’s ministry—
therefore as occurring at an interval of only
3 or 4 months after the return. This seems impossible in
view of the crowding of events it involves in so short a
time—opening incidents, stay in Capernaum (Mt 4 13),
three circuits in ‘all Galilee" (Mt 4 23-25 [{; Lk § 1-4:
Mt 9 35-38; Mk 6 6), lesser journeys and excursions
(Sermon on Mount: Gadara); and the dislocations it
necessitates, e.g. the plucking of ears of corn (about Pass-
over time) must be placed after the feeding of the 5,000,


| etc. It is simpler to adhere to the three years’ scheme.


A division of the Galilean ministry may then fitly
be made into two periods—one preceding, the other suc-


1639


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


ceeding the Mission of the Twelve in Mt 10 ||. One
reason for this division is that after the Mission of the
Twelve the order of events is the same in the first three
evangelists till the final departure from Galilee.


First Period—From the Beginning of the Ministry
in Galilee tll the Mission of the Twelve


I. Opening Incidents—From sympathetic Sa-
maria (Jn 4 39), Jesus had journeyed to unsym-
pathetic Galilee, and first to Cana,
1. Healing where His first miracle had been
of Noble- wrought. The reports of His miracles
man’s Son in Judaea had come before Him (ver
(Jn4:43-64) 45), and it was mainly His reputation
as a miracle-worker which led a noble-
man—a courtier or officer at Herod’s court—to seek
Him at Cana on behalf of his son, who was near to
death. Jesus rebuked the sign-seeking spirit (ver
48), but, on the fervent appeal being repeated, He
bade the nobleman go his way: his son lived. The
man’s prayer had been, ‘“Come down”; but he had
faith to receive the word of Jesus (ver 50), and on
his way home received tidings of his son’s recovery.
The nobleman, with his whole household, was won
for Jesus (ver 53). This is noted as the second of
Christ’s Galilean miracles (ver 54).
A very different reception awaited Him at Naza-
reth, “His own country,’ to which He next came. We
can scarcely take the incident recorded


2. The in Lk 4 16-80 to be the same as that
Visit to in Mt 13 54-58, though Matthew’s
Nazareth habit of grouping makes this not im-
(Mt 4:13; possible. ‘The Sabbath had come, and


Lk 4:16-30) on His entering the synagogue, as was
His wont, the repute He had won led
to His being asked to read. The Scripture He se-
lected (or which came in the order of the day) was
Isa 61 1ff (the fact that Jesus was able to read
from the synagogue-roll is interesting as bearing on
His knowledge of Heb), and from this He proceeded
to amaze His hearers by declaring that this Scripture
was now fulfilled in their ears (ver 21). The ‘“‘words
of grace” he uttered are not given, but it can be
understood that, following the prophet’s guidance,
He would hold Himself forth as the predicted ‘“Serv-
ant of Jehovah,” sent to bring salvation to the
poor, the bound, the broken-hearted, and for this
purpose endowed with the fulness of the Spirit.
The idea of the passage in Isa is that of the year of
jubilee, when debts were canceled, inheritances re-
stored, and slaves set free, and Jesus told them He
had come to inaugurate that “acceptable year of
the Lord.” At first He was listened to with ad-
miration, then, as the magnitude of the claims He
was making became apparent to His audience, a very
different spirit tock possession of them. ‘Who was
this that spoke thus?’ ‘Was it not Joseph’s son?
(ver 22). They were disappointed, too, that Jesus
showed no disposition to gratify them by working
before them any of the miracles of which they had
heard so much (ver 23). Jesus saw the gathering
storm, but met it resolutely. He told His hearers
He had not expected any better reception, and in
reply to their reproach that He had wrought mira-
cles elsewhere, but had wrought none among them,
quoted examples of prophets who had done the
same thing (Elijah, Blisha, vs 24-28). This com-
pleted the exasperation of the Nazarenes, who,
springing forward, dragged Him to the brow of the
hill on which their city was built, and would have
thrown Him down, had something in the aspect
of Jesus not restrained them. With one of those
looks we read of occasionally in the Gospels, He
seems to have overawed His townsmen, and,
passing in safety through their midst, left the
place (vs 28-30). ;
After leaving Nazareth Jesus made His way to
Capernaum (probably Tell Hum), which thereafter


seems to have been His headquarters. He “dwelt”
there (Mt 4 13). It is called in Mt 91, “his


own city.” Before teaching in Caper-
8. Callof naum itself, however, He appears to
the Four have opened His ministry by evangcliz-
Disciples ing along the shores of the Sea of Gali-
(Mt 4:17- lee (Mt 4 18; Mk 1 16; Lk 6 1), and
22; Mk 1: there, at Bethsaida (on topographical
16-22; Lk questions, see special quay took
6:1-11) His first step in gathering His chosen


disciples more closely around Him.
Hitherto, though attached to His person and cause,
the pairs of fisher brothers, Simon and Andrew,
James and John—these last the “sons of Zebedee”
—had not been in constant attendance upon Him.
Since the return from Jerus, they had gone back to
their ordinary avocations. The four were “part-
ners’ (Lk 5 10). They had “hired servants” (Mk
1 20); therefore were moderately well off. The
time had now come when they were to leave “all,”
and follow Jesus entirely.
Luke alone records the striking miracle which led


to the call. Jesus had been teaching the multitude

from a boat borrowed from Simon, and
a) The now at the close He bade Simon put
Draught of out into the deep, and let down his
Fishes (Lk nets. Peter told Jesus they had toiled
5:1-9) all night in vain, but he would obey


His word. The result was an immense
draught of fishes, so that the nets were breaking,
and the other company had to be called upon for
help. Both boats were filled and in danger of sink-
ing. Peter’s cry in so wonderful a presence was,
‘Depart from me; for I am’a sinful man, O Lord.”

The miracle gave Jesus opportunity for the word
He wished to speak. It is here that Mt and Mk
take up the story. The boats had

b) “Fishers been brought to shore when, first to
of Men” Simon and Andrew, afterward to

James and John (engaged in ‘‘mending
their nets,” Mt 4 21; Mk 1 19), the call was given:
“Come ye after me, and I will make you fishers of
men.” At once all was left—boats, nets, friends
—and they followed Him. ‘Their experience taught
them to have large expectations from Christ.

Jesus is now found in Capernaum. Aun: early
Sabbath—perhaps the first of His stated residence in
the city—was marked by notable


4. AtCa- events.

pernaum The Sabbath found Jesus as usual
(Mt 4:13; in the synagogue—now as teacher.
Lk 4:31) The manner of His teaching is spe-


cially noticed: ‘He taught them as
having authority, and not as the scribes’ (Mk 1


22). The scribes gave forth nothing of their own.

They but repeated the dicta of the great
a) Christ’s authorities of the past. It was a sur-
Teaching _ prise to the people to find in Jesus One
(Mk 1:22. whose wisdom, like waters from a clear
27; Lk 4: fountain, came fresh and_ sparkling
32) from Hisownlips. The authority also

with which Jesus spoke commanded
attention. He sought support in the opinion of no


others, but gave forth His statements with firmness,

decision, dignity and emphasis.
While Jesus was teaching an extraordinary inci-
dent occurred. A man in the assembly, described
as possessed by “an unclean spirit”


b) The (Mk 1 28; Lk 4 33), broke forth in
Demoniac cries, addressing Jesus by name (“‘Jesus,
in the thou Nazarene’), speaking of Him as
Synagogue “the Holy One of God,” and asking
(Mk 1:23- “What have we to do with thee? Art
27; Lk 4: thou come to destroy us?” The dis-
33-37) eased consciousness of the sufferer bore


a truer testimony to Christ’s dignity,
holiness and power than most of those present could


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1640


have given, and instinctively, but truly, construed
His coming as meaning destruction to the empire of
the demons. At Christ’s word, after a terrible
paroxysm, from which, however, the man escaped
unhurt (Lk 4 35), the demon was cast out. More
than ever the people were “amazed” at the word
which had such power (Mk 1 27).


Demon-possession—its reality.—'This is the place to
say a word on this terrible form of malady—demon-
possession—met with so often in the Gospels. Was it
a@ reality? or a hallucination? Did Jesus believe in
it? Itis difficult. to read the Gospels, and not answer
the last question in the affirmative. Was Jesus, then,
mistaken? This also it is hard to believe. If there is
one subject on which Jesus might be expected to have
clear_vision—on which we might trust His insight—it
was His relation to the spuitual world with which He
stood in so close rapport. as He likely then to be mis-
taken when He spoke so earnestly, so profoundly, so fre-
quently, of its hidden forces of evil? There is in itself
no improbability—rather analogy suggests the highest
probability—of realms of spiritual existence outside our
sensible ken. That evil should enter this spiritual world,
and that human life should he deeply implicated with that
evil—that its forces should have a mind and will organiz-
ing and directing them—are not beliefs to be dismissed
with scorn. The presence of such beliefs in the time of
Christ is commonly attributed to Bab, Pers or other
foreign influences. It may be questioned, however,
whether the main cause was not something far more real—
an actual and permitted ‘‘hour and the power of darkness’
(Lk 22 53) in the kingdom of evil, discovering itself in
manifestations in the bodies and souls of men, that could
be traced only to @ supernatural cause (see Demontrac
Posszssion). (The present writer discusses the subject
in an art. in the Sunday School Times for June 4, 1910.
It would be Puen even to say that the instance
in the Gospels have no modern parallels. See a striking

aper in Good Words, edited by Dr. Norman MacLeod,
‘or 1867, on “The English Demoniac.”) It should be
noted that all diseases are not, as is sometimes affirmed,
traced to demonic influence. The distinction between
other diseases and demonic possession is clearly maln-
tained (cf Mt 4 24; 10 1; 11 5,etc). Insanity, epilepsy,
blindness, dumbness, etc, were frequent accompaniments
of possession, but they are not identifled with it.


Jesus, on leaving the synagogue, entered the
house of Peter. In Mk it is called ‘‘the house of
Simon and Andrew” (1 29). Peter


c) Peter’s was married (cf 1 Cor 9 5), and ap-
Wife’s parently his mother-in-law and brother
Mother lived with him in Capernaum. It was
(Mt 8:14. an anxious time in the household, for
15; Mk 1: the mother-in-law lay “sick of a fever”
29-31; Lk —“‘a great fever,’’ as Luke the physi-
4:38.39) cian calls it. Taking her by the hand,


Jesus rebuked the fever, which in-
stantaneously left her. The miracle, indeed, was a
double one, for not only was the fever stayed, but
strength was at once restored. ‘She rose up and
ministered unto them” (Lk 4 39).

The day’s labors were not yet done; were, in-
deed, scarce begun. The news of what had taken
place quickly spread, and soon the


d) The extraordinary spectacle was presented
Eventful of ‘the whole city’ gathered at the door
Evening of the dwelling, bringing their sick of
(Mt 8:16; every kind to be healed. Demoniacs
Mk 1:32- were there, crying and being rebuked,
34; Lk 4: but multitudes of others as well. The
40.41) Lord’s compassion was unbounded.


He rejected none. He labored un-
weariedly till every one was healed. His sympathy
was individual: ‘‘He laid his hands on every one of
them” (Lk 4 40).

Il, From First Galilean Circuit till Choice of
the Apostles.—The chronological order in this sec-
tion is to be sought in Mk and Lk;

1. The First Mt groups for didactic purposes.
Circuit (Mk The morning after that eventful


1:35-45; Sabbath evening in Capernaum, Jesus
Lk 4:42- took steps for a systematic visitation
44; cf Mt of the towns and villages of Galilee.

4:23-25) The task He set before Himsclf was


prepared for by early, prolonged, soli-
tary prayer (Mk 1 35; many instances show that


Christ’s life was steeped in prayer). His disciples
followed Him, and reported that the_multitudes
sought Him, Jesus intimated to them Hisintention
of passing to the next towns, and forthwith com-
menced a tour of preaching and heal-
a) Its Scope ing “throughout all Galilee.” Even if
the expression ‘‘all Galilee” is used with
some latitude, it indicates a work of very extensive
compass. It was a work likewise methodically con-
ducted (cf Mk 6 6: “went round about the vil-
lages,”’ lit. “in a circle”). Galilee at this time was
extraordinarily populous (ef Jos, BJ, III, iti, 2), and
the time occupied by the circuit must have been
considerable. Mt’s condensed picture (4 23-25)
shows that Christ’s activity during this period was
incredibly great. He stirred the province to its
depths. His preaching and miracles drew enor-
mous crowds after Him. This tide of popularity
afterward turned, but much of the seed sown may
have produced fruit at a later day.
The one incident recorded which seems to have
belonged to this tour was a sufficiently typical
one. While Jesus was in a certain city


b) Cure of a man “full of leprosy” (Lk 6 12)
the Leper came and threw himself down before
(Mt 8:2-4; Him, seeking to be healed. The man
Mk 1:40— did not even ask Jesus to heal bim,
45; Lk 5: but expressed his faith, ‘If thou wilt,
12-16) thou canst make me clean.” The


man’s apparent want of importunity
was the very essence of his importunity. Jesus,


‘moved by his earnestness, touched him, and the


man was made whole on the spot. The leper was
enjoined to keep silence—Jesus did not wish to pass
for a mere miracle-worker—and bade the man show
himself to the priests and offer the appointed sacri-
fices (note Christ’s respect for the legal institu-
tions). The leper failed to keep Christ’s charge,
and published his cure abroad, no doubt much to
his own spiritual detriment, and also to the hin-
drance of Christ’s work (Mk 1 45).

His circuit. ended, Jesus returned to Capernaum


(Mk 2 1; lit. “after days’). Here again His

fame at once drew multitudes to see
2. Caper- and hear Him. Among them were
naum now persons of more unfriendly spirit.
Incidents Pharisees and doctors, learning of the


new rabbi, had come out of ‘every
village of Galilee and Judaea and Jerusalem” (Lk
5 17), to hear and judge of Him for themselves.
The chief incidents of this visit are the two now
to be noted.
In a chamber crowded till there was no standing
room, even round the door, Jesus wrought the cure
upon the paralytic man. The scene
a) Cure of was a dramatic one. From Christ’s
the Para- words “son,” lit. ‘child’ (Mk 2 5),
lytic (Mt 9: we infer that the paralytic was young,
2-8; Mk but his disablement seems to have been
2:1-12; Lk complete. It was no easy matter,
6:17-26) with the doorways blocked, to get the
man brought to Jesus, but his four
bearers (ver 3) were not easily daunted. They
climbed the flat roof, and, removing part of the
covering above where Jesus was, let down the man
into the midst. Jesus, pleased with the inventive-
ness and perseverance of their faith, responded to
their wish. But, first, that the spiritual and tem-
poral might be set in their right relations, and the
attitude of His hearers be tested, He spoke the
higher words: ‘‘Son, thy sins are forgiven’? (ver 5).
At once the temper of the scribes was revealed.
Here was manifest evasion. Anyone could say,
“Thy sins are forgiven.’’ Worse, it was blas-
phemy, for ‘‘who can forgive sins but one, even
God?’ (ver 7). Unconsciously they were conceding
to Christ the Divine dignity Heclaimed. Jesus per-


1641


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


ceives at once the thoughts of the cavilers, and
proceeds to expose their malice. Accepting their
own test, He proves His right to say, “Thy sing
are forgiven,” by now saying to the palsied man,
“Take up thy bed and walk” (vs 9.11). At once
the man arose, took his bed, and went forth whole.
The multitude were “amazed” and “glorified God”
(ver 12).

The call of Matthew apparently took place
shortly after the cure of the paralytic man. The


feast was possibly later (cf the con-
b) Call and nection with the appeal of Jairus,
Feast of Mt 9 18), but the cal and the feast
Matthew are best taken together, as they are
(Mt 9:9- im all the three narratives.
13; Mk 2: (1) The call—Mattbew is called


13-17; Lk “Levi” by Luke, and ‘Levi, the son of
§:27-32) Alphaeus’” by Mark. By occupation
he was a “publican” (Lk 6 27),
collector of custom-dues in Capernaum, an impor-
tant center of traffic. There is no reason to suppose
that Matthew was not a man of thorough upright-
ness, though naturally the class to which he belonged
was held in great odium by the Jews. Passing the
place of toll on His way to or from the lake-side,
Jesus:called Matthew to follow Him. The publican
must by this time haveseen and heard much of Jesus,
and could not but keenly feel His grace in calling one
whom men despised. Without an instant’s delay,
he left all, and followed Jesus. From publican,
Matthew became apostle, then evangelist.

(2) The feast.—Then, or after, in the joy of his
heart, Matthew made a feast for Jesus. To this
feast be invited many of his own class—‘‘publicans
and sinners” (Mt 9 10). Scribes and Pharisees
were loud in their remonstrances to the disciples at
what seemed to them an outrage on all propriety.
Narrow hearts cannot understand the breadth of
grace. Christ’s reply was conclusive: ‘They that
are whole have no need of a physician, but they
that are sick,” etc (Mk 2 17, etc).

(8) Fasting and joy.—Another line of objection
was encountered from disciples of the Baptist.
They, like the Pharisees, ‘fasted oft”? (Mt 9 14),
and they took exception to the unconstrained way
in which Jesus and His disciples entered into social
life. Jesus defends His disciples by adopting a
metaphor of John’s own (Jn 3 29), and speaking
of Himself as the heavenly bridegroom (Mk 2 19).
Joy was natural while the bridegroom was with
them; then, with a sad forecast of the end, He
alludes to days of mourning when the bridegroom
should be taken away (ver 20). A deeper answer
follows. The spirit of His gospel is a free, spon-
taneous, sonal, spirit, and cannot be confined
within the old forms. To attempt to confine His
religion within the outworn forms of Judaism would
be like putting a patch of undressed cloth on an
old garment, or pouring new wine into old wine-
skins. The garment would be rent; the wine-
skins would burst (vs 21.22 ||). The new spirit
must make forms of its own.

At this point is probably to be introduced the
visit to Jerus to attend “a feast,’”’ or, according to

another reading, “the feast’? of the
3. The Un- Jews, recorded in Jn 6. The feast
named may, if the article ig admitted, have
Jerusalem been the Passover (April), though in
Feast that case one would expect it to be
(jn 68) named; it may have been Purim

(March), only this is not a feast Jesus
might be thought eager to attend; it may even have
been Pentecost (June). In this last case it would
succeed the Sabbath controversies to be mentioned
later. Fortunately, the determination of the actual
feast has little bearing on the teaching of the
chapter.


‘Bethesda (‘house of mercy”) was the name given
to a pool, fed by an intermittent spring, possessing
healing properties, which was situated


a) The by the sheep-gate (not “market,” AV),
Healing at i.e. nearthetemple, onthe E. Porches
Bethesda were erected to accommodate the
(vs 1-16) invalids who desired to make trial of


the waters (the mention of the angel,
ver 4, with part of ver 3, is a later gloss, and is
justly omitted in RV). On one of these porches
lay an impotent man. His infirmity was of long
standing—38 years. Hopedeferred was making his
heart sick, for he had no friend, when the waters
were troubled, to put him into the pool. Others
invariably got down before him. Jesus took pity
on this man. He asked him if he would be made
whole; then by a word of power healed him. The
cure was instantaneous (vs 8.9). It was the Sab-
bath day, and as the man, at Christ’s command,
took up his bed to go, he was challenged as doing
that which was unlawful. The healed man, how-
ever, rightly perceived that He who was able to
work so great a cure had authority to say what
should and should not be done on the Sabbath.
Meeting the man after in the temple, Jesus bade him
“sin no more”’—a hint, perhaps, that his previous
infirmity was a result of sinful conduct (ver 14).
Jesus Himself was now challenged by the authori-
ties for breaking the Sabbath. Their strait, arti-
ficial rules would not permit even of
b) Son and acts of mercy on the Sabbath. This
Father (vs_ led, on the part of Jesus, to a momen-
17-29) tous assertion of His Divine dignity.
He first justified Himself by the
example of His Father, who works continually in
the upholding and government of the universe
(ver 17)—the Sabbath is a rest from earthly labors,
for Divine, heavenly labor (Westcott)—then, when
this increased the offence by its suggestion of
“equality” with the Father, so that His life was
threatened (ver 18), He spoke yet more explicitly
of His unique relationship to the Father, and of
the Divine prerogatives 1t conferred upon Him.
The Jews were right: if Jesus were not a Divine
Person, the claims He made would be blasphemous.
Not only was He admitted to intimacy with the
Divine counsel (vs 20.21; ef Mt 11 27), but to
Him, He averred, was committed the Divine power
of giving hfe (vs 21.26), of judgment (vs 22.27), of
resurrection—spiritual resurrection now (vs 24.25),
resurrection at the last day (vs 28.29). It was the
Father's will that the Son should be honored even
as Himself (ver 23).
These stupendous claims are not made without
adequate attestation. Jesus cites a: threefold
witness: (1) the witness of the Bap-


c) The tist, whose testimony they had been
Threefold _ willing for a time to receive (vs 33.35);
Witness (2) the witness of the Father, who by
(vs 30-47) Christ’s works supported His witness


to Himself (vs 36-38); (3) the witness
of the Scriptures, for these, if read with spiritual
discernment, would have led to Him (vs 39.45-47).
Moses, whom they trusted, would condemn them.
Their rejection of Jesus was due, not to want of
light, but to the state of the heart: “I know you,
that ye have not the love of God in yourselves”
(ver 42); ‘“How can ye believe,” ete (ver 44).
Shortly after His return to Galilee, if the order
of events has been rightly apprehended, Jesus
became involved in new disputes with
4. Sabbath the Pharisees about Sabbath-keeping,
Contro- Possibly we hear in these the echoes
versies of the charges brought against Him at
the feast in Judaea. Christ’s conduct,
and the principles involved in His replies, throw
valuable light on the Sabbath institution.


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1642


The first dispute was occasioned by the action
of the disciples in plucking ears of grain and rubbing
them in their hands as they passed

a) Plucking through the grainfields on a Sabbath


of the Ears (the note of time “second-first,’’ in
of Grain Lk 6 1 AV, is omitted in RV. In
(Mt 12:1- any case the ripened grain points to
8; Mk 2: a time shortly after the Passover).
23-28; Lk The law permitted this liberty (Dt
6: 1-6) 23 25), but Pharisaic rigor construed


it into an offence to do the act on the
Sabbath (for specimens of the minute, trivial and
vexations rules by which the Pharisees converted
the Sabbath into a day of wretched constraint, see
Farrar’s Life of Christ, Edersheim’s Jesus the Mes-
siah, and similar works). Jesus, in defending His
disciples, first quotes OT precedents (David and
the showbread, an act done apparently on the
Sabbath, 1 S 216; the priests’ service on the
Sabbath—“One greater than the temple” was
there, Mt 12 6), in illustration of the truth that
necessity overrides positive enactment; next, falls
back on the broad principle of the design of the
Sabbath as made for man—for his highest physical,
mental, moral and spiritual well-being: ‘The
sabbath was made for man,” ete (Mk 2 27). The
claims of mercy are paramount. The end is not to
be sacrificed to the means. The Son of Man,
see asserts lordship over the Sabbath (ver
28 |\).
The second collision took place on “another
sabbath” (Lk 6 6) in the synagogue. There was
present a man with a withered hand.
b) The Man The Pharisees themselves, on this


with the occasion, eager to entrap Jesus, seem
Withered to have provoked the conflict by a
Hand (Mt question, ‘Is it lawful to heal on the
12:10-14; sabbathday?”’ (Mt 12 10). Jesus met
Mk 3:1-6; them by an appeal to their own prac-
Lk 6:6-11) tice in permitting the rescue of a


sheep that had fallen into a pit on the
Sabbath day (vs 11.12), then, bidding the man stand
forth, retorted the question on themselves, ‘Is it
lawful on the sabbath day to do good, or to do
harm? to save a life, or to kill?” (Mk 3 4)—an
allusion to their murderous intents. On no reply
being made, looking on them with holy indignation,
Jesus ordered the man to stretch forth his hand, and
it was at once perfectly restored. The effect was
only to inflame to ‘‘madness” (Lk 6 11) the minds
of His adversaries, and Pharisees and Herodians
(the court-party of Herod) took counsel to destroy
Him (Mk 3 6 |).
Jesus, leaving this scene of unprofitable conflict,
quietly withdrew with His disciples to the shore,
and there continued His work of teach-


c) With- ing and healing. People from all the
drawal to neighboring districts flocked to His
the Sea ministry. He taught them from a


(Mt 12:15- little boat (Mk 3 9), and healed their

21; Mk 3: sick. Mt sees in this a fulfilment of

7-9) the oracle which is to be found in Isa
42 1-4,

The work of Jesus was growing on His hands, and

friends and enemies were rapidly taking sides. The

time accordingly had come for select-


5. The ing and attaching to His person a defi-
Choosing nite number of followers—not simply
of the disciples—who might be prepared to
Twelve carry on His work after His departure.
(Mt 10: This He did in the choice of twelve
1-4; Mk 3: apostles. The choice was made in
13-19; Lk early morning, on the Mount of Beati-
6:12-16; tudes, after a night spent wholly in


Acts 1:13) prayer (Lk 6 12).
“Apostle” means “one sent.” On
the special function of the apostle it is sufficient to


say here that those thus set apart were chosen for
the special end of being Christ’s witnesses and
accredited ambassadors to the world,


a) The able from personal knowledge to bear
Apostolic testimony to what Christ had been,
Function said and done—to the facts of His life,


death and resurrection (cf Acts 1 22.
23; 2 22-32; 3 15; 10 39; 1 Cor 16 3-15, etc);
but, further, as instructed by Him, and endowed
with His Spirit (cf Lk 24 49; Jn 14 16.17.26, etc),
of being the depositaries of His truth, sharers of His
authority (cf Mt 10 1; Mk 3 15), messengers of
His gospel (cf 2 Cor 6 18-21), and His instruments
in laying broad and strong the foundations of His
church (cf Eph 2 20; 3 5). So responsible a calling
was never, before or after, given to mortal men.
Four lists of the apostles are given—in Mt, Mk,
Lk, and Acts (1 13, omitting Judas). The names
are given alike in all, except that
b) The “Judas, the son for brother] of James”
Lists (Lk 6 16; Acts 1 13) is called by Mt
“Lebbaeus,” and by Mk ‘‘Thaddaeus.”
The latter names are cognate in meaning, and all
denote the same person. ‘‘Bartholomew” (son of
Tolmai) is probably the Nathanael of Jn 1 47 (cf
21 2). The epithet ‘‘Cananaean” (Mt 10 4; Mk
3 18) marks “Simon” as then or previously a mem-
ber of the party of the Zealots (Lk 6 15). In all
the lists Peter, through his gifts of leadership, stands
first; Judas Iscariot, the betrayer, stands last.
There is a tendency to arrangement in pairs: Peter
and Andrew; James and John; Philip and Bartholo-
mew; Thomas and Matthew; lastly, James, the son
of Alphaeus, Judas, son or brother of James, Simon
the Zealot and Judas Iscariot. The list contains two
pairs of brothers (three, if “brother” be read with
Judas), and at least one pair of friends (Philip and
Nathanael).
All the apostles were men from the humbler ranks,
yet not illiterate, and mostly comfortably circum-
stanced. All were Galileans, except
c) The Men the betrayer, whose name “Iscariot”
i.e. ‘man of Kerioth,” marks him as a
Judaean. Of some of the apostles we know a good
deal; of others very little; yet we are warranted
in speaking of them all, Judas excepted, as men of
honest minds, and sincere piety. The band held
within it a number of men of strongly contrasted
types of character. Allusion need only be made to
the impetnous Peter, the contemplative John,
the matter-of-fact Philip, the cautious Thomas, the
zealous Simon, the conservative Matthew, the ad-
ministrative Judas. The last-named—Iscariot—
is the dark problem of the apostolate. We have
express testimony that Jesns knew him from the
beginning (Jn 6 64). YetHechosehim. Thechar-
acter of Judas, when Jesus received him, was doubt-
less undeveloped. He could not himself suspect the
dark possibilities that slept in it. His association
with the apostles, in itself considered, was for his
good. His peculiar gift was, for the time, of service.
In choosing him, Jesus must be viewed as acting
for, and under the direction of, the Father (Jn 5 19;
17 12). See special arts. on the several apostles.
HE. From the Sermon on the Mount till the Par-
ables of the Kingdom—a Second Circuit—The
choice of the apostles inaugurates a
1. The new period of Christ’s activity. ltsfirst
Sermon on most precious fruit was the delivery to
the Mount the apostles and the multitudes who
_ thronged Him as He came down from
the mountain (Lk 6 17) of that great manifesto of
His kingdom popularly known as the Sermon on the
Mount. The hill is identified by Stanley (Sinai
and Pal, 368) and others with that known as ‘‘the
Horns of Hattin,’ where “the level place” at the
top, from which Christ would come down from one


1643


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


—_H_ >TO


of the higher horns, exactly suits the conditions of
the narrative. The sick being healed, Jesus seated
Himself a little higher up, His disciples near Him,
aud addressed the assembly (cf Mt 7 28.29). The
season of the year is shown by the mention of the
‘Tilies” to be the summer.

Its scope—His words were weighty. His aim
was at the outset to set forth in terms that were un-
mistakable the principles, aims and dispositions of
His kingdom; to expound its laws; to exhibit its
righteousness, both positively, and in contrast with
Pharisaie formalism and hypoerisy. Only the lead-
ing ideas can he indicated here (see BraTrTupEs;
Sermon on Mount; Etutcs or Jesus), Matthew,
as is his wont, groups material part of which is found
in other conneetions in Lk, but it is well to study
the whole in the well-ordered form in which it ap-
pears in the First Gospel.

In marked contrast with the lawgiving of Sinai,
Christ’s first words are those of blessing. Passing

at once to the dispositions of the heart,


a) The He shows on what inner conditions the
Blessings _ blessings of the kingdom depend. His
(Mt 5:1- _ beatitudes (poverty of spirit, mourning,
6; Lk 6 meekness, hunger and thirst after
20-26) righteousness, etc) reverse all the

world’s standards of judgment on such
matters. In the possession of these graces consists


true godliness of eharacter; through them the heirs
of the kingdom beeome the salt of the earth, the light
of the world. The obligation rests on them to let
their light shine (cf Mk 4 21-23; Lk 8 16; 11 33).
Jesus defines His relation to the old law—not a
Destroyer, but a Fulfiller—and proceeds to exhibit
the nature of the true righteousness
b) True in eontrast to Pharisaic literality and
Righteous- formalism. Through adherence to the
ness—the latter they killed the spirit of the law.
Old and the With an absolute authority—“But I
New Law say unto you”—Jesus leads every-
(Mt 6:17— thing back from the outward letter to
48; Lk 6: the state of the heart. Illustrations
27-36) are taken from murder, adultery,
swearing, retaliation, hatred of ene-
mies, and a spiritual expansion is given to every
precept. The sinful thought or desire holds in it
the essence of transgression. The world’s stand-
ards are again reversed in the demands for non-
resistanee to injuries, love of enemies and requital
of good for evil. i
Pursuing the contrast between the true right-
eousness and that of the scribes and Pharisees,
Jesus next draws attention to motive
c) Religion in religion. The Pharisees erred not


and Hy- simply in having regard only to the
pocrisy— letter of the Law, but in acting in
True and morals and religion from a false motive.
False Mo- He had furnished the antidote to their


tive (Mt 6: literalism; He now assails their osten-
1-18; cf Lk tation and hypocrisy. Illustrations
11: 1-8) are taken from almsgiving, prayer and
fasting, and in connection with prayer
the Lord’s Prayer 1s given as a model (Lk intro-
duces this in another context, 11 1-4).
The true motive in religious acts is to please God;
the same motive should guide us in the choice of
what is to be our supreme good.
d) The True Earthly treasure is not to be put above
Good and heavenly. The kingdom of God and
Cure for His righteousness are to be first in our
Care (Mt 6: desires. The eye is to besingle. The


19-34; cf true cure for worldly anxiety is then
Lk 11: found in trust of the heavenly Father.
34-36; 12: His children are more to God than
22-34) fowls and flowers, for whom His care


in Nature is so conspicuously manifest.
Seeking first the kingdom they have a pledge—no


higher conecivable—that all else they need will be
granted along with it (this seetion on trust, again,

Lk places differently, 12 22-34).
Jesus finally proeeeds to.speak of the relation of
the disciple to the evil of the world. That evil has
been considered in its hostile attitude


e) Relation to the diseiple (Mt 5 38 ff); the ques-
to the tion is now as to the disciple’s free rela-
World’s tions toward it. Jesus ineuleates the
Evil—the duties of the disciple’s bearing himself
Conclusion wisely toward evil—with charity, with ‘
(Mt 7:1-  eaution, with prayer, in the spirit: of
29; Lk 6: ever doing as one would be done by—
87-49; cf and of being on his guard against it.
11:9-13) The temptation is great to follow the


worldly crowd, to be misled by false
teachers, to put profession for praetice. Against
these perils the disciple is energetically warned.
True religion will ever be known by its fruits. The
discourse closes with the powerful similitude of the
wise and foolish builders. Again, as on an earlier
occasion, Christ’s auditors were astonished at His
teaching, and at the authority with which He spoke
(Mt 7 28.29).
A series of remarkable incidents are next to be
noticed.
(1) The healing of the centurion’s servant ap-
parently took place on the same day as the delivery
of the Sermon on the Mount (Lk 7


2. Inter- 1.2). It had been a day of manifold
vening and exhausting labors for Jesus. A
Incidents walk of perhaps 7 miles brought Him


back to Capernaum, the crowds ac-
companying. Yet no sooner, on His return, does
He hear a new appeal for help than His love replies,
“T will eome and heal him.” The
a) Healing suppliant was a Rom centurion—one
of the Cen- who had endeared himself to the Jews
turion’s (Lk 7 5)—and the request was for the
Servant healing of a favorite servant, paralyzed
(Mt 8:1.5- and tortured with pain. First, a depu-
18; Lk 7: tation sought Christ’s good offices,
1-10) then, when Jesus was on the way, a
seeond message eame, awakening even
Christ’s astonishment by the magnitude of its faith.
The centurion felt he was not worthy that Jesus
should come under his roof, but let Jesus speak the
word only, and his servant would be healed. “TI
have not found so great faith,’ Jesus said, ‘no,
not in Israel.” The word was spoken, and, on the
return of the messengers, the servant was found
healed.
The exciting events of this day gathered so great
a crowd round the house where Jesus was as left
Him no leisure even to eat, and His
b) The friends, made anxious for His health,
Widow of sought to restrain Him (Mk 3 20.21).
Nain’s Son It was probably to escape from this
Raised (Lk local excitement that Jesus, “soon
7:11-17) — afterwards,” is found at the little town
: of Nain, a few miles 8.E. of Nazareth.
A great multitude still followed Him. Here, as He
entered the city, occurred the most wonderful of
the works He had yet wrought. A young man—the
only son of a widowed mother—was heing carried
out for burial. Jesus,in compassion, stopped the
mournful procession, and, in the ealm certainty of
His word Bene obeyed, bade the young man arise.
On the instant life returned, and Jesus gave the son
back to his mother. The amazement of the people
was tenfold intensified. They felt that the old days
had comeback: that God had visited His people.
It was apparently during the journey or eircuit
which embraced this visit to Nain, and as the result
of the fame it brought to Jesus (Lk 7 17.18; note
the allusion to the dead being raised in Christ’s
reply to John), that the embassy was sent from the .


Jesus Christ


Baptist in prison to ask of Jesus whether He
was indeed He who should come, or would they look

for another. It was a strange question
c) Embassy on the lips of the forerunner, but is
of John’s probably to be interpreted as the ex-
Disciples— pression of perplexity rather than of
Christ and actualdoubt. Thereseems no question
His Gen- but that John’s mind had been thrown
eration (Mt into serious difficulty by the reports
11:2-30; which had reached him of the work
Lk 7: 18-35) of Jesus. Things were not turning out

as he expected. It was the peaceful,
merciful character of Christ’s work which stumbled
John. The gloom of his prison wrought with his
disappointment, and led him to send this message
for the satisfaction of himself and his disciples.

(1) Christ’s answer to John.—If doubt there was,
Jesus treated it tenderly. He did not answer di-
rectly, but bade the two disciples who had been sent
go back and tell John the things they had seen and
heard—the blind receiving their sight, the lame
walking, the deaf cured, the dead raised, the Gospel
preached. Little doubt the Messiah had come when
works like these—the very works predicted by the
prophets (Isa 35 5.6)—were being done. Blessed
were those who did not find occasion of stumbling
in Him. Jesus, however, did more. By his em-
bassy John had put himself in a somewhat false po-
sition before the multitude. But Jesus would not
have His faithful follower misjudged. His was no
fickle spirit. Jesus nobly vindicated him as a
prophet and more than a prophet; yea, a man than
whom a greater had not lived. Yet, even as the
new dispensation was higher than the old, one “‘but
little” in the kingdom of heaven—one sharing
Christ’s humble, loving, self-denying disposition—
was greater even than John (Mt 11 11).

(2) A perverse people—Christ’s grace-—The im-
plied contrast between Himself and John led Jesus
further to denounce the perverse spirit of His own
generation. The Pharisees and lawyers (Lk 7 30)
had rejected John; they were as little pleased with
Him. Their behavior was like children objecting
to one game because it was merry, and to another
because it was sad. The flood of outward popu-
larity did not deceive Jesus. The cities in which
His greatest works were wrought—Chorazin, Beth-
saida, Capernaum—remained impenitent at heart.
The heavier would be their judgment; worse even
than that on Tyre and Sidon, or on Sodom itself.
Over against their unbelief Jesus reasserts His dig-
nity and declares His grace (Mt 11 25-30). All
authority was His; He alone knew and could reveal
the Father (mo claims in Jn are higher). Let the
heavy laden come to Him, and He would give them
rest (parts of these passages appear in another con-
nection in Lk 10 12-21).

Yet another beautiful incident connected with
this journey is preserved by Lk—the anointing of

Jesus in Simon’s house by a woman
d) The who was a sinner. In Nain or some
First other city visited by Him, Jesus was
Anointing— invited to dine with a Pharisee named
the Woman Simon. His reception was a cold one
Who Wasa (vs 4446). During the meal, a
Sinner (Lk woman of the city, an outcast from
7:36-60) respectable society—one, however, as

the story implies, whose heart Jesus
had reached, and who, filled with sorrow, love,
shame, penitence, had turned from her life of sin,
entered the chamber. There, bathing Christ’s
feet with her tears, wiping them with her tresses, and
imprinting on them fervent kisses, she anointed
them with a precious ointment she had brought with
her. Simon was scandalized. Jesus could not be
a right-thinking man, much less a prophet, or He
. would have rebuked this misbehavior from such


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1644


a person. Jesus met the thought of Simon’s heart
by speaking to him the parable of the Two Debtors
(vs 41.42). Of two men who had been freely for-
given, one 500, the other 50 shillings, which would
love his creditor most? Simon gave the obvious
answer, and the contrast between his own reception
of Jesus and the woman’s passionate love was
immediately pointed out. Her greater love was
due to the greater forgiveness; though, had Simon

only seen it, he perhaps needed for-
3. Second giveness even more than she. Her


Galilean faith saved her and she was dismissed
Circuit— inpeace. But again the question arose,
Events at ‘Who is this that even forgiveth sins?”
Capernaum Luke introduces here (Lk 8 1-4) a
(Lk 8:1~4. second Galilean circuit of Jesus, after
19-21; Mt the return from which a new series
12:22-50; of exciting incidents took place at Ca-
Mk 3:22- pernaum.

35; cf Lk The circuit was an extensive one—
11:14-36) “went about through cities and villages


(lit. “according to city and village”J,
preaching.” During this journey Jesus was attended
by the Twelve, and by devoted women (Mary

_ Magdalene, Joanna, wife of Herod’s
a) Galilee steward, Susanna, and others), who
Revisited ministered to Him of their substance
(LE 8:1-4) (vs 2.3). At the close of this circuit

Jesus returned to Capernaum.

Jesus, no doubt, wrought numerous miracles on
demoniacs (cf Lk 8 1.2; out of Mary Magdalene

He is said to have cast 7 demons—per-
b) Cure of haps a form of speech to indicate the
Demoniac— severity of the possession). Thedemo-


Discourse niac now brought to Jesus was blind
on Blas- and dumb. Jesus cured him, with the
phemy double result that the people were


filled with amazement: ‘Can this
be the son of David?” (Mt 12 23), while the Phari-
sees blaspbhemed, alleging that Jesus cast out
demons by the help of Beelzebub (Gr Beelzeboul),
the prince of the demons (see s.v.). A quite
similar incident is narrated in Mt 9 32-34; and
Lk gives the discourse that follows in a later con-
nection (11 14 ff). The accusation may well have
been repeated more than once. Jesus, in reply,
points out, first, the absurdity of supposing Satan
to be engaged in warring against his own kingdom
(Mt 18 25 ff |; here was plainly a stronger than
Satan); then utters the momentous word about
blasphemy against the Holy Spirit. All other
blasphemies—even that against the Son of Man (Mt
12 32)—may be forgiven, for they may proceed
from ignorance and misconception; but deliberate,
perverse rejection of the light, and attributing to
Satan what was manifestly of God, was a sin which,
when matured—and the Pharisees came perilously
near committing it—admitted of no forgiveness,
either in this world or the next, for the very
capacity for truth in the soul was by such sin
destroyed. Mk has the strong phrase, “is guilty
of an eternal sin’ (3 29). Pertinent words follow
as to the root of good and evil in character (Mt
12 33-37). See BuaspHemy,

The sign of Jonah.—Out of this discourse arose
the usual Jewish demand for a “sign” (Mt 12 38;
ef Lk 11 29-32), which Jesus met by declaring
that no sign would be given but the sign of the
prophet Jonah—an allusion to His future resurrec-
tion. He reiterates His warning to the people of
His generation for their rejection of greater light
than had been enjoyed by the Ninevites and the
Queen of Sheba.

, Two incidents, not dissimilar in character,
interrupted this discourse—one the cry of a woman
in the audience (if the time be the same, Lk 11 27.
28), “Blessed is the womb that bare thee,” etc,


1645


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


to which Jesus replied, ‘Yea rather, blessed are they
that hear the word of Gad, and keep it’”’; the other,
a message that His mother and brethren

ce) Christ’s (doubtless anxious for His safety) de-
Mother and sired to speak with Him. To this,
Brethren _— stretching out His hand toward His
disciples, Jesus answered, ‘Behold,

my mother and my brethren” (Mk 3 34), etc.
Kinship in the spiritual kingdom consists in fidelity
to the will of God, not in ties of earthly relationship.
On the same day on which the preceding dis-
courses were delivered, Jesus, seeing the multitudes,
passed to the shore, and entering a

4. Teaching boat, inaugurated a new method in


in Parables His public teaching. This was the
(Mt 13:1~ speaking in parables. Similitude,
52; Mk 4: metaphor, always entered into the
1-34; Lk teaching of Jesus (cf Mt 7 24-27),
8:4-16; 13: and parable has once been met with
18-21) (Lk T 41.42); now parable is sys-


tematically employed as a means of
imparting and illustrating important truths, while
yet veiling them from those whose minds were
hostile and unreceptive (Mk 4 10-12; Lk 8 9.10).
The parable thus at once reveals and conceals. The
motive of this partially veiled teaching was the
growing hostility of the Pharisees. In its nature
the parable (from a verb signifying “to place side
by side”) is a representation in some form of earthly
analogy of truths relating to Divine and eternal
things (see ParaBLE). The parables of the king-
dom brought together in Mt 13 form an invaluable
series, though not all were- spoken in public (cf
Mt 13 36-52), and some may belong to a later
occasion (cf Lk 18 18-21). Mk adds the parable
of the Seed Growing Secretly (4 26-29). Of three
of the parables (the Sower, the Tares, the Dragnet),
Jesus Himself gives the interpretation.

Parables of the kingdom.—In series the parables
at once mirror the origin, mixed character and
development of the kingdom in its present imper-
fect earthly condition, and the perfection which
awaits it after the crisis at the end. In the parable
of the Sower is represented the origin of the kingdom
in the good seed of the word, and the varied soils
on which that seed falls; in the Seed Growing
Secretly, the law of orderly growth in the kingdom;
in the parable of the Tares, the mixed character
of the subjects of the kingdom; in those of the
Mustard Seed and Leaven, the progress of the
kingdom—external growth, internal transformative
effect; in those of the Treasure and Pearl the finding
and worth of the kingdom; in that of the Dragnet
the consummation of the kingdom. Jesus compares
His disciples, if they understand these things, to
householders bringing out of their treasure “things
new and old” (Mt 13 52).

IV. From the Crossing to Gadara to the Mission
of the Twelve—a Third Circuit.—It was _on the

evening of the day on which He spoke


1. Crossing the parables—though the ee oHoloey
of the Lake of the incident seems unknown to L
—Stillmg (8 22)—that Jesus bade His disciples
of the cross over to the other side of the
Storm (Mt lake. At this juncture He was accosted
8:18-27; by an aspirant for discipleship. Mat-
Mk 4:36- thew gives two cases of aspirants;
41; Lk 8: Luke (but in a different connection,
22-25; cf 9 57-62), three. Luke’s connection
9:57-62) (departure from Galilee) is perhaps


preferable for the second and third;
but the three may be considered together.

The three aspirants may be distinguished as, (a)
The forward disciple: he who in an atmosphere of
enthusiasm offered himself under impulse, without
counting the cost. The zeal of this would-be
follower Jesus checks with the pathetic words, ‘The


foxes have holes,” etc (Mt 8 20; Lk 9 58. (6)
The procrastinating disciple. The first candidate
needed repression; the second needs im-
a) Aspirants pulsion. He would follow Jesus, but
for Dis- jirst let him bury hisfather. There had
cipleship come a crisis, however, when the Lord’s
claim was paramount: “Leave the
dead to bury their own dead” (Mt 8 22). There
are at times higher claims than mere natural rela-
tionships, to which, in themselves, Jesus was the last
to be indifferent. (c) The wavering disciple. The
third disciple is again one who offers himself, but
his heart was too evidently still with the things at
home. Jesus, again, lays His finger on the weak
spot, ‘‘No man, having put his hand to the plow,
and looking back,” ete (Lk 9 62). As mentioned,
the latter two cases tally better with a final depar-
ture from Galilee than with a temporary crossing
of the lake.
The inland lake was exposed to violent and
sudden tempests. One of these broke on the dis-
ciples’ boat as they sailed across.


b) The Everyone’s life seemed in jeopardy.
Storm Jesus, meanwhile, in calmest repose,
Calmed was asleep on a cushion in the stern


(Mk 4 38). The disciples woke Him
almost rudely: ‘‘Teacher, carest thou not that we
perish?” Jesus at once arose, and, reproving their
want of faith, rebuked wind and waves (‘‘Peace, be
still”). Immediately there was a great calm. It
was a new revelation to the disciples of the majesty
of their Master. ‘Who then is this, that even the
wind and the sea obey him?”’

The lake being crossed, Jesus and His disciples
came into the country of the Gadarenes (Mt),
or Gerasenes (Mk, Lk)—Gadara being


2. The the capital of the district (on the to-
Gadarene  pography, cf Stanley, Sinai and Pal,
(Gerasene) 380-81). From the lake shore rises a
Demoniac mountain in which are ancient tombs.
(Mt 8:28- Here Jesus was met by a demoniac
34; Mk 5: (Mt mentions two demoniacs:

1-20,Lk 8: Henry’s quaint comment is, “If there
26-39) were two, there was one.” Possibly


one was the fiercer of the two, the other
figuring only as his companion). The man, as de-
scribed, was a raving maniac of the worst type (Mk
5 3-5), dwelling in the tombs, wearing no clothes
(Lk 8 27), of supernatural strength, wounding
himself, shrieking, etc. Really possessed by ‘an
unclean spirit,’ his consciousness was as if he were
indwelt by a “legion” of demons, and from that
consciousness he addressed Jesus as the Son of
God come for their tormenting. In what follows
it is difficult to distinguish what belongs to the
broken, incoherent consciousness of the man, and
the spirit or spirits who spake through him. In
the question, “What is thy name?” (Mk 6 9)
Jesus evidently seeks to arouse the victim’s shat-
tered soul to some sense of its own individuality.
On Jesus commanding the unclean spirit to leave
the man, the request was made that the demons
might be permitted to enter a herd of swine feeding
near. The reason of Christ’s permission, with its
result in the destruction of the herd (“rushed down
the steep into the sea”) need not be too closely
scrutinized. It may have had an aspect of judg-
ment on the (possibly) Jewish holders of the swine;
or it may have had reference to the victim of the
possession, as enabling him to realize his deliver-
ance. Whatever the difficulties of the narrative,
none of the rationalistic explanations afford any
sensible relief from them. The object of the miracle
may be to exclude rationalistic explanations, by
giving a manifest attestation of the reality of the
demon influence. When the people of the city
came they found the man fully restored—‘clothed


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1646


and in his right mind.” Yet, with fatal short-
sightedness, they besought Jesus to depart from
their borders. The man was sent home to declare
to his friends the great things the Lord had done

to him.
Repelled by the Gerasenes, Jesus received a
warm welcome on His return to Capernaum on
the western shore (Mk 6 21). It was


8. Jairus’ probably at this point that Matthew
Daughter gave the feast formerly referred to.

Raised— It was in connection with this feast,
Woman Matthew himself informs us (9 18),


with Issue _ that Jairus, one of the rulers of the
of Blood (Mt synagogue, made his appeal for help.


9:18-26; His little daughter, about 12 years
Mk 6:21- old (Lk 8 42), was at the point of
43; Lk 8: death; indeed, while Jesus was coming,
40-56) she died. The ruler’s faith, though


real, was not equal to the centurion’s,
who believed that Jesus could heal without being


present. Jesus came, and having expelled the pro-
fessional mourners, in sacred privacy,
a) Jairus’ only the father and mother, with Peter,


Appeal and James and John being permitted to
Its Result enter the death-chamber, raised the
girl to life. It is the second miracle

on record of the raising from the dead.
On the way to the ruler’s house occurred another


wonder—a miracle within a miracle. A poor

woman, whose case was a specially
b) The distressing one, alike as regards the
Afflicted nature of her malady, the length of
Woman its continuance, and the fruitlessness of
Cured her application to the physicians, crept


up to Jesus, confident that if she
could but touch the border of His garment, she
would be healed. The woman was ignorant; her
faith was blended with superstition; but Jesus,
reading the heart, gave ber the benefit she desired.
It was His will, however, that, for her own good,
the woman thus cured should not obtain the blessing
by stealth. He therefore brought her to open con-
fession, and cheered her by His commendatory word.
At this point begins apparently a new evangelistic
tour (Mt 9 35; Mk 6 6), extending methodically
to “all the cities and villages.” To it
4. Incidents belong in the narratives the healing of
of Third two blind men (cf the case of Barti-
Circuit (Mt maeus, recorded later); the cure of a
9:27-38; demoniac who was dumb—a similar
13:53-58; casetothatin Mt 12 22; and asecond
Mk 6:1-6) rejection at Nazareth (Mt, Mk). The
incident is similar to that in Lk 4
16-30, and shows, if the events are different, that
the people’s hearts were unchanged. Of this cir-
cuit Mt gives an affecting summary (9 35-38), em-
phasizing the Lord’s compassion, and His yearning
tor more laborers to reap the abundant harvest.
Partly with a view to the needs of the rapidly
growing work and the training of the apostles, and
partly as a witness to Israel (Mt 10
5. The 6.23), Jesus deemed it expedient to
Twelve Sent send the Twelve on an independent
Forth—Dis- mission. The discourse in Mt attached


course of to this event seems, as frequently,
Jesus (Mt to be a compilation. Parts of it are
10; Mk 6: given by Luke in connection with the


7-13; Lk 9: mission of the Seventy (Lk 10 1 ff;


1-6; cf Lk the directions were doubtless similar
10:2-24; in both cases); parts on other occasions
12:2-12, (Lk 12 2-12; 21 12-17, etc; cf Mk
etc) 13 9-13).

The Twelve were sent out two by
two. Their work was to be a copy of the Master’s


-—to preach the gospel and to heal the sick. To this
end they were endowed with authority over unclean
spirits, and over all manner of sickness. They were


to go forth free from all encumbrances—no money,
no scrip, no changes of raiment, no staff (save that
in their hand, Mk 6 8), sandals only
a) The on their feet, etc. They were to rely
Commission for support on those to whom they
preached. They were for the present
to confine their ministry to Israel. The saying in
Mt 10 23, “Ye shall not have gone through the
cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come,” ap-
parently has reference to the judgment on the
nation, not to the final coming (cf 16 28).
The mission of the Twelve was the first step of
Christianity as an aggressive force in society. Jesus
speaks of it, accordingly, in the light
b) Counsels of the whole future that was to come
and out of it. He warns His apostles
Warnings faithfully of the dangers that awaited
them; exhorts them to prudence and
circumspection (‘wise as serpents,” etc); holds
out to them Divine promises for consolation; di-
rects them when persecuted in one place to flee to
another; points out to them from His own case that
such persecutions were only to be expected. He
assures them of a coming day of revelation; bids
them at once fear and trust God; impresses on them
the duty of courage in confession; inculcates in
them supreme love to Himself. That love would
be tested in the dearest relations. In itself peace,
the gospel would be the innocent occasion of strife,
enmity and division among men. Those who re-
ceive Christ’s disciples will not fail of their reward.
When Christ. had ended His discourse He pro-
ceeded with His own evangelistic work, leaving the
disciples to inaugurate theirs (Mt 11 1).


Second Period—After the Mission of the Twelve till
the Departure from Galilee


I. From the Death of the Baptist till the Discourse
on Bread of Life.—Shortly before the events now
to be narrated, John the Baptist had

1. The been foully murdered in his prison
Murder of by Herod Antipas at the instigation
the Baptist of Herodias, whose unlawful marriage
and Herod’s with Herod John had unsparingly
Alarms (Mt condemned. Jos gives as the place of


14:1-12; the Baptist’s imprisonment the for-
ME 6:14-__ tress of Machaerus, near the Dead Sea
29; Lk 9: (Ant, XVIII, v, 2); or John may have
7-9; cf 3: been removed to Galilee. Herod
18-20) would ere this have killed John, but

was restrained by fear of the people
(Mt 14 5). The hate of Herodias, however, did


not slumber. Her relentless will contrasts with the
vacillation of Herod, as Lady Macbeth in Shake-
speare contrasts with Macbeth. A birthday feast
gave her the opening she sought for. Her daughter
Salome, pleasing Herod by her dancing, obtained
from him a promise on oath to give her whatever
she asked. Prompted by Herodias, she boldly de-
manded John the Baptist’s head. The weak king
was shocked, but, for his oath’s sake, granted her
what she craved. The story tells how the Baptist’s
disciples reverently buried the remains of their mas-
ter, and went and told Jesus. Herod’s conscience
did not let him rest. When rumors reached him of
a wonderful teacher and miracle-worker in Galilee,
be leaped at once to the conclusion that it was
John risen from the dead. Herod cannot have
heard much of Jesus before. An evil conscience
makes men cowards.

Another Passover drew near (Jn 6 4), but Jesus
did not on this occasion go up to the feast.

Returning from their mission, the apostles re-
ported to Jesus what they had said and done (Lk
9 10); Jesus had also heard of the Baptist’s fate,
and of Herod’s fears, and now proposed to His
disciples a retirement to a desert place across the


1647


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


lake, near Bethsaida (on the topography, ef Stanley,
op. cit., 375, 381). As it proved, however, the mul-
titudes had observed their departure,
2. The and, running round the shore, were at
Feeding of the place before them (Mk 6 38).
the Five The purpose of rest was frustrated,
Thousand but Jesus did not complain. He pitied
(Mt 14:13- the shepherdless state of the people,
21; Mk 6: and went out to teach and heal them.
30-44; Lk The day wore on, and the disciples sug-
9:10-17; gested that the fasting multitudeshould
Jn 6:1-14) disperse, and seek victualsin the nearest
towns and villages. This Jesus, who
had already proved Philip by asking how the people
should be fed (Jn 6 5), would not permit. With
the scanty provision at command—d loaves and 2
fishes—He fed the whole multitude. By His bless-
ing the food was multiplied till all were satisfied,
and 12 baskets of fragments, carefully collected, re-
mained over. It was a stupendous act of creative
power, no rationalizing of which can reduce it to
natural dimensions.
The enthusiasm created by this miracle was in-
tense (Jn 6 14). Mt and Mk relate (Lk here falls for
a time out of the Synopsis) that Jesus
3. Walking hurriedly constrained His disciples to
on the Sea enter into their boat and recross the
(Mt 14:22— lake—this though a storm was gath-
33; Mk 6: ering—while He Himself remained in
45-52; Jn the mountainalonein prayer. Jngives
6:16-21) the key to this action in the statement
: that the people were about to take
Him by force and make Him a king (ver 15). Three
hours after midnight found the disciples still in the
midst of the lake, “distressed in rowing” (Mk 6 48),
deeply anxious because Jesus was not, as on a former
occasion, with them. At last, at the darkest hour
of their extremity, Jesus was seen approaching in a
way unlooked-for—walking on the water. Every
new experience of Jesus was a surprise to the disci-
ples. They were at first terrified, thinking they saw
a spirit, but straightway the well-known voice was
heard, “Be of good cheer: it is I; be not afraid.”
In the rebound of his feelings the impulsive Peter
asked Jesus to permit him to come to Him on the
water (Mt). Jesus said “‘Come,” and for the first
moment or two Peter did walk on the water; then,
as he realized his unwonted situation, his faith failed,
and he began to sink. Jesus, with gentle chiding,
caught him, and assisted him back into the boat.
Once again the sea was calmed, and the disciples
found themselves safely at land. To their adoring
minds the miracle of the loaves was eclipsed by this
new marvel (Mk 6 52). ;
On the return to Gennesaret the sick from all
quarters were brought to Jesus—the commence-
ment apparently of a new, more general


4. Gennes- ministry of healing (Mk 6 56). Mean-
aret—Dis- while—here we depend on Jn—the
course on people on the other side of the lake,
the Bread when they found that Jesus was gone,
of Life (Mt took boats hastily, and came over to
14:34-36; Capernaum. They found Jesus ap-
Mk 6:53- parently in the synagogue (ver 59). In
56; Jn6: reply to their query, ‘Rabbi, when
22-71) camest thou hither?” Jesus first rebuked


the motive which led them to follow
Him—not because they had seen in His miracles
“sions” of higher blessings, but because they had
eaten of the loaves and were filled (ver 26)—then
spoke to them His great discourse on the bread from
heaven. “Work,” He said, “for the food which
abideth unto eternal life, which the Son of man shall
give unto you” (ver 27). When asked to authenti-
cate His claims by a sign from heaven like the manna,
He replied that the manna also (given not by Moses
but by God) was but typical bread, and surprised


them by declaring that He Himself was the true
bread of life from heaven (vs 35.51). The bread
was Christ’s flesh, ‘given for the life of the world;
His fiesh and blood must be eaten and drunk (a
spiritual appropriation through faith, ver 63), if
men were to have eternal life. Jesus of set purpose
had put His doctrine in a strong, testing manner.
The time had come when His hearers must make
their choice between a spiritual acceptance of Him
and a break with Him altogether. What He had
said strongly offended them, both on account of the
claims implied (ver 42), and on account of the doc-
trine taught, which, they were plainly told, they
could not receive because of their carnality of heart
(vs 43.44.61-64). Many, therefore, went back and
walked no more with Him (vs 60.61.66); but their
defection only evoked from the chosen Twelve a yet
more confident confession of their faith. ‘Would ye
also go away?”

Peter's first confession.—Peter, as usual, spoke for
the rest: “Lord, to whom shall we go? .. . . We
have believed and know that thou art the Holy One
of God” (ver 69). Here, and not first at- Caesarea,
Philippi (Mt 16 16), is Peter’s brave confession of
his Master’s Messiahship. Twelve thus confessed
Him, but even of this select. circle Jesus was com-
Poy to say, “One of you [Judas] is a devil” (Jn 6
70.71).

IL From Disputes with the Pharisees till the
Transfiguration—The discourse in Capernaum
seems to mark a turning-point in the Lord’s minis-
try in Galilee. Soon after we find Him ceasing from
public teaching, and devoting Himself to the in-
struction of His apostles (Mt 15 21; Mk 7 24, etc).

Meanwhile, that Christ’s work in Galilee was at-
tracting the attention of the central authorities, is

shown by the fact that scribes and


1. Jesus Pharisees came up from Jerus to watch
and Tradi- Him. They speedily found ground of
tion—Out- complaint against Him in His uncon-
ward and ventional ways and His total disregard
Inward of the traditions of the elders. They
Purity (Mt specially blamed Him for allowing His
15:1-20; disciples to eat bread with “common,”


Mk& 7:1-23) i.e. unwashen hands. Here was a
point on which the Pharisees laid great
gtress (Mk 7 3.4). Ceremonial ablutions (washing
“diligently,” Gr “with the fist”; “‘baptizings” of
person and things) formed a large part of their re-
ligion. These washings were part of the “oral tra-
dition” said to have been delivered to Moses, and
transmitted by a succession of elders. Jesus set
all this ceremonialism aside. It was part of the
“hypocrisy” of the Pharisees (Mk 7 6). When
questioned regarding it, He drew a sharp distinc-
tion between God’s commandment in the Scriptures
and man’s tradition, and accused the Pharisees (in-
stancing “Corban” [q.v.], in support, vs 10-12) of
making “void” the former through the latter. This
led to the wider question of wherein real defilement
consisted. Christ’s rational position here is that,
it did not consist in anything outward, as in meats,
but consisted in what came from within the man:
as Jesus explained afterward, in the outcome of his
heart or moral life: “Out of the heart of men evil
thoughts proceed,” etc (vs 20-23). Christ’s saying
was in effect the abrogation of the old ceremonial
distinctions, as Mk notes: “making all meats clean”
(ver 19). The Pharisees, naturally, were deeply
offended at His sayings, but Jesus was unmoved.
Every plant not of the Father’s planting must be
rooted up (ver 13). °
From this point Jesus appears, in order to escape
notice, to have made journeys privately from place
to place. His first retreat was to the borders, or
neighborhood, of Tyre and Sidon. From Mk 7 31
it is to be inferred that He entered the heathen ter-


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1648


ritory. He could not, however, be hid (Mk 7 24).
It was not long ere, in the house into which He
had entered, there reached Him the


2. Retire- cry of human distress. A woman came
ment to to Him, a Greek (or Gentile, Greek-
Tyre and speaking), but Syrophoenician by race.
Sidon—the Her “‘little daughter” was grievously


Syrophoeni- afflicted with an evil spirit. Flinging
cian Woman herself at His feet, and addressing
(Mt 15:21- Him as “‘Son of David,” she besought
98; Mk 7: His mercy for her child. At first
24-30) Jesus seemed—yet only seemed—to
repel her, speaking of Himself as sent
only to the lost sheep of Israel, and of the un-
meetness of giving the children’s loaf to the dogs
(the Gr softens the expression, ‘‘the little dogs’’).
With a beautiful urgency which won for her the boon
she sought, the woman seized on the word as an argu-
ment in her favor. ‘ven the dogs under the table
eat. of the children’s crumbs.’”’ The child at Jesus’
word was restored.
Christ’s second retreat was to Decapolis—the
district of the ten cities—E. of the Jordan. Here
also He was soon discovered, and
3. At Decap- followed by the multitude. Sufferers
olis—New were brought to Him, whom He


Miracles cured (Mt 15 30). Later, He fed the
(Mt 15: 29- crowds.

39; Mk 7: The miracle of the deaf man is at-
31-37; 8: tested only by Mk. The patient was
1-10) doubly afflicted, being deaf, and having


an impediment in hisspeech. The cure
presents several peculiarities—its privacy (ver 33);
the actions of Jesusin putting his fingers into his ears,
etc (a mode of speech by signs to the
a) The Deaf deaf man); His “sign,’’ accompanied
Man (Mk _ with prayer, doubtless occasioned by
7:32-37) something in the man’s look; the word
Ephphathd (ver 34)—‘Be opened.”
The charge to those present not to blazon the deed
abroad was disregarded. Jesus desired no cheap
popularity.
The next miracle closely resembles the feeding of
the Five Thousand at Bethsaida, but the place and
: numbers are different; 4,000 instead of
b) Feeding 5,000; 7 loaves and a few fishes, in-
of Four
Thousand of fragments instead of 12 (Mark’s term
(Mt 15:32- denotes a larger basket). There is no
39; Mk 8: reason for doubting the distinction of
1-9) the Thee (cf Mt 16 9.10; Mk 8
19.20).
Returning to the plain of Gennesaret (Magdala,
Mt 16 39 AV; parts of Dalmanutha, Mk 8 10),
Jesus soon found Himself assailed by
4. Leaven His old adversaries. Pharisees and
of the Phari-Sadducees were now united. They


sees, etc— came “trying” Jesus, and asking from
Cure of Him a “sign from heaven’—some
Blind Man signal Divine manifestation. ‘Sigh-
(Mt 16:1- ing deeply” (Mk) at their caviling
12; Mk 8: spirit, Jesus repeated His word about
11-26) the sign of Jonah. The times in


which they lived were full of signs,
if they, so proficient in weather signs, could only see
them. To be rid of such questioners, Jesus anew
took boat to Bethsaida. On the way He warned
His disciples against the leaven of the spirit they
had just encountered. The disciples misunder-
stood, thinking that Jesus referred to their for-
getfulness in not taking bread (Mark states in his
graphic way that they had only one loaf). The
leaven Christ referred to, in fact, represented three
spirits: (1) the Pharisaic leaven—formalism and
hypocrisy; (2) the Sadducean leaven—rationalistic
skepticism; (3) the Herodian leaven (Mk 8 15)—
political expediency and temporizing. Arrived at


stead of 5 loaves and 2 fishes; 7 baskets:


Bethsaida, a miracle was wrought on a blind man
resembling in some of its features the cure of the
deaf man at Decapolis. In both cases Jesus took


| the patients apart; in both physical means were


used—the spittle (“spit on his eyes,’ Mk 8 23);
in both there was strict injunction not to noise the
cure abroad. Another peculiarity was the gradual-
ness of the cure. It is probable that the man had
not been blind from his birth, else he could hardly
have recognized men or trees at the first opening.
It needed that Jesus should lay His hands on Him
before he saw all things clearly.

The next retirement of Jesus with His disciples
was to the neighhorhood of Caesarea Philippi, near

the source of the Jordan. This was
5. At Caesa- the northernmost point of His journey-
rea Philippi ings. Here, ‘‘on the geographical
—The Great frontier between Judaism and heathen-
Confession ism” (Liddon), Our Lord put the
—First An- momentous question which called forth
nouncement Peter’s historical confession.
of Passion (1) The voices of the age and the exter-
(Mt 16:13- nal truth—The question put to the
28; Mk 8: Twelvein this remote region was: ‘“Who
27-30; Lk do men say that the Son of man is?”
9:18-27) “Son of man,” as already said, was

the familiar name given by Jesus to
Himself, to which a Messianic significance might
or might not be attached, according to the prepos-
sessions of His hearers. First the changeful voices
of the age were recited to Jesus: ‘Some say John
the Baptist; some, Elijah,” etc. Next, in answer to
the further question: ‘But who say ye that I am ?”
there rang out from Peter, in the name of all, the
unchanging truth about Jesus: ‘Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God.” In clearness,
boldness, decision, Peter’s faith had attained a
height not reached before. The confession embodies
two truths: (1) the Divinity, (2) the Messiahship,
of the Son of man. Jesus did honor to the con-
fession of His apostle. Not flesh and blood, but
the Father, had revealed the truth to him. Here
at length was “rock”? on which He could build a
church. Reverting to FPeter’s original name,
Simon Bar-Jonah, Jesus declared, with a play on the
name “Peter” (pétros, “rock,” ‘piece of rock’’)
He had before given him (Jn 1 42), that on this
“rock” (pétra), He would build His church, and
the gates of Hades (hostile evil powers) would not
prevail against it (Mt 1618). The papacy has
reared an unwarrantable structure of pretensions
on this passage in supposing the “rock” to be Peter
personally and his successors in the see of Rome
(none such existed; Peter was not bishop of Rome).
It.is not Peter the individual, but Peter the
confessing apostle— Peter as representative of all
—that Christ names “rock”; that which consti-
tuted him a foundation was the truth he had con-
fessed (cf Eph 2 20). This is the first NT men-
tion of a “church” (ekklésia). The Christian church,
therefore, is founded (1) on the truth of Christ’s
Divine Sonship; (2) on the truth of His Messiah-
ship, or of His being the anointed prophet, priest
and king of the new age. A society of believers
confessing these truths is a church; no society
which denies these truths deserves the name. To
this confessing community Jesus, still addressing
Peter as representing the apostolate (cf Mt 18 18),
gives authority to bind and loose—to admit and to
exclude. Jesus, it is noted, bade His disciples tell
no man of these things (Mt 16 20; Mk 8 30;
Lk 9 21).

(2) The cross and the disciple —The confession of
Peter prepared the way for an advance in Christ’s
teaching. From that time, Matthew notes, Jesus
began to speak plainly of His approaching suffer-
ings and death (16 21). There are in all three


1649


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


solemn announcements of the Passion (Mt 16
21-23; 17 22.23; 20 17-19 ||). Jesus foresaw,
and clearly foretold, what would befall Him at
Jerus. He would be killed by the authorities, but
on the third day would rise again. On the first
announcement, following His confession, Peter
took it upon him to expostulate with Jesus: “Be
it far from thee, Lord,” etc (Mt 16 22), an action
which brought upon him the stern rebuke of Jesus:
“Get thee behind me, Satan,” ete (ver 23). The
Rock-man, in his fall to the maxims of a worldly
expediency, is now identified with Satan, the
tempter. This principle, that duty is only to be
done when personal risk is not entailed, Jesus
not only repudiates for Himself, but bids His
disciples repudiate it also. The disciple, Jesus
says, must be prepared to deny himself, and take
up his cross. The cross is the symbol of anything
distressing or painful to bear. There is a saving
of life which is a losing of it, and what shall a man
be profited if he gain the whole world, and forfeit
his (true, higher) life? As, however, Jesus had
spoken, not only of dying, but of rising again,
so now He encourages His disciples by announcing
His future coming in glory to render to every man
according to His deeds. That final coming might
be distant (cf Mt 24 36); but (so it seems most
natural to interpret the saying 16 28 ||) there were
those living who would see the nearer pledge of that,
in Christ’s coming in the triumphs and successes of
His kingdom (cf Mk 9 1; Lk 9 27; Mt 26 64).
About eight days after the announcement of His
passion by Jesus, took place the glorious event of
the transfiguration. Jesus had spoken
6. The of His future glory, and here was a
Transfigura- pledge of it. In strange contrast
tion—the with the scene of glory on the summit


Epileptic of the mountain was the painful sight
Boy (Mt which met Jesus and His three com-
17:1-20; | panions when they descended again to


Mk 9:2-29; to the plain. :

Lk 9:28-43) Tradition connects the scene of the
transfiguration with Mount Tabor, but

it more probably took place on one of the spurs

of Mount Hermon. Jesus had ascended the moun-
tain with Peter, James and John, for


a) The prayer. It was while He was praying
Glory of the the wonderful change happened. For
Only once the veiled glory of the only
Begotten begotten from the Father (Jn 1 14)


was permitted to burst forth, suffusing
His person and garments, and changing them into
a dazzling brightness. His face did shine as the
sun; His raiment became white as light (‘‘as snow,
AV, Mk). Heavenly visitants, recognized from their
converse as Moses and Elijah, appeared with Him
and spoke of His decease (Lk). A voice from an
enveloping cloud attested: “This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased.” Little wonder
the disciples were afraid, or that Peter in his con-
fusion should stammer out: “It is good for us to
be here: if thou wilt, I will make here three taber-
nacles [booths].”” This, however, was not per-
mitted. Earth is not heaven. Glimpses of heavenly
glory are given, not to wean from duty on earth,
but to prepare for the trials connected therewith.
The spectacle that met the eyes of Jesus and the
chosen three as they descended was distressing in
the extreme. A man had_ brought


b) Faith’s his epileptic boy—a sore sufferer and
Entreaty dumb—to the disciples to see if they
and Its could cast out the evil spirit that pos-
Answer sessed him, but they were not able.


Their failure, as Jesus showed, was a
failure of faith; none the less did their discomfiture
afford a handle to the gainsayers, who were not slow
to take advantage of it (Mk 9 14). The man’s ap-


peal was now to Jesus, ‘If thou canst do anything,”
cte (ver 22). The reply of Jesus shifted the “canst”
to-the right quarter, “If thou canst [believe]”’
(ver 23). Such little faith as the man had revived
under Christ’s word: “I believe; help thou mine
unbelief.” The multitude pressing around, there
was no call for further delay. With one energetic
word Jesus expelled the unclean spirit (ver 25).
The first effect of Christ’s approach had been to
induce a violent paroxysm (ver 20); now the spirit
terribly convulsed the frame it was compelled to
relinquish. Jesus, taking the boy’s hand, raised
him up, and he was found well. The lesson drawn
to the disciples was the omnipotence of faith (Mt
17 19.20) and power of prayer (Mk 9 28.29).
From Private Journey through Galilee till
Return from the Feast of Tabernacles.—Soon after
the last-mentioned events Jesus passed
1. Galilee privately through Galilee (Mk 9 30),
and Caper- returning later to Capernaum.
naum During the Galilean journey Jesus
made to His disciples His 2d announce-
ment of His approaching sufferings and death,
accompanied as before by the assurance of His re-
surrection. The disciples still could
a) Second not take in the meaning of His words,
Announce- though what He said made them ‘‘ex-


ment of ceeding sorry” (Mt 17 23).

Passion(Mt The return to Capernaum was
17:22.23; marked by an incident which raised
Mk 9:30— the question of Christ’s relation to
33; Lk 9: temple institutions. The collectors of
44.45) tribute for the temple inquired of Peter:


“Doth not your teacher pay the half-
shekel?” (Gr didrachma, or double drachm, worth
about 32 cents or 1s.4d.). The origin of this tax was

in the half-shekel of atonement-money
b) The of Ex 30 11-16, which, though a special
Temple Tax contribution, was made the basis of
(Mt 17:24 later assessment (2 Ch 24 4-10; in
27) Nehemiah’s time the amount was one-

third of a shekel, Neh 10 32), and its
object was the upkeep of the temple worship
(Schiirer). The usual time of payment was March,
but Jesus had probably been absent and the inquiry |
was not made for some months later. Peter, hasty
as usual, probably reasoning from Christ’s ordinary
respect for temple ordinances, answered at once that
He did pay the tax. It had not occurred to him
that Jesus might have something to say on it, if
formally challenged. Occasion therefore was taken
by Jesus gently to reprove Peter. Peter had but
recently acknowledged Jesus to be the Son of God.
Do kings of the earth take tribute of their own
sons? ‘The half-shekel was suitable to the subject-
relation, but not to the relation of a son. Never-
theless, lest occasion of stumbling be given, Jesus
could well waive this right, as, in His humbled con-
dition, He had waived so many more. Peter was
ordered to cast his hook into the sea, and Jesus
foretold that the fish he would bring up would have
in its mouth the necessary coin (Gr statér, about 64
cents or 2s. 8d.). The tax was paid, yet in such a
way as to show that the payment of it was an act
of condescension of the king’s Son.
On the way to Capernaum a dis-


c) Dis- pute had arisen among the disciples as
course on to whoshould be greatest in the Messi-
Greatness anic kingdom about tobeset up. The
and For- fact of such disputing showed how
giveness largely even their minds were yet dom-
(Mt 18:1— inated by worldly, sensuous ideas of
35; Mk 9: the kingdom. Now, in the house (Mk
33-50; Lk 9 33), Jesus takes occasion to check
9:46-50) their spirit of ambitious rivalry, and


to inculeate much-needed lessons on
greatness and kindred matters.


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1650


(1) Greatness in humility—First, by the example
of a little child, Jesus teaches that humility is the
rdot-disposition of His kingdom. It alone admits
to the kingdom, and conducts to honor in it. He
is greatest who humbles himself most (Mt 18 4),
and is the servant of all (Mk 9 35). He warns
against slighting the “‘little ones,” or causing them
to stumble, and uses language of terrible severity
against those guilty of this sin.

(2) Tolerance——The mention of receiving little
ones in Christ’s name led John to remark that he
had seen one casting out demons in Christ’s name,
and had forbidden him, because he was not of their
company. ‘Forbid him not,” Jesus said, ‘for there
is no man who shall do a mighty work in my name,
and be able quickly to speak evil of me. For he
that is not against us is for us’ (Mk 9 39.40).

(3) The erring brother.—The subject of offences
leads to the question of sins committed by one Chris-
tian brother against another. Here Christ incul-
cates kindness and forbearance; only if private rep-
resentations and the good offices of brethren fail, ig
the matter to be brought before the church; if the
brother repents he is to be unstintedly forgiven
(“seventy times seven,’”’ Mt 18 22). If the church
is compelled to interpose, its decisions are valid
(under condition, however, of prayer and Christ’s
presence, vs 18-20).

(4) Parable of the Unmerciful Servant—To en-
force the lesson of forgiveness Jesus speaks the para-
ble of the Unmerciful Servant (Mt 18 23-35).
Himself forgiven much, this servant refuses to for-
give his fellow a much smaller debt. His lord visita
him with severest punishment. Only as we for-
give others can we look for forgiveness.

The Gospel of Jn leaves a blank of many months
between chs 6 and 7, covered only by the state-

ment, ‘“‘After these things, Jesus walked
2. The in Galilee” (7 1). In this year of His
Feast of ministry Jesus had gone neither to the
Tabernacles feast of the Passover nor to Pentecost.
—Dis- The Feast of Tabernacles was now at
courses, etc hand (October). To this Jesus went up
(Jn 7—10: and Jn preserves for us a full record o
21) His appearance, discourses and doings

there.

The brethren of Jesus, still unpersuaded of His
claims (ver 5), had urged Jesus to go up with them

to the feast. ‘Go up,” in their sense,


a) The included a public manifestation of
Private Himself as the Messiah. Jesus replied
Journey— that His time for this had not yet come.
Divided Afterward He went up quietly, and in
Opinions _ the midst of the feast appeared in the


(Jn 7:1-10) temple as a teacher. The comments

made about Jesus at the feast before His
arrival vividly reflect the divided state of opinion
regarding Him. ‘He isagood man,” thought some.
“Not so,” said others, ‘“‘but He leadeth the multi-
tude astray.’ His teaching evoked yet keener divi-
sion. While some said, “Thou hast a demon” (ver
20), others argued, ‘‘When the Christ shall come,
will he do more signs?” etc (ver 31). Some de-
clared, “This is of a truth the prophet,” or ‘This
is the Christ’; others objected that the Christ
was to come out of Bethlehem, not Galilee (vs
40-42). Yet no one dared to take the step of mo-
lesting Him.

Christ’s wisdom and use of the Scriptures excited
surprise. Jesus met this surprise by stating that
His knowledge was from the Father, and with ref-
erence to the division of opinion about Him laid
down the principle that knowledge of the truth was
the result of the obedient will: “If any man willeth
to do his will, he shall know of the teaching, whether
it is of God” (ver 17). It was objected that they
knew who Jesus was, and whence He came. In


a sense, Jesus replied, this was true; in a deeper
sense, it was uot. He came from the Father,

whom they knew not (vs 28.29). The
b) The Test last and great day of the feast—the
of Truth— eighth (Nu 29 35)—brought with it


Christ’s a new self-attestation. Jesus stood
Self- and cried, “If any man thirst, let him
Witness; come unto me and drink. He that
a Foiled believeth on me... . from within him
Purpose shall flow rivers of living water” (vs
(vs 14-52) 37.38). The words are understood to


have reference to the ceremony of
pouring out a libation of water at this feast—the
libation, in turn, commemorating the gilt of water
at the striking of the rock. The evangelist inter-
prets the saying of the Spirit which believers should
receive. Meanwhile, the chief priests and Pharisees
had sent officers to apprehend Jesus (ver 32), but
they returned without Him. ‘Why did ye not
bring him?” The reply was confounding, ‘‘Never
man so spake” (vs 45.46). The retort was the poor
one, ‘‘Are ye also led astray?” In vain did Nico-
demus, who was present, try to put in a moderating
word (vs 50.51). It was clear to what issue hate
like this was tending.
The discourses at the feast are at this point in-
terrupted by the episode of the woman taken in adul-
tery (8 1-11), which, by general con-


c) The sent, does not belong to the original
Woman text of the Gospel. It is probably,
Taken in however, an authentic incident, and


Adultery— illustrates, on the one hand, the eager-
Continued ness of the official classes to find an ac-
Self-Wit- cusation against Jesus, and, on the
ness (ch 8) other, the Saviour’s dignity and wisdom

in foiling such attempts, His spirit of
mercy and the action of conscience in the accusers.
In His continued teaching, Jesus put forth even
higher claims than in the foregoing discourse. As
He had applied to Himself the water from the rock,
so now He applied to Himself the symbolic meaning
of the two great candelabra, which were lighted in
the temple court during the feast and bore refer-
ence to the pillar of cloud andfire. “I am the light
of the world,’’ said Jesus (ver 12). Only a Divine
being could put forth such a claim as that. The
Jews objected that they had only His witness to
Himself. Jesus replied that no other could bear
adequate witness of Him, for He alone knew whence
He came and whither He went (ver 14). But the
Father also had borne witness of Him (ver 18). This
discourse, delivered in the “treasury” of the temple
(ver 20), was soon followed by another, no man yet
daring to touch Him. This time Jesus warns the
Jews of the fate their unbelief would entail upon
them: “Ye shall die in your sins” (ver 24), Ad~-
dressing Himself next specially to the Jews who
believed in Him, He urged them to continuance in
His word as the condition of true freedom. Re-
seutment was again aroused at the suggestion that
the Jews, Abraham’s seed, were not iree. Jesus
made clear that the real bondage was that of sin;
only the Son could make spiritually free (vs 34~36).
Descent from Abraham meant nothing, if the spirit
was of the devil (vs 39-41). A new conflict was pro-
voked by the saying, “If a man keep my word, he
shall never see death” (ver 51). Did Jesus make
Himself greater than Abraham? The controversy
that ensued resulted in the sublime utterance, “Be-
fore Abraham was born, I am” (ver 58). The Jews
would have stoned Him, but Jesus eluded them, and
departed.

The Feast of Tabernacles was past, but Jesus was
still in Jerus. Passing by on a Sabbath (ver 14),
He saw a blind man, a beggar (ver 8), well known
to have been blind from his birth. ‘The narrative
of the cure and examination of this blind man is


1651


adduced by Paley as bearing in its inimitable cir-


cumstantiality every mark of personal knowledge on
the part of the historian. The man,
d) The cured in strange but symbolic fashion
Cure of the by the anointing of his eyes with clay
Blind Man (thereby apparently sealing them more
(ch 9) firmly), then washing in the Pool of
: Siloam, became an object of immediate
interest, and every effort was made by the Pharisees
to shake his testimony as to the miracle that had
been wrought. The man,’ however, held to his
story, and his parents could only corroborate the
fact that their son had been born blind, and now
saw. ‘The Pharisees themselves were divided, some
reasoning that Jesus could not be of God because
He had broken the Sabbath—the old charge; others,
Nicodemus-like, standing on the fact that a man
who was a sinner could not do such signs (vs 15.16).
The healed man applied the logic of common-sense:
“Tf this man were not from God, he could do nothing”’
(ver 33). The Pharisees, impotent to deny the
wonder, could only cast him out of the synagogue.
Jesus found him, and brought him to full confession
of faith in Himself (vs 35-38).
Yet another address of Jesus is on record arising
out of this incident. In continuation of His reply
to the question of the Pharisees (9 40),


e) The “Are we also blind?” Jesus spoke to
Good them His discourse on the Good Shep-
Shepherd herd. Flocks in eastern countries are
(10:1-21) gathered at night into an inclosure sur-


rounded by a wall or palisade. This
is the ‘‘fold,”’ which is under the care of a “porter,”
who opens the closely barred door to the shepherds
in the morning. As contrasted with the legitimate
shepherds, the false shepherds “enter not by the
door,”’ but climb over some other way. The al-
lusion is to priests, scribes, Pharisees and gener-
ally to all, in any age, who claim an authority within
the church unsanctioned by God (Godet). Jesus
now gathers up the truth in its relation to Himself
as the Supreme Shepherd. From His fundamental
relation to the church, He is not only the Shepherd,
but the Door (vs 7-14). To those who enter by
Him there is given security, liberty, provision (ver
9). In his capacity as Shepherd Christ is preémi-
nently all that a faithful shepherd ought tobe. The
highest proof of His love is that, as the Good Shep-
herd, He lays down His life for the sheep (vs 11.15.
17). This laying down of His life is not an accident,
but is His free, voluntary act (vs 17.18). Again
there was division among the Jews because of these
remarkable sayings (vs 19-21).

Chronological note—Though John does not mention
the fact, there is little doubt that, after this visit to
Jerus, Jesus returned to Galilee, and at no long interval
from His return, took His final departure southward.
The chronology of this Slosing eriod in Galilee is some-
what uncertain. Some would place the visit to the
Feast of Tahernacles hefore the withdrawal to Caesarea
Philippi, or even earlier (cf Andrews, Life of Our Lord,
ete); Bue the order adopted above appears preferable.


D. LAST JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM—JESUS IN PERAEA


An interval of two months elapses between vs 21
and 22 in Jn 10—from the Feast of Tabernacles (Oc-
tober) till the Feast of the Dedication


Departure (December). This period witnessed
from the final withdrawal of Jesus from Galli-
Galilee lee. Probably while yet in Galilee He


sent forth the seventy disciples to pre-
pare His way in the cities to which He should come
(Lk 10 1). Repulsed on the borders of Samaria (Lk
9 51-53), He passed over into Peraea (“beyond Jor-
dan”), where he exercised a considerable ministry.
The record of this period, till the entry into Jerus,
belongs in great part to Luke, who seems to have
had a rich spccial source relating to it (9 51—19 27).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


The discourses in Lk embrace many passages and
sections found in other connections in Mt, and it is
difficult, often, to determine their proper chrono-
logical place, if, as doubtless sometimes happened,
portions were not repeated.
i. From Leaving Galilee till the Feast of the Dedi-
cation.—Conscious that He went to suffer and die,
Jesus steadfastly set His face to go to
1. Rejected Jerus. His route was first by Samaria
by Samaria —an opportunity of grace to that peo-
(Lk 9: ple—but here, at a border village, the
messengers He sent before Him, prob-
ably also He Himself on His arrival,
were repulsed, because of His obvious intention to
go to Jerus (ver 53). James and John wished to
imitate Elijah in calling down fire from heaven on
the rejecters, but Jesus rebuked them for their
thought (RV omits the reference to Elijah, and
subsequent clauses, vs 55.56).
In the present connection Luke inserts the inci-
dents of the three aspirants formerly considered
(9 57-62; cf p. 1645). It was sug-
2. Mission gested that the second and third cases
of the may belong to this period.
Seventy (Lk A new and ent onut step was now
10:1-20) taken by Jesus in the sending out of
70 disciples, who should go before Him,
two by two, to announce His coming: in the cities
and villages He was about to visit. The number
sent indicates how large a following Jesus had now
acquired. (Some see a symbolica!l meaning in the
number 70, but it is difficult to show what it is.)
The directions given to the messengers are similar
to those formerly given to the Twelve (9 1-5; ef
Mt 10); a passage also found in Mt in a different
connection (11 21-24) is incorporated in this dis-
course, or had originally its place in it (vs 13-15).
In this mission Jesus no longer made any secret of
His Messianic character. The messengers were to
proclaim that the kingdom of God was come nigh
to them in connection with His impending visit (ver
9). The mission implies that a definite route was
marked out by Jesus for Himself (cf 13 22), but this
would be subject to modification according to the
reception of His emissaries (vs 10.11.16). The cir-
cuit need not have occupied a long time with so
many engaged in it. The results show that it
aroused strong interest. Later the disciples re-
turned elated with their success, emphasizing their
victory over the demons (ver 17). Jesus bade
them rejoice rather that their names were written
in heaven (ver 20). Again a passage is inserted
(vs 21.22) found earlier in Mt (11 25-27; cf also
vs 23.24, with Mt 13 16.17).
Jesus had now passed “beyond the Jordan,” i.e.
into Peraea, and vast crowds waited on His teach-
ing (cf Mt 19 1f; Mk 10 1; Lk 12 1).


3. The At one place a lawyer put what he
Lawyer’s meant to be a testing question, ‘What
Question— shall Ido toinherit eternal life?” Jesus
Parable of referred him to the great command-
Good Sa- ments of love to God and one’s neigh-


maritan (Lk bor, eliciting the further query, “And
10:26-37) who is my neighbor?” In reply Jesus

spoke to him the immortal parable of
the Good Samaritan, and asked who proved neigh-
bor to him who fell among the robbers. The lawyer
could give but one answer, ‘‘He that showed mercy
on him.” ‘‘Go,” said Jesus, “and do thou like-
wise.”

The incident of Martha and Mary, which Luke
inserts here (vs 38-42), comes in better later, when
Jesus was nearer Bethany.

At this place Luke brings together a variety of
discourses, warnings and exhortations, great parts
of which have already been noticed in earlier
contexts. It does not follow that Lk has not,


Jesus Christ


in many cases, preserved the original connection.
This is probably the case with the Lord’s Prayer
(11 1-4), and with portions of what


4. Dis- Mt includes in the Sermon on the
courses, Mount (e.g. 11 9-13.33-36; 12 22-34;
Parables, cf 18 24-27 with Mt 7 13.14.22.23),
and and in other discourses (e.g. 11 42-52
Miracles =Mt 23 23-36; 12 2-12=Mt 10 26-
(Lk chs il 33; 12 42-48=Mt 24 45-51; 13 18-
-14) ’ 21, parables of Mustard Seed and


Leaven=Mt 13 31.32, ete).
Of matter original to Lk in these chs may he noted
such passages as that on the Friend at Midnight
(11 5-8), the incident of the man who
a) Original wished Jesus to hid his brother divide
to Luke his inheritance with him, to whom
Jesus spoke the parable of the Rich
Fool (12 13-21), the parable of the Barren Fig Tree,
called forth by the disposition to regard certain Gali-
leans whom Pilate had slain in a tumult at the
temple, and eighteen on whom the tower of Siloam
had fallen, as sinners above others (13 1-9: ‘‘Nay,”
said Jesus, ‘but, except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish”), and most of the teaching in
ch 14, referred to helow. In 11 37.38, we have the
mention of a Pharisee inviting Jesus to dine, and
of his astonishment at the Lord’s neglect of the
customary ablutions before eating. Ver 53 gives
a glimpse of the fury to which the scribes and
Pharisees were aroused by the severity of Christ’s
denunciations. They “began to press upon him
vehemently .... laying wait for him, to catch
something out of his mouth.” In 13 31 ff it is
told how the Pharisees sought to frighten Jesus
from the district by telling Him that Herod would
fain kill Him. Jesus bade them tell that ‘‘fox”
that His work would go on uninterruptedly in the
brief space that remained (‘‘day”’ used enigmatically)
till He was “perfected” (ver 32). The woe on
ders (vs 34.35) is given by Mt in the discourse in
c 3
Of the miracles in this section, the casting out of
the demon that was dumb (11 14 ff) is evidently
the same incident as that already noted


b) The in Mt 12 22ff. Two other miracles
Infirm are connected with the old accusation
Woman— of Sabbath hreaking. One was the
the Drop- healing in a synagogue on the Sabbath
sied Man day of a woman bowed down for 18


years with “a spirit of infirmity” (13
10-17); the other was the cure on the Sabbath of a
man afflicted with dropsy at a feast in the house of a
ruler of the Pharisees to which Jesus had been in-
vited (14 1-6). The motive of the Pharisee’s invi-
tation, as in most such cases, was hostile (ver 1).
In both instances Jesus met the objection in the
same way, by appealing to their own acts of hu-
ey, to their animals on the Sabbath (13 15.16;
4 5).
This feast at the Pharisee’s house had an inter-
esting sequel in the discourse it led Jesus to utter
against vainglory in feasting, and on
c) Parable the spirit of love which would prompt
of the Great to the table being spread for the help-
Supper less and destitute rather than for the
selfish enjoyment of the select few,
closing, in answer to a pious ejaculation of one of the
guests, with the parable of the Great Supper (14
7-24). The parables with its climax in the invita-
tion to bring in the poor, and maimed, and blind,
and those from the highways and hedges, was a
commentary on the counsels He had just becn giv-
ing, but it had its deeper lesson in picturing the
rejection by the Jews of the invitation to the feast
God had made for them in His kingdom, and the
call that would be given to the Gentiles to take
their place.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1652


The injunctions to the multitudes as to the sac-
rifice and cross-hearing involved in discipleship are
pointed by the examples of a man
d) Counting building a tower, and a king going to
the Cost war, who count the cost before enter-
ing on their enterprises (vs 25-35).
At or about this time—perhaps before the inci-
dents in Lk 14—Jesus paid the visit to Jerus at the
Feast of the Dedication described in
5. Martha Jn 10 22-39, This seems the fitting
and Mary place for the introduction of the epi-
sode of Martha and Mary which Luke
narrates a little earlier (10 38-42). The “village”
into which Jesus entered was no doubt Bethany
(Jn 11 1). The picture given by Luke of the con-
trasted dispositions of the two sisters—Martha
active and “serving” (cf Jn 12 2), Mary retiring
and contemplative—entirely corresponds with that
in Jn. Martha busied herself with preparations
for the meal; Mary sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard
His word. To Martha’s complaint, as if her sister
were idling, Jesus gave the memorable answer, ‘‘One
thing is needful: for Mary hath chosen the good
part,” etc (Lk 10 42).
The Feast of the Dedication, held in December,
was in commemoration of the cleansing of the temple
and restoration of its worship after its
6. Feast of profanation by Antiochus Epiphanes
the Dedica- (164 BC). Great excitement was oc-
tion (Jn 10: casioned by the appearance of Jesus at
22-39) this feast, and some asked, “How long
dost thou hold us in suspense? If
thou art the Christ, tell us plainly.” Jesus said
He had told them, and His works attested His claim,
but they were not of His true flock, and would not
believe. To His own sheep He gave eternal life.
The Jews anew wished to stone Him for claiming
to be God. Jesus replied that even the law called
the judges of Israel “gods”? (Ps 82 6, “I said, Ye
are gods, and all of you sons of the Most High”):
how could it then be blasphemy for Him whom the
Father had sanctified and sent into the world to say
of Himself, “I am the Son of God’? The Jews
sought to take Him, but He passed from their midst.
i, From the Abode at Bethabara till the Raising
of Lazarus.—After leaving Jerus Jesus went beyond
Jordan again to the place where John at first, bap-
tized (Jn 10 40; cf1 28, calledin AV “Bethahara,”
in RV “Bethany,” distinct from the Bethany of ch
11). There He “abode,” implying a prolonged stay,
and many resorted to Him. This spot, sacred to
Jesus by His own baptism, may be regarded now
as His headquarters from which excursions would
be made to places in the neighborhood. Several
of the incidents recorded by Luke are probably con-
nected with this sojourn.
The stronger the opposition of scribes and
Pharisees to Jesus became, the more by natural
affinity did the classes regarded as out-
1. Parahles cast feel drawn to Him. He did not


of Lost repel them, as the Pharisees did, but
Sheep, ate and drank with them. Publicans
Lost Piece and sinners gathered to His teaching,
of Silver, and He associated with them. The
Prodigal murmuring was great: ‘This man re-


Son (Lk 15) ceiveth sinners, and eateth with them.”

The defence of Jesus was in parables,
and the Pharisees’ reproach may be thanked for
three of the most beautiful parables Jesus ever
spoke—the Lost Sheep (cf Mt 18 12-14), the Lost
Piece of Silver, and the Prodigal Son (ch 15). Why
does the shepherd rejoice more over the one lost
sheep brought back than over the ninety-nine that
have not gone astray? Why does the woman rejoice
more over the recovery of her lost drachma than over
all the coins safe in her keeping? Why does the
father rejoice more over the prodigal son come back


1653


in rags and penitence from the far country than
over the obedient but austere brother that had never
left the home? The stories were gateways into the
inmost heart of God. There is joy in heaven over
one sinner that repenteth more than over ninety-

nine Just persons that need no repentance (ver 7).
_ Two other parables, interspersed by discourses
(in part again met with in other connections, cf 16
13 with Mt 6 24; ver 16 with Mt 11


2. Parables 12; ver 18 with Mt 6 32; 19 9, etc),
of the were spoken at this time—that of the
Unjust Unjust Steward (16 1-9) and that of
Steward, the Rich Man and Lazarus (vs 19-31).
the Rich The dishonest steward, about to be dis-
Man and _ missed, utilized his opportunities, still
Lazarus dishonestly, to make friends of his
(Lk 16) master’s creditors; let the “children


_ of light” better his example by right-
eously using mammon to make friends for them-
selves, who shall receive them into everlasting habi-
tations. The rich man, pampered in luxury, let the
afflicted Lazarus starve at his gate. At death—in
Hades—the positions are reversed: the rich man is
in torment, stripped of all he had enjoyed; the poor
man is at rest in Abraham’s bosom, compensated
for all he suffered. It is character, not outward
estate, that determines destiny. The unmerciful
are doomed. Even a messenger from the unseen
world will not save men, if they hear not Moses and
the prophets (ver 31).

In this connection Lk (17 1-10) places exhorta-
tions to the disciples on occasions of stumbling, for-
giveness, the power of faith, renunciation of merit
(“We are unprofitable servants”), some of which are
found elsewhere (cf Mt 18 6.7.15.21, etc).

While Jesus was in the trans-Jordanic Betha-
bara, or Bethany, or in its neighborhood, a message

came to Him from the house of Martha


3. The and Mary in the Judaean Bethany (on
Summons the Mount of Olives, about 2 miles E.
to Bethany from Jerus), that His friend Lazarus
—Raising (“he whom thou lovest’’) was sick.
of Lazarus The conduct of Jesus seemed strange,
(Jn 11) for He abode still two days where He


was (Jn 11 6). As the sequel showed,
this was only for the end of a yet more wonderful
manifestation of His power and love, to the glory of
God (ver 4). Meanwhile Lazarus died, and was
buried. When Jesus announced His intention of
going into Judaea, the disciples sought hard to dis-
suade Him (ver 8); but Jesus was not moved by
the fears they suggested. He reached Bethany (a
distance of between 20 and 30 miles) on the fourth
day after the burial of Lazarus (ver 17), and was
met on the outskirts by Martha, and afterward by
Mary, both plunged in deepest sorrow. Both
breathed the same plaint: “Lord, if thou hadst
been here, my brother had not died” (vs 21.32). To
Martha Jesus gave the pledge, ‘“Thy brother shall
rise again,’”’ strengthening the faith she already had
expressed in Him (ver 22) by announcing Himeelf
as “the resurrection, and the life’ (vs 25.26); at
Mary’s words He was deeply moved, and asked to
be taken to the tomb. Here, it is recorded, “Jesus
wept” (ver 35), the only other instance of His weep-
ing in the Gospels being as He looked on lost Jerus
(Lk 19 41). The proof of love was manifest, but
some, as usual, suggested blame that this miracle-
worker had not prevented His friend’s death (ver
37). Arrived at the rock-tomb, Jesus, still groan-
ing in Himself, caused the stone at its mouth to be
removed, and, after prayer, spoke with a loud voice,
“Lazarus, come forth” (ver 43). The spirit re-
turned, and the man who had been dead came forth
bound with his grave-clothes. He was released and
restored to his sisters. __ A
Even this mighty deed did not alter the mind of the


; THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


Pharisees, who held a council, and decided, on the ad-
vice of Caiaphas (ver 50), that for the safety of the
nation it was “expedient” that this man should die.
The circumstantiality of this beautiful narrative
speaks irresistibly for its historical truth, and the
objections raised by critical writers center really in
their aversion to the miraculous as such.
UI. From the Retirement to Ephraim till the
Arrival at Bethany.—The hostility of the ruling
classes was now so pronounced that, in
1. Retreat the few weeks that remained till Jesus
to Ephraim should go up tothe Passover, He deemed
(Jn 11:54- it advisable to abide in privacy at
57) a city called Ephraim (situation un-
certain). That He was in secrecy dur-
ing this period is implied in the statement (ver 57)
that if anyone knew where He was, he was to inform
the chief priests and Pharisees. The


2. The retirement would be for Jesus a period
Journey of preparation for the ordeal before
Resumed Him, as the wilderness had been for


the commencement of His ministry.

On His leaving this retreat to resume His advance

to Jerus the narratives again become rich in incident
and teaching.

It is not easy to define the route which brought

Jesus again to the border line between Samaria and

Galilee (Lk 17 11), but, in traversing


8. Cure of this region, He was met by ten lepers,
the Lepers who besought Him for a cure. Jesus
(Lk 17: bade them go and show themselves to
11-19) the priests, and on the way they were


cleansed. Only one of the ten, and
he a Samaritan, returned to give thanks and glorify
God. Gratitude appeared in the unlikely quarter.
At some point in this journey the Pharisees sought
to entrap Jesus on the question of divorce. Was it
lawful for a man to put away his wife
4. Pharisaic for every cause? (Mt 19 3). Jesus
Question- in reply admitted the permission to
ings divorce given by Moses (Mk 10 3-5),
but declared that this was for the hard-
ness of their hearts, and went back tga the original
institution of marriage in which the two so joined
were declared to be “one flesh.” Only
a) Divorce one cause is admissible as a ground of
(Mt 19:3-— separation and remarriage (Mt 19 9;
12; Mk 10: cf 6 31.32; Mk has not even the ex-
1-12) ception, which is probably, however,
implied). Comments follow to the dis-
ciples in Mt on the subject of continence (vs 10-12).
See Divorce.
Another question asked by the Pharisees of Jesus
was as to when the kingdom of God should come.
The expectation excited by His own


b) Coming ministry and claims was that it was
of the near; when should it appear? Re-
Kingdom buking their worldly ideas, Jesus
(Lk 17: warned them that the kingdom did
20-37) not come “with observation’’—was


not a “‘Lo, there! Lo, here!’; it was

“within” them, or “in their midst,” though they
did not perceive it. In the last decisive coming of
the Son of Man there would be no dubiety as to
His presence (vs 24.25). He adds exhortations as
to the suddenness of His coming, and the separations
that would ensue (vs 26-37), which Mt gives as part
of the great discourse on the Last Things in ch 24,
In close connection with the foregoing, as fur-
nishing the ground for the certainty that this day of
the Son of Man would come, Jesus

c) Parable spoke the parable of the Unjust Judge.
of the Un- This judge, though heedless of the
just Judge claims of right, yet yielded to the
(Lk 18:1-8) widow’s importunity, and granted her
justice against her adversary. How

much more surely will the righteous, long-suffering


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1654


God avenge His own elect, who cry unto Him day
and night (vs 7.8)! Yet men, in that supreme
hour, will almost have lost faith in His coming
(ver 8). ee
A series of sayings and incidents at this time
throw light upon the spirit of the kingdom. :
The spirit of self-righteousness 1s
5. The rebuked and humble penitence as the
Spirit of the condition of acceptance is enforced in
Kingdom the parable of the Pharisee and Pub-
lican. The Pharisee posing in his self-
complacency at his fastings and tithes, and thanking
God for his superiority to others, is set in vivid con-
trast to the abased publican, standing
a) Parable afar off, and able only to say, “‘God, be
of Pharisee thou merciful to me a sinner’ (ver 13).
and Publi- Yet it was he who went down to his
can (Lk 18: house “justified” (ver 14).


9-14) A similar lesson is inculcated in the
beautiful incident of the blessing of
the babes. The disciples rebuked the mothers for


bringing their little ones, but Jesus, “moved with
indignation’ (Mk), received and blessed
b) Blessing the babes, declaring that to such (to
of the them and those of like spirit) belonged
Babes (Mt the kingdom of heaven. ‘Suffer the
19:13-15; little children, and forbid them not, to
Mk 10:13- come unto me,” etc.
16; Lk 18: A third illustration—this time of the
15-17) peril of covetousness—is afforded by
the incident of the rich young ruler.
This amiable, blameless, and evidently sincere
young man (‘Jesus looking upon him loved him,”
Mk 10 21) knelt, and addressing
c) The Rich Jesus as “Good Teacher,” asked what


Young he must do to inherit eternal life. Jesus
Ruler (Mt first declined the term ‘“‘good,” in the
19: 16-30; easy, conventional sense in which it
Mk 10: wag applied, then referred the ruler to
17-31; Lk the commandments as the standard
18:18-30) of doing. All these, however, the


young man averred he had observed
from his youthup. Hedid not know himself. Jesus
saw the secret hold his riches had upon his soul, and
revealed it by the searching word, “If thou wouldest
be perfect, go, sell that which thou hast,” ete (Mt
19 21; cf Mk, ‘One thing thou lackest,” etc). This
was enough. The young man could not yield up
his ‘great possessions,’ and went away sorrowing.
Jesus bases on his refusal earnest warnings against
the love of riches, and points out, in answer to a
question of Peter, that loss for His sake in this life
is met with overwhelmingly great compensations
in the life to come.
Not unconnected with the foregoing teachings is
the third solemn announcement to the disciples, so
hard to be persuaded that the kingdom
6. Third was not immediately to be set up in
Announce- glory, of His approaching sufferings
ment of the and death, followed by resurrection.
Passion The disciples had been ‘‘amazed” and
(Mt 20:17— “afraid” (Mk) at something strange
19; Mk 10: in the aspect and walk of Jesus as they
32-34; Lk were on the way, going to Jerus (cf
18:31-338) Lk 951). His words gave the ex-
planation. With them should be taken
what is said in a succeeding incident of His baptism
of suffering (Mk 10 38.39; cf Lk 12 50).
The spirit of the kingdom and sacrifice for the
kingdom have already been associated with the idea
of reward, but the principles underlying
7. The this reward are now made the subject
Rewards of of special teaching.
the King- First by the parable of the Laborers
dom in the Vineyard the lesson is inculcated
that reward in the kingdom is not ac-
cording to any legal rule, but is governed by a Di-


vine equity, in accordance with which the last may
often be equal to, or take precedence of, the first.
The laborers were ‘hired at different
a) Parable hours, yet all at the end received the
of the same wage. The murmuring at the
Laborers generosity of the householder of those
in the Vine- who had worked longest betrayed a de-
yard (Mt _fectiveness of spirit which may explain
20:1-17) why they were not more highly re-
warded. In strictness, the kingdom is
a gift of grace, in the sum total of its blessings one
and the same to all. :
Still there are distinctions of honor in God’s king-
dom, but these are not arbitrarily made. This is
the lesson of the reply of Jesus to the


b) The plea of the mother of the sons of Zebe-
Sons of dee, James and John, with, apparently,
Zebedee the concurrence of the apostles them-


(Mt 20:20- selves, that they might sit one on the
28; Mk 10: right hand and the other on the left
35-45) hand in His kingdom. It was a bold
and ambitious request, and naturally
moved the indignation of the other apostles. Still it
had its ground in a certain nobility of spirit. For
when Jesus asked if they were able to drink of His
cup and be baptized with His baptism, they an-
swered, “We are able.” Jesus told them they
should share that lot of suffering, but to sit on His
right hand and on His left were not favors that could
be arbitrarily bestowed, but would be given to those
for whom it had been prepared of His Father—the
preparation having regard to character and fitness,
of which the Father alone was judge. Jesus went
on to rebuke the spirit which led one to seek promi-
nence over another, and laid down the essential
law, ‘‘Whosoever would become great among you
shall be your minister,” enforcing it by His own
never-to-be-forgotten example, “Even as the Son of
man came not to be ministered unto, but to min-
ister, and to give his life a ransom for many” (Mt
20 28; Mk 10 45).
Accompanied by a great throng, possibly of pil-
grims to the feast, Jesus drew near to the influential
city of Jericho, in the Jordan valley,
8. Jesus at about 17 miles distant from Jerus.
Jericho Here two notable incidents marked
His progress.
As they approached the city (Lk) (Mt and Mk
place the incident as they “went out”) a blind beg-
gar, Bartimaeus, hearing that ‘Jesus
a) The the Nazarene” (Mk) passed by, loudly
Cure of called on Him as the ‘Son of David”
Bartimaeus to have mercy onhim. The multitude
(Mt 20:29- would have restrained the man, but
34; Mk 10: their rebukes only made him the more
46-52; Lk urgent in his cries. Jesus stopped in
18:35-43) His way, called the blind man to Him,
then, when he came, renewing his
appeal, healed him. The cry of the beggar shows
that the Davidic descent, if not the Messiahship, of
Jesus was now known. Mt varies from the other
evangelists in speaking of “two blind men,” while
Mt and Mk, as noted, make the cure take place on
leaving, not on entering the city. Not improbably
there are two healings, one on entering Jericho, the
other on going from the city, and Matthew, after his
fashion, groups them together (Luke’s language is
really indefinite; lit. “as they were near to Jericho”).
The entrance of Jesus into Jericho was signalized
by a yet more striking incident. The chief collect-
or of revenue in the city was Zacchaeus,
b) Zacchae- rich, but held in opprobrium (“a sin-
us the Pub- ner”) because of his occupation. Being
lican (Lk little of stature, Zacchaeus had climbed
19:1-10) into the branches of a sycomore tree
to see Jesus as He passed. To his
amazement, and that of the crowd, Jesus stopped


1655


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


on His way, and called Zacchaeus by name to hasten
to come down, for that day He must abide at his
house. Zacchaeus joyfully received Him, and, moved
to a complete change in his views of duty, declared
his purpose of giving half his goods to the poor, and
of restoring fourfold anything he might have taken by
false accusation. It was a revolution in the man’s
soul, wrought by love. “Today,” Jesus testified, “‘is
salvation come to this house. ... . For the Son of
man came to seek and to save that which was lost.”
The expectations of the multitude that the king-
dom of God should immediately appear led Jesus to
speak the parable of the Pounds, fore-


c) Parable warning them that the consummation
of the they looked for might be longer de-
Pounds layed than they thought, and impress-
(Lk 19: ing on them the need of loyalty,
11-27) faithfulness and diligence, if that day,


when it came, was not to prove dis-
astrous to them. The nobleman went into a “far
country” to receive a kingdom, and his ten servants
were to trade with as many pounds (each=100
drachmas) in his absence. On his return the faith-
ful servants were rewarded in proportion to their
diligence; the faithless one lost what he had; the
rebellious citizens were destroyed. ‘Thus Jesus fore-
shadowed the doom that would overtake those who
were plotting against Him, and checked hopes that
disregarded the moral conditions of honor in His
kingdom.

Arrival at Bethany—From Jericho Jesus moved
on to Bethany, the abode of Lazarus and his sisters.
To His halt here before His public entrance into
Jerus the next events belong.


E. THE PASSION WEEK—BETRAYAL, TRIAL AND
CRUCIFIXION


We reach now the closing week and last solemn
events of the earthly life of Jesus. The importance
attached to this part of their narra-
Importance tives is seen by the space the evangel-
of the Last ists devote to it. Of the Gospels of
Events Mit and Mk fully one-third is devoted
to the events of the Passion Week and
their sequel in the resurrection; Luke has several
chs; John gives half his Gospel to the same period.
It is obvious that in the minds of the evangelists
the crucifixion of Jesus is the pivot of their whole
narrative—the dénowement to which everything tends
from the first. :
L. The Events Preceding the Last Supper.—The arrival


in Bethany is placed by John ‘six days before the Pass-
over’? (12 1). Assuming that the public
1. The


entry into Jerus took place on the Sun-

day, and that the 14th of Nisan fell on the
Chronology foliowing Thursday, this would lead to

the arrival being placed on the Friday or
Saturday preceding, according to the mode of reckoning.
It is in the highest degree unlikely that Jesus would jour-
ney from Jericho on the Jewish Sabbath; hence He may
be’supposed to have arrived on the Friday evening. The
supper at which the anointing by Mary took place would
be on the Saturday (Sabhath) evening. Mt and Mk con-
nect it with events two days hefore the Passover (Mt 26
2; Mk 14 1), but parenthetically, in a way which leaves
the other order open.


‘This beautiful deed occurred at a supper given in
honor of Jesus at the house of one Simon, a leper
(Mt and Mk)—probably cured by

2. The Jesus—at which Martha, Mary and
Anointing Lazarus were guests. Martha aided
at Bethany in serving (Jn 12 2). In the course
(Mt 26:6- of the meal, or at its close, Mary
13; Mk 14; brought a costly box of nard (valued by
3-9; Jn Judas at ‘300 shillings,” about $50, or
12: 1-9) £10; cf ARVm on Jn 6 7), and with
the perfume anointed the head (Mt,

Mk) and feet (Jn) of Jesus, wiping His feet with her
hair (Mt and Mk, though not mentioning the “feet,”
speak of the “body” of Jesus). Indignation, insti-


gated by Judas (Jn), was at once awakened at what
was deemed wanton waste. How much better had
the money been given to the poor! Jesus vindi-
cated Mary in her loving act—a prophetic anoint-
ing for His burial—and declared that wherever His
gospel went, it would be spoken of for a memorial
of her. It is the hearts from which such acts come
that are the true friends of the poor. The chief
priests were only the further exasperated at what
was happening, and at the interest shown in Lazarus,
and plotted to put Lazarus also to death (Jn 12 10).
On the day following—Palm Sunday — Jesus
made His public entry as Messiah into Jerus. All
the evangelists narrate this event.


3. The The Mount of Olives had to be crossed
Entry into from Bethany, and Jesus sent two
Jerusalem disciples to an adjacent village—prob-
(Mt 21:1— ably Bethphage (this seems to have
11; Mk 11: been also the name of a district)—
1-11; Lk  whereanassand its colt would be found
19:29-44; tied. These they were to bring to
n 12: Him, Jesus assuring them of the per-
12-19) mission of the owners. Garments


were thrown over the colt, and Jesns
seated Himself on it. In this humble fashion (as
Mt and Jn note, in fulfilment of prophecy, Zec 9
9), He proceeded to Jerus, from which a multitude,
bearing palm branches, had already come out to
meet Him (Jn). Throngs accompanied Him, going
before and after; these, spreading their garments,
and strewing branches in the way, hailed Him with
hosannas as the Son of David, the King of Israel,
who came in the name of the Lord. Very different
were the feelings in the breasts of the Pharisees.
“Behold,” they said, “how ye prevail nothing; lo,
the world is gone after him’ (Jn 12 19). They
bade Jesus rebuke His disciples, but Jesus replied
that if they were silent, the very stones would cry
out (Lk 19°40).

Jesus weeping over Jerusalem—return to Bethany.
—One incident in this progress to Jerus is related
only by Lk (19 41-44). As at a bend in the road
Jerus became suddenly visible, Jesus paused and
wept over the city, so blind to its day of visitation,
and so near to its awful doom. Not His own suffer-
ings, but the thought of Jerusalem’s guilt and woes,
filled Him with anguish. On reaching the city,
Mark’s testimony is explicit that He did no more
than enter the temple, and ‘look round on all things’
(11 11). . Then eventide having come, He returned
to Bethany with the Twelve.

The morning of Monday found Jesus and His
disciples again on their way to the city. Possibly

the early hours had been spent by
4, Cursing Jesus in solitary prayer, and, as they
of the Fig went, it is recorded that “he hungered.”


Tree— A fig tree from which, from its foliage,
Second fruit might have been expected, stood
Cleansing invitingly by the wayside, but when
of Temple Jesus approached it, it was found to
21:12-22; have nothing but leaves—a striking


Mk 11:12-— symbol of the outwardly religious, but
26; Lk 19: spiritually barren Jewish community.
45-48) And in this sense Jesus used it in pro-
nouncing on it the word of doom, “No
man eat fruit from thee henceforward for ever”
(Mk). Next morning (Tuesday), as the disciples
passed, the tree was found withered from the roots.
Mt combines the events of the cursing and the
withering, placing both on thesecond day, but Mk
more accurately distinguishes them. Jesus used the
surprise of the disciples as the occasion of a lesson
on the omnipotence of faith, with added counsels on
prayer.
Were there two cleansings ?—Pursuing His journey
on the first morning, Jesus reached the temple, and
there, as His first act, is stated by Mt and Mk to


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1656


have cleansed the temple of the traders. It is a
difficult question whether this is a second cleansing,
or the same act as that recorded by John at the
beginning of the ministry (Jn 2 18-22; see above),
and here narrated out of its chronological order.
The acts are at least quite similar in character and
significance. In favor of a second cleansing is the
anger of the priests and scribes (Mk 11 18; Lk 19
47), and their demand next day for His authority.
No other incidents are recorded of this visit to the
temple, except the healing of certain blind and lame,
and the praises of the children, ‘(Hosanna to the son
of David’”—an echo of the previous day’s proceed-
ings (Mt 21 14-16). In the evening He went back
to Bethany.

Far different is it with the third day of these visits
of Jesus to the temple—the Tuesday of the Passion


Week. This is crowded with parables,
5. The discourses, incidents, so numerous,
Eventful impressive, tragical, as to oppress the
Tuesday mind in seeking to grasp how one short


day could embrace them all. It was
the last day of the appearance of Jesus in the temple
(Jn 12 36), and marks His final break with the
authorities of the nation, on whom His words of
denunciation (Mt 23) fell with overwhelming force.
The thread of the day’s proceedings may thus be
briefly traced.
On His first appearance in the temple on the Tues-
day morning, Jesus was met by a demand from the
chief priests, scribes and elders (rep-
a) The resentatives of the Sanhedrin), for the
Demand for authority by which He acted as He
Authority— did. Jesus met them by a counter-


Parables question, “The baptism of John, was
(Mt 21: it from heaven, or from men?’ The
23—22:14; dilemma was obvious. If John was


Mk 11:27 Divinely accredited, why did they not
—12:12; accept his testimony to Jesus? Yet
Lk 20: 1-18) they feared to say his mission was of

men, for John was universally esteemed
aprophet. They could therefore only Jamely reply:
‘We cannot tell’ (AV). Matters had now come
to an issue, and Jesus, reverting to the method of
parable, set forth plainly their sin and its results to
themselves and others.

The Two Sons—the
Marriage of the King’s Son—The parables spoken
on this occasion were: that of the Two Sons, one who
said “I go not,” but afterward repented and went,
the other who said, “I go, sir,” but went not—
pointing the moral that the publicans and _harlots
went into the kingdom of God before the self-right-
eous leaders who rejected the preaching of John
(Mt 21 28-82); that of the Wicked Husbandmen,
who slew the servants, and finally the son, sent to
them, and were at length themselves destroyed, the
vineyard being given to others—a prophecy of the
transferring of the kingdom to the Gentiles (Mt,
Mk, Lk); and that of the Marriage of the King’s
Son (Mt 22 2-14), akin to that of the Great Supper
in Lk 14 16-24 in its gathering in of the outcasts to
take the place of those who had been bidden, but
distinguished from it by the feature of the wedding
garment, the lack of which meant being thrust into
the outer darkness. The Pharisees easily perceived
that these parables were spoken of them (Mt 21
45; Mk 12 12; Lk 20 19), and were correspond-
ingly enraged, yet dared not touch Jesus for fear
of the people.

The attempt was next made on the part of the
Pharisees, Herodians and Sadducees—now joined
in a common cause—to ensnare Jesus by captious
and compromising questions. These attempts He
met with a wisdom and dignity which foiled His
adversaries, while He showed a ready apprecia-
tion of a candid spirit when it presented itself,


Wicked Husbandmen—the-


and turned the point against His opponents by
putting a question on the Davidic sonship of the
Messiah.


by Ensnar- (1) Tribute to Caesar—the Resurrec-
ing Ques- tion—the Great Commandment.—First
tions, ete the Pharisees with the Herodians sought
(Mt 22:1- to entrap Him by raising the question


46; Mk 12: of the lawfulness of tribute to Caesar.
13-37; Lk By causing them to produce a denarius
20:19-44) bearing Caesar’s image and superscrip-
tion, Jesus obtained from them a recog-
nition of their acceptance of Caesar’s authority,
and bade them render Caesar’s things to Caesar,
and God’s to God. The Sadducees next tried Him
with the puzzle of the wife who had seven husbands,
leading up to denial of the resurrection; but Jesus
met them by showing that marriage relations have
no place in the resurrection life, and by pointing
to the implication of a future life in God’s word to
Moses, “I am the God of Abraham,” etc. God “is
not the God of the dead, but of the living,” a fact
which carried with it all the weight of resurrection,
as needed for the completion of the personal life.
The candid scribe, who came last with His question
as to which commandment was first of all, had a
different reception. Jesus met Him kindly, sat~
isfied him with His answer, and pronounced him
‘not far from the kingdom of God” (Mk 12 34).
(2) David's Son and Lord—The adversaries were
silenced, but Jesus now put to them His own ques-
tion. If David in Ps 110 could say “Jeh saith unto
my lord, Sit thou on my right hand,” etc, how was
this reconcilable with the Christ being David’s son?
The question was based on the acceptance of the
oracle as spoken by David, or one of his house, of
the Messiah, and was intended to suggest the higher
nature of Christ as one with God in a Divine sover-
eignty. David’s son was also David’s Lord.
At this point, in audience of the multitudes and
of His disciples in the temple, Jesus delivered that
tremendous indictment of the scribes


c) The and Pharisees, with denunciations of
Great De- woes upon them for their hypocrisy
nunciation and iniquity of conduct, recorded most
(Mt 23; fully in Mt 23. A more tremendous


ME 12:38-— denunciation of a class was never


40; Lk 20: uttered. While conceding to the
45-47; cf scribes and Pharisees any authority
Lk 11: they lawfully possessed (vs 2.3), Jesus


specially dwelt on their divorce of
; practice from precept. They said
and did not (ver 3). He denounced their perver-
sion of the right, their tyranny, their ostentation,
their keeping back others from the kingdom, their
zeal in securing proselytes, only to make them, when
gained, worse than themselves, their immoral cas-
uistry, their scruples about trifles, while neglecting
essentials, their exaltation of the outward at the
expense of the inward, their building the tombs of
the prophets, while harboring the spirit of those that
killed the prophets. He declared them to be foul
and corrupt to the last degree: ‘sons of Gehenna’
(vs 15.33). So awful a condition meant ripeness
fordoom, On them, through that law of retribution
which binds generation with generation in guilt and
penalty, would come all the righteous blood shed
since the days of Abel (the allusion to “Zachariah
son of Barachiah,” ver 35, is unmistakably to 2 Ch
24 21—this being the last book in the Heb Canon—
but “Barachiah” seems a confusion with Zec 1 1,
perhaps through a copyist’s gloss or error), At
the close indignation melts into tenderness in the
affecting plaint over Jerus—“O Jerusalem, Jerusa-
lem, . . . . how often would I have gathered thy
children together,” etc (vs 37-89)—words found in
Lk in an earlier context_(13 34.35), but assuredly
also appropriate here. For other parts of the dis-


1657


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


course found earlier, cf Lk 11 39-52. All seems
to have been gathered up afresh in this final accusa-
tion. It can be imagined that the anger of the
Pharisees was fierce at such words, yet they did not

venture openly to touch Him.
Before finally leaving the temple, Jesus seems to
have passed from the outer court into the women’s
court, and there to have sat down near


d) The the receptacles provided for the gifts
Widow’s of the worshippers. Many who were
Offering wealthy cast of their gold and silver into


(Mk 12:41- the treasury, but the eye of Jesus singled
44; Lk 21: out one poor widow who, creeping up,
1-4) cast in two mites (Gr leptd, the smallest
of coins), which made up but a farth-
ing. It was little, but it was her all, and Jesus
immortalized her poor offering by declaring that,
out of her want, she had given more than the wealth-
jest there. Gifts were measured in His sight by the
willingness that prompted them, and by the sac-
rifice they entailed.
It is perhaps to this crowded day, though some
place it earlier in the week (on Sunday or Monday),
that the incident should be referred of
e) The the request of certain Greeks to see
Visit of the Jesus, as related in Jn 12 20 ff. Who
Greeks (Jn these Greeks were, or whence they
12:20-86) came, is unknown, but they were evi-
dently proselytes to the Jewish faith,
and men of asincere spirit. ‘Their request was made
through Philip of Bethsaida, and Philip and An-
drew conveyed it to Jesus. It is not said whether
their wish was granted, but we can hardly doubt
that it was. Jesus evidently saw in the incident a
prelude of that glory that should accrue to Himself
through all men being drawn to Him (vs 23.32).
But He saw as clearly that this “glorifying” could
only be through His death (vs 24.33), and He uni-
versalized it into a law of His Kingdom that, as a
grain of wheat must fall into the earth and die if it
is to be multiplied, so only through sacrifice can
any life be made truly fruitful (vs 24.25). The
thought of death, however, always brought trouble
to the soul of Jesus (ver 27), and a voice from the
Father was given to comfort Him. The multitude
thought it thundered, and failed to apprehend the
meaning of the voice, or His own words about being
“lifted up” (vs 29.34).
Jesus had now bidden farewell to the temple. As
He was going out, His disciples—or one of them


f) Dis- magnificence of the buildings of the
course on temple, eliciting from Him the startling
Last Things reply that not one stone should be left
(Mt 24; Mk upon another that should not be thrown
13; Lk 21: down. Later in the evening, when
5-36) seated on the Mount of Olives on their

return journey, in view of the temple,
Andrew, James and John (Mk) asked Him privately
when these things should be, and what would be
the signs of their fulfilment. In Mt the question is
put more precisely, “When shall these things be?
and what shall be the sign of thy coming [parousta],
and of the end of the world?” (or “consummation
of the age’). It is in answer to these complex ques-
tions that Jesus spoke His great discourse on the
destruction of Jerus and His final coming, some of
the strands in which it is difficult now to disentangle.
In the extended report in Mt 24 certain passages
appear which are given elsewhere by Luke (cf ik 17
20-37). It may tend to clearness if a distinction
be observed between the nearer event of the de-
struction of Jerus—also in its way a coming of the
Son of Man—and the more remote event of the final
parousia. The former, to which vs 15-28 more
specially belong, seems referred to by the “these
things” in ver 34, which, it is declared, shall be ful-


(Mk)—called His attention to the |


filled in that generation. Of the final parousia, on
the other hand, it is declared in ver 36 that “of that
day and hour knoweth no one, not even the angels
of heaven, neither the Son, but the Father only”
(cf Mk 13 32). The difficulty occasioned by the
“immediately” of ver 29 is relieved by recalling the
absence of perspective and grouping of future
events in all apocalyptic prophecy—the consum-
mation ever rising as the background of the imme-
diate experience which is its prelude. The dis-
course then divides itself into a general part (vs
4-14), delineating the character of the entire period
till the consummation (false Christs and prophets,
wars, tribulations, apostasies, preaching of the gos-
el to all nations, etc); a special part relating to the
impending destruction of the city, with appropriate
warnings (vs 15-28); and a closing part (vs 32-51)
relating mainly to the final parousia, Bit not without
reference to preceding events in the extension of
Christ’s kingdom, and ingathering of His elect (vs
30.31). Warning is given of the suddenness of the
coming of the Son of Man, and the need of being
prepared for it (vs 37-51). The whole is a massive
prophecy, resting on Christ’s consciousness that
His death would be, not the defeat of His mission,
but the opening up of the way to His final glorifi-
cation and triumph.
To this great discourse on the solemnities of the
end, Jesus, still addressing His disciples, added three
memorable parables of instruction and
g) Parables warning (Mt 25)—the first, that of


of Ten the Ten Virgins, picturing, under the
Virgins, figure of virgins who went to meet the
Talents bridegroom with insufficient, provision
and Last of oil for their lamps, the danger of
Judgment being taken unawares in waiting for
(Mt 25) the Son of Man; the second, that of


the Talents, akin to the parable in Lk
of the Pounds (19 11-27), emphasizing the need of
diligence in the Lord’s absence; the third, that of
the Sheep and Goats, or Last Judgment, showing
how the last division will be made according as dis-
cipleship is evinced by loving deeds done to those
in need on earth—such deeds being owned by Christ
the King as done to Himself. Love is thus declared
to be the ultimate law in Christ’s kingdom (cf 1 Cor
13); the loveless spirit is reprobated. ‘‘These shall
go away into eternal punishment: but the righteous
into eternal life” (ver 46).
Lk 21 37.38 might suggest that Jesus taught in
the temple every day till the Thursday of the Pass-
over; if, however, the denunciation


6. A Day took place, as nearly all agree, on Tues-
of Retire- day, an exception must be made of the
ment (cf Wednesday, which Jesus probably
Jn 12:36) spent in retirement in Bethany in prep-


aration of spirit for His last great con-
flict (others arrange differently, and put some of
the preceding events in this day). The summary
in Jn 12 36-43 connects the blindness of mind of
the Pharisees with Isaiah’s vision (6 10), and with
the prophecy of the rejected Servant (63 1).
The plot for the destruction of Jesus was mean-
while maturing. Two days before the Passover
(Tuesday evening), Jesus forewarned
7. An At- the disciples of His approaching be-
mosphere of trayal and crucifixion (Mt 26 2); and


Plotting— probably at that very hour a secret
Judas and meeting of the chief priests and elders
the Priests was being held in the court of the house


(Mt 26:1-5. of the high priest, Caiaphas (Mt), to
14-16; Mk consult as to the means of putting Him
14:1.2.10. to death. Their resolve was that it
11; Lk 22: should not be done on the feast day,
1-6) lest there should be a tumult; but the

appearance of Judas, who since the
anointing had seemingly meditated this step, speed-


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1658


ily changed their plans. For the paltry sum of 30
pieces of silver (shekels of the sanctuary, less than
$20 or £4; the price of a slave, Ex 21 32; cf Zec
11 12), the recreant disciple, perhaps persuading
himself that he was really forcing Jesus to an exer-
cise of His Messianic power, agreed to betray his
Lord. The covenant of infamy was made, and the
traitor now ouly waited his opportunity to carry
out his project.

il, From the Last Supper till the Cross.—A question of


admitted difficulty arises in the comparison of the Synop-
tics and Jn as tothe dates of the Last Supper


1. The and of the crucifixion. The Synoptics seem
1 clearly to place the Last Supper on the
Chronology evening of the 14th of Nisan (ia Jewish


reckoning, the beginning of the 15th), and
to identify it with the ordinary paschal meal (Mt 26 17—
19). The crucifixion then took place on the 15th. Jn, on
the contrary, seems to place the supper on the day before
the Passover (13 1), and the crucifixion on the 14th,
when the Passover had not yet been eaten (18 28; 19 14).
Many, on this ground, affirm an irreconcilable dis-
crepancy between Jn and the Synoptics, some (e.g.
Meyer, Farrar, less decisively Sanday) preferring Jn;
others (Strauss, Baur, Schmiedel, etc) using the fact to
discredit Jn. By those who accept both accounts,
various modes of reconciliation are proposed. A favor-
ite opinion (early_church writers; many moderns, as
Godet, Westcott, Farrar) is that Jesus, in view of His
death, anticipated the Passover, and ate His parting
meal with His disciples on the evening of the 13th;
others (e.g. Tholuck, Luthardt, Edersheim, Andrews,
D. Smith), adhering to the Synoptics, take the view, here
shared, that the apparent discrepancy is accounted for
by a somewhat freer usage of terms in Jn. Details of
the discussion must be sought in the works on the sub-
ject. The case for the anticipatory view is well given in
Westcott, Intro to the Study of the Gospels, 339 ff; and
in Farrar, Life of Christ, Excur. X; a good statement
of that for the Synoptics may be seen in Andrews, Life
of Our Lord; cf Tholuck, Comm. on Jn, on 13 1; Lut-
hardt, Comm. on Jn, on 13 1; 18 28; D. Smith, Days
of His Flesh, App. II. The language of the Synop-
tists (‘the first day of unleavened bread, when they
sacrificed the passover,’ Mk 14 12) leaves no douht
that they intended to identify the Last Supper with the
regular Passover, and it is hardly conceivahle that they
could he mistaken on so vital a point of the apostolic
tradition: This also was the view of the churches of
Asia Minor, where John himself latterly resided. On the
other hand, the phrase to ‘‘eat the passover’’ in Jn 18
28 may very well, in John’s usage, refer to participation
in the special sacrifices which formed a chief feature of
the proceedings on the 15th. The allusion in Jn 13 1
need mean no more than that, the Passover now impend-
ing, Jesus, loving His aaules to the end, gave them a
special token of that love during the meal that ensued.
The ‘ preparation of the passover” in Jn 19 14.31 most
naturally refers to the preparation for the Sahbath of
the Passover week, alluded to also by the Synoptics (Mt
27 62; Mk 15 42; Lk 23 54). The objections based
on rabbinical regulations ahout the Sabbath are con-
vincingly met by Tholuck (see also Andrews). We
assume, therefore, that Our Lord ate the Passover with
His disciples at the usual time—the evening of the 14th of
Nisan (i.e. the beginning of the 15th).


In the scene in the upper chamber, at the observ-

ance of the Last Supper, we enter the holy of holies

of this part of the Lord’s history. It

2. The Last is difficult, in combining the narratives,

Supper (Mt to be sure of the order of all the par-

26:17-35;  ticulars, but the main events are clear.
Mk 14:12— They may be exhibited as follows:


31; Lk 22- On “the first day of unleavened
7-38; Ju bread’’—Thursday, 14th of Nisan—
13; cf Jesus bade two of His disciples (Lk
Cor 11: names Peter and John) make the need-
23-25) ful preparations for the observance of


the Passover. This included the saeri-
ficing of the lamb at the temple, and the securing of
a guest-chamber. Jesus bade the disciples follow

aman whom they would meet bearing
a) The


Preparation stopped they would find one willing

to receive them. The master of the

house, doubtless a disciple, at once gave them “a

large upper room furnished and ready” (Mk); there
they made ready.

Evening being come, Jesus and the Twelve assem-

bled, and took their places for the meal.


a pitcher, and at the house where he ©


from Ju 13 23 that John reclined next to Jesus (on
the right), and the sequel shows that Judas and

Peter were near on the other side. It
b) Dispute was probably this arrangement that
about gave rise to the unseemly strife for pre-
Precedence cedence among the disciples narrated
—Washing in Lk 22 24-30. The spirit thus dis-
of the Dis- played Jesus rebuked, as He had more
ciples’ Feet than once had occasion to do (cf Mk 9


>-Depart- 33-37); then (for here may he inserted
ure of the beautiful incident in Jn 13 1 ff),
Judas rising from the table, He gave them an


amazing illustration of His own precept,
“He that is chief [let him become] as he that doth
serve I am in the midst of you as he that
serveth” (Lk 22 26.27), in divesting Himself of His
garments, girding Himself with a towel, and per-
forming the act of a servant in washing His disciples’
feet. Peter’s exclamation must have expressed the
feelings of all: ‘Lord, dost thou wash my feet?”
The act of the Divine Master was a wonderful lesson
in humility, but Jesus used it also as a parable of
something higher. ‘If I wash thee not [1.e. if thou
art not cleansed by the receiving of my word and
spirit, which this washing symbolizes], thou hast no
part with me’”’; then on Peter’s further impulsive
protest, “Lord, not my feet only, but also my
hands and my head,” the word: ‘He that is bathed
needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean
every whit”’ (i.e. sanctification of the inner man is
once for all, but there is need for cleansing from
the sins of the daily walk). Resuming His place at
the table, He bade them imitate the example He
had just given them.

Is it 1?—An ominous word had accompanied
the reply to Peter, ‘“Ye are not all clean” (Jn 13
10.11). As the supper proceeded, the meaning of
this was made plain. Judas, who had already sold
his Master, was at the table with the rest. He had
permitted Jesus to wash his feet, and remained un-
moved by that surpassing act of condescending
love. Jesus was “troubled in spirit,’ and now
openly declared, “One of you shall betray me”
(the Gr word means lit. “deliver up”: ef Lk 22
4.6,and RVm throughout). It was an astounding
announcement to the disciples, and from one and
another came the trembling question, ‘Lord, is it
I?” Jesus answered that it was one of those dipping
his hand with Him in the dish (Mk), and spoke of
the woe that would overtake the betrayer (“Good


- were it for that man if he had not been born’).


John, at a sign from Peter, asked more definitely,
“Who is it?” (Jn). Jesus said, but to John only,
it was he to whom He would give a sop, and the sop
was given to Judas. The traitor even yet sought
to mask his treachery by the words, “Is it I, Rabbi?”
and Jesus replied, though still not aloud, “Thou hast
said” (Mt); then, as Satanic passion stirred the
breast of Judas, He added, “What thou doest, do
quickly’ y (Jn). Judas at once rose and went out—
into the night (13 30). The disciples, not compre-
hending his abrupt departure, thought some errand
had been given him for the feast or for the poor.
Jesus was relieved by his departure and spoke of
the glory coming to Himself and to His Father, and


| of love as the mark of true discipleship (13 31-35).


The forms of the observance of the Passover by
the Jews are given elsewhere (see Passover). Luke
alone of the NT writers speaks of 2


c) The cups (22 17.20); in Jewish practice 4
Lord’s cups were used. The ‘Western’ text
Supper D omits Lk’s 2d cup, from which some


_, (ef Sanday, HDB) infer duplication,
but this is not necessary. Lk’s 1st cup (ver 17) may
be that with which the paschal supper opened;
the 2d cup—that mentioned by all the writers—


We gather | was probably the 3d Jewish cup, known as “the cup


1659


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


of blessing” (cf 1 Cor 10 16). Some, however, as
Meyer, make it the 4th cup. It is implied in Mt,
Mk, Jn, that by this time Judas had gone. Left
thus with His own, the essentials of the paschal meal
being complete, Jesus proceeded, by taking and
distributing bread and wine, associating them with
His body and blood, soon to be offered in death upon
the cross, to institute that sacred rite in which,
through all ages since (though its simplicity has
often been sadly obscured) His love and sacrifice
have been commemorated by His church. There
are variations of phrase in the different accounts,
but in the essentials of the sacramental institution
there is entire agreement. Taking bread, after
thanks to God, Jesus broke it, and gave it to the
disciples with the words, ‘‘This is my body”; the
cup, in like manner, after thanksgiving, He gave
them with the words, “This is my blood of the cov-
enant [in Lk and Paul, ‘‘the new covenant in my
blood’’] which is poured out for many” (Mt adds,
“unto remission of sins’). Lk and Paul add what
is implied in the others: “This do in remembrance
of me” (Lk 22 19; 1 Cor 11 24). Nothing could
more plainly designate the bread and wine as holy
symbols of the Lord’s body and blood, offered in
death for man’s redemption, and sealing in His blood
a hew covenant with God; nor, so long as the rite
is observed in its Divine simplicity, as Jesus insti-
tuted it, will it be possible to expunge from His
death the character of a redeeming sacrifice. In
touching words Jesus intimated that He would no
more drink of the fruit of the vine till He drank it
new with them in their Father’s Kingdom (on the
doctrinal aspects, see Eucuarist; SACRAMENT;
Lorp’s SupPER).
The Supper was over, and parting was imminent,
but Jesus did not leave the holy chamber till He had
poured out. His inmost heart in those
d) The Last tender, consolatory, profoundly spirit-
Discourses ual addresses which the beloved disciple


—Initer- has preserved for us in the 14th, 15th
cessory and 16th chs of his Gospel, followed
Prayer by the wonderful closing intercessory


prayer of ch17. He was leaving them,
but their hearts were not to be disquieted, for they
would see Him again (14 18; 16 16 ff), and if, ere
long, He would part with them again in visible form,
it was only outwardly He would be separated from
them, for He would send them the Holy Spirit, the
Paraclete, who would take His place, to guide them
into all truth, and bring all things to their remem-
brance that He had said to them (14 16.17; 16 26;
16 7-14). If He went away, it was to prepare a
place for them, and He would come again to receive
them to Himself in His Father’s house (14 1-3);
let them meanwhile show their love to Him by keep-
ing Hig commandments (14 15.23.24). In the
Spirit He Himself and the Father would dwell in the
souls that loved Him (14 21-23). The intimacy
of their union with Him would be like that of
branches in the vine; only by abiding in Him could
they bring forth fruit (16 1 ff). They would have
tribulations (16 18 ff; 16 1.2), but as His dying
bequest He left them His own peace (14 27); that
would sustain their hearts in all trial (16 33).
With many such promises did He comfort them in
view of the terrible ordeal through which they were
goon to pass; then, addressing His Father, He
prayed for their holy keeping, and their final ad-
mission to His glory (17 9-18.24). ;
These solemn discourses finished, Jesus and His
disciples sang a hymn (the “Hallel’”) and departed
to go to the Mount of Olives. Comparing the
evangelists, one would infer that the conversation
in which Jesus foretold the denial of Peter at least
commenced before they left the chamber (Lk 22
31 ff; Jn connects it, probably through relation of


subject, with the exposure of Judas, 13 36-38);
but it seems to have continued on the way (Mt,
Mk). Jesus had spoken of their being


e) The “offended” in Him that night. In
Departure his exaltation of spirit, Peter declared
and Warn- that though all should be offended in
ing Him, he would never be offended.


Jesus, who had already warned Peter
that Satan sought to have him, that he might sift
him as wheat (Lk 22 31; but “I made supplica-
tion for thee,” etc), now told him that before the
cock should crow, he would thrice deny Him. Peter
stoutly maintained that he would die rather than
be guilty of so base an act—so little did he or the
others (Mt 26 35; Mk 14 31) know themselves!
The enigmatic words in Lk 22 36 about taking
scrip and sword point metaphorically to the need,
in the times that were coming upon them, of every
lawful means of provision and self-defence; the
succeeding words show that “sword” is not intended
to be taken literally (ver 38).

Descending to the valley, Jesus and His disciples,
crossing the brook Kidron (‘‘of the cedars’’), en-
tered the “garden” (Jn) known as
3. Geth- Gethsemane (‘‘oil-press”), at the foot
semane— of the Mount of Olives. Here took
the Betrayal place the agony, which is the proper
and Arrest commencement of the Passion, the
(Mt 26:36- betrayal by Judas and the arrest of
66; Mk 14: Jesus.
32-52; Lk During the evening the thoughts of
22:39-53; Jesus had been occupied mainly with
Jn 18:1-12) His disciples; now that the hour had
come when the things predicted con-
cerning Him should have fulfilment (Lk 22 37:
“your hour, and the power of darkness,” ver 53), it
was inevitable that mind and spirit


a) Agony should concentrate on the awful bodily
in the and mental sufferings that lay before
Garden Him. It was not the thought of physi-


cal sufferirig alone—from that also the
pure and sensitive humanity of Jesus shrank with
natural horror—but death to Him, the Holy One
and Prince of Life, had an indescribably hateful
character as a hostile power in humanity, due to
the judgment of God on sin, and now descending
upon Him through the workings of the vilest of
human passions in the religious heads of His nation.
What anguish to such an One, filled with love and
the desire to save, to feel Himself rejected, betrayed,
deserted, doomed to a malefactor’s cross—alone,
yet not alone, for the Father was with Him! (Jn
16 32). The burden on His spirit when He reached
Gethsemane was already, as the language used
shows, all but unendurable—“amazed,” ‘‘sore
troubled,” “My soul is exceeding sorrowful even
unto death’ (Mk). There, bidding the other dis-
ciples wait, He took with Him Peter, and James,
and John, and withdrew into the recesses _of the
garden. Leaving these also a little behind, He sank
on the ground in solitary ‘‘agony” (Lk), and “with
strong crying and tears” (He 5 7), poured out His
soul in earnest supplication to His Father. ‘Let
this cup pass away from me”’—it could not be, but
thus the revulsion of His nature was expressed—
“howbeit not what I will, but what thou wilt.”
The passage in Lk (22 44), “His sweat became as
it were great drops of blood,” etc, though omitted
in certain MSS, doubtless preserves a genuine trait.
Returning to the three, He found them overpowered
with sleep: even the support of their wakeful sym-
pathy was denied Him! ‘Watch and pray,” He
gently admonished them, “that ye enter not into
temptation.” A second and third time the same
thing happened—wrestling with God on His part,
sleep on theirs, till, with Divine strengthening (Lk
2241), victory was attained, and calm restored.


Jesus Christ


“Sleep on now,” He said to His disciples (the crisis
is past; your help can avail no more): ‘‘Arise, let
us be going” (the future has to be faced; the be-
trayer is at hand. See the remarkable sermon of
F. W. Robertson, II,-sermon 22).
The crisis had indeed arrived. Through the dark-
ness, even as Jesus spoke, was seen flashing the light
of torches and lanterns, revealing a
b) Betrayal mingled company of armed men—
by Judas— Rom soldiers, temple officers (Jn),
others—sent by the chief priests,
scribes and elders, to apprehend Jesus.
Their guide was Judas. It had been
found impracticable to lay hands on Jesus in public,
but Judas knew this retreat (Jn 18 2), and had
arranged, by an act of dastardly treachery, to en-
able them to effect the capture in privacy. The
sign was to beakiss. With an affectation of friend-
ship, only possible to one into whose heart the devil
had truly entered (Lk 22 3; Jn 13 27), Judas
advanced, and hailing Jesus as ““Master,”’ effusively
kissed Him (Mt 26 49; Mk 14 45m). Jesus had
asked, ‘‘Betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?”
(Lk); now He said, ‘‘Friend, do that for which thou
art come” (Mt). The soldiers essayed to take Jesus,
but on their first approach, driven back as by a
supernatural power, they fell to the ground (Jn).
A proof thus given of the voluntariness of His sur-
render (cf Mt 26 53: ‘Thinkest thou that I cannot
beseech my Father,” etc), Jesus, remarking only
on the iniquity of secret violence when every day
they had opportunity to take Him in the temple,
submitted to be seized and bound. At this point
Peter, with characteristic impetuosity, remember-
ing, perhaps, his pledge to die, if need be, with Jesus,
drew a sword, and cut off the right ear of the high
priest’s servant, Malchus (Jn gives the names). If
he thought his deed justified by what Jesus had
earlier said about “swords” (Lk 22 36.38), he was
speedily undeceived by Jesus’ rebuke (Mt 26 52;
Jn 18 11), and by His healing of the ear (Lk; the
last miracle of Jesus before His death). How little
this flicker of impulsive boldness meant is shown
by the general panic that immediately followed.
‘All the disciples,” it is related, “left him, and fled’’
(Mt, Mk). Mk tells of a young man who had come
upon the scene with only a linen cloth cast about
his naked body, and who fied, leaving the cloth
behind (14 51.52). Not improbably the young man
was Mark himself.
It would be about midnight when Jesus was ar-
rested, and He was at once hurried to the house of
Caiaphas, the high priest, where in


4. Trial expectation of the capture, a company
before the of chief priests, scribes and elders—
Sanhedrin members of the Sanhedrin—were al-


(Mt 26:57— ready assembled. Here the first stage
76; 27:1- in the trial of Jesus took place.

10; Mk 14:
53-72; 15:


The legal and constitutional questions
connected with the trlal of Jesus are con-


1; Lk 22: sidered in the art. on Jesus Cunist, ARREST
54-71; Jn 42ND TritaL OF; see also Dr. Taylor Innes,

%on, The Trial of Jesus Christ; on the powers
18:12-27; of the Sanhedrin, see SANHEDRIN, and cf
cf Acts Schiirer, Jewish People, etc, II, 1, pp. 163 ff.
1:18.19) There seems Ilttle doubt that, while certaln


judiclal forms were observed, the trial was
illegal in nearly every particular. The
arrest itself was arbitrary, as not founded on any formal
accusation (the Sanhedrin, however, seems to have ar-
rogated to itself powers of this kind; cf Acts 4 1 ff);
but the night session, lack of definite charge, search for
testimony, interrogation of accused, haste in condem-
nation, were unquestionabiy in flagrant violation of the
established rules of Jewlsh judicial procedure In such
cases. It is to be remembered that the death of Jesus had
already been decided on by the heads of the Sanhedrin, so
that the trlal was wholly a means to a foregone conclusion.
On the historlcal side, certain difficulties arise. Jn seems
to make the first interrogatlon of Jesus take place before
Annas, father-in-law to Caiaphas (on Annas, see below;
though deposed 15 years before, he retained, in reality,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1660


all the dignity and influence of the high-priesthood; cf Lk
3 2; Acts 46); after which He is sent to Cajaphas (Jn
18 13.14.19-24), The narrative is simplified if either (1)
vs 19-23 are regarded as a preliminary interrogatory by
Annas till matiers were prepared for the arraignment
hefore Caiaphas; or (2) ver 24 is taken as retrospective (in
the sense of ‘‘had sent,”’ asin AV), and the interrogation
is included in the trial by Caiaphas (cf ver 19: ‘‘the high
priest’). Annas and Caiaphas may be presumed from
the account of Peter's denials to have occupied the same
Official residence: else Annas was present on this night to
he in readiness for the trial. The frequently occurring
term “chief priests’' denotes the high priests, with those
who had formeriy held this rank, and members of their
families (cf Schiirer, op. cit., 203 if). They formed, with
the scribes, the most important element in the Sanhedrin.


First Jesus was led before Annas, then by him,
after a brief interview, was transferred, still bound,
to Caiaphas. Annas had been de-
posed, as above noticed, much earlier
(15 AD), but still retained the name
and through his sons and relations, as
the Unjust long as he lived, exercised much of the
Judgment authority of high priest. Like all

those holding this high office, he and
Caiaphas were Sadducees. Annas—if he is the
questioner in Jn 18 19-23—asked Jesus concern-
ing His disciples and His teaching. Such interroga-
tion was unlawful, the duty of the accuser, in Jewish
law, being to produce witnesses; properly, there-
fore, Jesus referred him to His public teaching in the
temple, and bade him ask those who heard Him
there. An officer standing by struck Jesus with
his hand for so speaking: an indignity which Jesus
endured with meek remonstrance (vs 22.23).

(1) An illegal session—Meanwhile a company
of the Sanhedrin had assembled (23 sufficed for a
quorum), and Jesus was brought before this tri-
bunal, which was presided over by Caiaphas. A
hurried search had been made for witnesses (this,
like the night session, was illegal), but even the
suborned testimony thus obtained (‘false witnesses’)
was found useless for the purpose of establishing,
constructively or directly, a charge of blasphemy
against Jesus. At length two witnesses were pro-
duced who gave a garbled version of the early saying
of Jesus (Jn 2 19) about destroying the temple
and rebuilding it in three days. To speak against
the temple might be construed as speaking against
God (cf Mt 23 16.21; Acts 6 13.14), but here too
the witnesses broke down through lack of agree-
ment. At all costs, however, must Jesus be con-
demned: the unprecedented course therefore was
taken of seeking a conviction from the mouth of the
accused Himself. Rising from his seat, the high
priest adjured Jesus by the living God to tell them
whether He was the Christ, the Son of God (in Mk,
“Son of the Blessed’’). In using this title, Caiaphas
had evidently in view, as in Jn 6 18; 10 33, a
claim to equality with God. The supreme moment
had come, and Jesus did not falter in His reply:
“Thou hast said.” Then, identifying Himself with
the Son of Man in Daniel’s vision (7 13.14), He sol-
emnly added, “Henceforth [from His resurrection
on] ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the right
hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
It was enough. Without even the pretense of in-
quiry into the truth or falsehood of the claim, the
high priest rent his garments, exclaiming, ‘“He hath
spoken blasphemy,” and by assent of all Jesus was
adjudged worthy of death. Abuse and insult fol-
lowed. The minions of the Sanhedrin were per-
mitted to spit on the condemned One, smite Him,
blindfold and mock Him, saying, ‘Prophesy unto ~
us, thou Christ: who is he that struck thee?”’ Then,
with further blows, He was led away (Mt 26 68).

(2) A morning confirmation.—To give color of
judicial sanction to these tumultuous and wholly
irregular night proceedings, a more formal meeting
of the Sanhedrin was convened as soon as day


a) Before
Annas and
Caiaphas—


1661


had dawned (Mt 271; Mk 151; Lk 22 66-71).
Probably the irregularities were held to be excused
by the urgency of the occasion and the solemnities
of the feast. Jesus was again brought forward;
new questions were put which He declined to an-
swer. Possibly a new avowal of His Messiahship
was made (more probably Luke includes in this scene,
the only one he records, some of the particulars of
the earlier proceedings). ‘The judgment of the past

night was confirmed. ;
While this greatest moral tragedy of the trial and
condemnation of Jesus was in process, a lesser, but
still awful, tragedy in the history of a


b) The soul was being enacted in the court
Threefold of the same building (from this the
Denial chamber in which the Sanhedrin sat


was visible), in the threefold denial of

his Master by the apostle Peter. Peter, who had
followed ‘‘afar off” (Lk), had gained access to the
court through an unnamed disciple, whom it is easy
to identify with John (Jn 18 15). As he stood
warming himself at a fire which had been kindled,
the maid who had admitted them (Jn), gazing atten-
tively at Peter, said boldly, “Thou also wast with
Jesus the Galilean” (Mt 26 69). Unnerved, and
affrighted by his surroundings, Peter took the readi-
est mode of escape in denial. “I know him not.”
His heart must have sunk within him as he framed
the words, and the crowing of a cock at the moment
(Mk—perhaps an hour after midnight), reminding
him of his Master’s warning, completed his dis-
comfiture. Guiltily he withdrew to the porch, only
a little after to be accosted by another (the maid
had spoken to her neighbors, Mk), with the same
charge. More afraid than ever, he declared again,
“T know not this man,” and, seeing he was not be-
lieved, strengthened the denial with an oath. Yet
a third time, an hour later, a bystander (or several,
Mk), this time founding on his Galilean speech,
ronounced, “Of a truth thou art one of them.’
eter, to clear himself, cursed and swore, anew dis-
claiming knowledge of his Lord. To this depth
had the boastful apostle fallen—as low, it might
seem, as Judas! But there was a difference. As
Peter spoke the cock again crew—the cockcrow
which gives its form to three of the narratives (Mk
alone mentions the double cockcrowing). At the
game instant, either from within, or as He was being
led forth, Jesus turned and looked on His erring
disciple. That look—so full of pity, sorrow, re-
proach—could never be forgotten! Its effect was
instantaneous: ‘Peter went out, and wept bitterly.”

Peter’s heartfelt repentance has its counterfoil
in the remorse of Judas, which, bitter as it also was,

cannot receive the nobler name. First,
c) Remorse Judas sought to return the 30 shekels
and Suicide paid him as the price of blood (‘I be-
of Judas trayed innocent blood”); then, when

callously rebuffed by the priests and
elders, he flung down the accursed money in the
sanctuary, and went and hanged himself. Mt and
Acts seem to follow slightly divergent traditions as
to his end and the purchase of the potter’s field.
The underlying facts probably are that the priests
applied the money, which they could not put into
the treasury (Mt), to the purchase of the field,
where, either before or after the purchase, Judas
destroyed himself (Acts: falling and bursting asun-
der), assigning ‘it as a place to bury strangers in.
Its connection with Judas is attested by its name,
“Akeldama,” “the field of blood.”

The Jews might condemn, but they had no power
to execute sentence of death (Jn 18 31). This
power had been taken from them by the Romans,
and was now vested in the Rom governor. The

rocurator of Judaea was Pontius Pilate, a man hated
by the Jews for his ruthless tyranny (see PraTE),


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


yet, as the Gospels show him, not without a sense
of right, but vacillating and weak-willed in face
of mob clamor, and risk to his own in-


5. Trial terests. His residence in Jerus (“Prae-
before torium,” ERV “palace’’) was probably
Pilate (Mt Herod’s former palace (thus Schiirer,
27:2.11- G. A. Smith, etc), on the tesselated
31; Mk 15: pavement (In 19 13) in the semicir-
1-20; Lk cular front of which was placed the
23:1-25; tribunal (béma) from which judgments
Jn 18:28- were delivered. It was to_ this place
40; 19: Jesus was now brought. The events
1-16) took place when it was “early” (Jn 18


28), probably between 6 and 7 AM (cf
19 14, Rom computation).
Jesus was taken within the Praetorium, but His
accusers were too scrupulous about defilement at
the Passover festival (Jn 18 28) to
a) Attitude enter the building. Pilate therefore
of the came out to hear their accusation.
Accusers They would fain have had him endorse
their condemnation without further
inquiry, but this he would not do. They would not
have it that it was a simple question of their law,
yet had to justify their demand for a death sentence
(ver 31). They based, therefore, on the alleged
revolutionary character of Christ’s teaching, His
forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar (a false charge),
His claim to be a king (Lk 28 2.5), to all which
charges Jesus answered not a word (Mk 16 3.5).
At a later stage, after Pilate, who knew very well
that no mere sedition against the Rom power had
called forth all this passion (witness the choice of
Barabbas), had repeatedly declared that he found
no crime in Jesus (Mk 15 14; Lk 23 4.14.22; Jn
18 38; 19 4.6), the real spring of their action was
laid bare: ‘‘We have a law, and by that law he
ought to die, because he made himself the Son of
God” (Jn 19 7). When it was seen how this
declaration made Pilate only the more unwilling
to yield to their rage, return was made to the politi-
cal motive, now in the form of personal threat: ‘‘If
thou release this man, thou art not Caesar’s friend”
(ver 12). This was Pilate’s weak point, and the
Jews knew it. The clamor grew ever louder, ‘‘Cru-
cify him, crucify him.” Hate of Jesus and national
degradation could go no farther than in the cry,
“We have no king but Caesar’ (ver 15).
Pilate was from the first impressed with the inno-
cence of Jesus, and was sincerely anxious, as his
actions showed, to save Him from the
b) The terrible and ignominious death’ His
Attitude of implacable enemies were bent on in-
Pilate flicting upon Him. His crime was
that, as Rom judge, he finally, against
his own convictions, through fear of a charge of dis-
loyalty to Caesar, yielded up to torture and death
One whom he had pronounced guiltless, to gratify
the brutal passions of a mob. By Pilate’s own ad-
missions, Christ’s death was, not a punishment for
any crime, but a judicial murder. First, through
private examination, Pilate satisfied himself that
the kingship Jesus claimed (“Thou sayest”’) carried
with it no danger to the throne of Caesar. Jesus
was a king indeed, but His kingdom was not of this
world; was not, like earthly kingdoms, supported
by violence; was founded on the truth, and gathered
its subjects from those that received the truth (Jn
18 36.37). The indifference to the name of truth
which the jaded mind of Pilate confessed (‘‘What is
truth?’”’) could not hide from him the nobility of
soul of the Holy One who stood before him. He
declared publicly, “I find no fault in this man,” and
thereafter sought means of saving Him, at least of
shifting the responsibility of His condemnation from
himself to others. :
(1) Jesus sent to Herod—Hearing in the clamor


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


‘


1662


round the judgment seat that Jesus was a Galilean,
and remembering that Herod Antipas, who had
jurisdiction in that region, was in the city, Pilate’s
first expedient was to send Jesus to Herod, to be
examined by him (Lk 23 6-11). This act of cour-
tesy had the effect of making Herod and Pilate,
who had been at enmity, again friends (ver 12);
otherwise it failed of its object. Herod was pleased
enough to see One he had so often heard about—
even thought in his flippancy that a miracle might
be done by Him—but when Jesus, in presence of
“that fox’? (Lk 13 32), refused to open His mouth
in answer to the accusations heaped upon Him,
Herod, with his soldiers, turned the matter into
jest, by clothing Jesus in gorgeous apparel, and
sending Him back as a mock-king to Pilate.

(2) “Not this man, but Barabbas.’”’—Pilate’s next
thought was to release Jesus in pursuance of a Jew-
ish custom of setting free a prisoner at the feast,
and to this end, having again protested that no fault
had been found in Him, offered the people the choice
between Jesus and a notorious robber and murderer
called Barabbas, then in prison. Just then, as he
sat on the judgment seat, a message from his wife
regarding a dream she had (‘Have thou nothing to
do with that righteous man,’ Mt 27 19) must
strongly have influenced his superstitious mind.
Pilate could hardly have conceived that the multi-
tude would prefer a murderer to One so good and
pure; but, instigated by the priests, they perpe-
trated even this infamy, shouting for the release of
Barabbas and the crucifixion of Jesus.

(3) ‘““Hece Homo.”’—Pilate’s weakness now began
to reveal itself. He proposed to ‘‘chastise” (scourge)
Jesus—why “chastise,” if He was innocent?—then
release Him. But this compromise, as was to be
anticipated, only whetted the eagerness for blood,
and the cries grew ever louder, ‘Crucify him.”
Pilate, however, as if yielding to the storm, did
deliver Jesus to be scourged (scourging—a fearful
infliction—preceded crucifixion), the cruelty being
aggravated by the maltreatment of the soldiers,
who, outstripping former mockeries, put on His head
a crown of thorns, arrayed Him in a purple robe,
and rained blows upon His bleeding face and form.
It seems to have been a design of Pilate to awake
pity, for once again he brought Jesus forth, and in
this affecting guise, with new attestation of His in-
nocence, presented Him to the people in the words,
“Behold, the man!’ (Jn 19 5). How hideous the
mockery, at once to declare of such an one, “I find
no crime in him,” and to exhibit Him to the crowd
thus shamefully abused! No pity dwelt in these
hearts, however, and the shouts became still an-
grier, ‘‘Crucify him.”

(4) A last appeal—Pilate yields—The words of
the leaders, ‘““He made himself the Son of God,”
spoken as a reason for putting Jesus to death (Jn
19 7), struck a new fear into the heart of Pilate. It
led him again to enter the Praetorium, and inquire
of this strange prisoner, unlike any he had ever seen,
“Whence art thou?” Jesus was silent. ‘‘Knowest
thou not,” asked Pilate, “that I have power to re-
lease thee, and have power to crucify thee?” Jesus
answered only that he, Pilate, had no power over
Him at all save what was given him of God; the
greater therefore was the crime of those who had
subjected Him to this abuse of Divinely given power.
Again Pilate went out and sought to release Him,
but was met by the fierce cries that foreboded com-
plaint to Caesar (Jn 19 12). A tumult seemed
imminent, and Pilate succumbed. Here probably
(though possibly after the choice of Barabbas) is to
be placed the washing of his hands by Pilate—a
vain disclaiming of his responsibility—recorded_in
Mt 27 24, and the awful answer of the people, ‘‘His
blood be on us, and on our children” (ver 25).


Pilate now ascends the judgment seat, and, fully
conscious of the iniquity of his procedure, pronounces
the formal sentence which dooms Jesus to the cross.
The trial over, Jesus is led again into the Praeto-
rium, where the cruel mockery of the soldiers is
resumed in intensified form. ‘The Holy One, thorn-
crowned, clad in purple, a reed thrust into His
hand, is placed at the mercy of the whole band,
who bow the knee in ridicule before Him (‘“Hail,
King of the Jews’), spit upon Him in contempt,
smite Him on the head with the reed (Mt, Mk).
Then, stripped of the robe, His own garments are

put on Him, in preparation for the end.
In all this hideous scene of cruelty, injustice, and
undeserved suffering, the conspicuous feature in
the bearing of Jesus is the absolute


c) The calmness, dignity and meekness with
Attitude which He endures the heaviest_ wrongs
of Jesus and insults put upon Him. The pic-


ture in Isa 63 7.8 is startling in its
fidelity: ‘‘When he was afflicted he opened not his
mouth; as a lamb that is led to the slaughter, ‘and
as a sheep that before its shearers is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth. By oppression and judg-
ment he was taken away,” etc. There is no return
of the perturbation of Gethsemane. As if the
strength won there had raised Him into a peace
that nothing could shake, He passed through the
frightful physical exhaustion, mental strain, agony
of scourging, suffering from wounds and blows, of
that terrible night and morning, with unbroken
fortitude and unembittered spirit. Not a word of
complaint passes His lips; He makes no reply to
accusations; when reviled, He reviles not again;
He takes all with submission, as part of the cup the
Father has given Him to drink. It is a spectacle
to move the stoniest heart. Well to remember that
it is the world’s sin, in which all share, that mingled
the bitter draught!
Hf. The Crucifixion and Burial—Crucifixion was
the form of punishment reserved by the Romans
for slaves, foreigners and the vilest
1. The criminals, and could not be inflicted
Crucifixion ona Rom citizen. With its prolonged
(Mt 27:31— and excruciating torture, it was the
66; Mk 165: most agonizing and ignominious death
20-41; Lk which the cruelty of a cruel age could


23:26-49; devise. Jewish law knew nothing of
Jn 19: it (the ‘banging on a tree’ of Dt 21 22.
16-37) 23, was after death; cf Gal 3 13), yet


to it the Jewish leaders hounded Pilate
on to doom their Messiah. The cross was no doubt
of the usual Rom shape (see Cross). The site of
Golgotha, ‘‘the place of a skull’ (in Lk “Calvary,”
the Latinized form), is quite uncertain. It may have
been a slight mound resembling a skull (thus Meyer,
Luthardt, Godet, etc), but this is not known. It
is only plain that it was outside the wall, in the im-
mediate vicinity of the city (see note below on
sepulcher). The time of the crucifixion was about
9 AM (Mk 15 25). The day (Friday) was the
preparation’ for the Sabbath of the Passover week
(Mt, Mk, Lk; cf Jn 19 14.31).
It was part of the torment of the victim of this
horrible sentence that he had to bear his own cross
(according to some only the patibu-
a) On the lum, or transverse béaen' to the place
Way of execution. As Jesus, staggering,
possibly fainting, under this burden,
passed out of the gate, a stranger coming from the
country, Simon, a man of Cyrene, was laid hold of
and compelled to carry the cross (such an one would
not be punctilious about rabbinical rules of travel,
especially as it was not the regular Sabbath). Jesus,
however, was not wholly unpitied. In the crowd
following Him were some women of Jerus, who be-
wailed and lamented Him. The Lord, turning,


1663


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD ‘BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


bade these weep, not for Him, but for themselves
and for their children. ‘‘If they do these things in
the green tree, what shall be done in the dry?” (Lk
23 27-31).
Golgotha being reached, the crucifixion at once
took place under the care of a centurion and a
quaternion of soldiers. With ruthless
b) Between blows, hands and feet were nailed to
the Thieves the wood, then the cross was reared
—the (the perpendicular part may, as some
Superscrip- think, have first been placed in posi-


tion—the tion). As if toemphasize, from Pilate’s
Seamless point of view, the irony of the pro-
Robe ceedings, two robbers were crucified


’ with Jesus, on right and left, an unde-
signed fulfilment of prophecy (Isa 63 12). It was
doubtless when being raised upon the cross that
Jesus uttered the touching prayer—His lst word
on the cross (its genuineness need not be questioned,
though some ancient MSS omit)—‘‘Father, for-
give them; for they know not what they do” (Lk).
Above His head, according to custom, was placed
a tablet with His accusation, written in three lan-
guages, Heb, Gr and Lat. The chief priests took
offence at the form, ‘“This is the King of the Jews,”
and wished the words changed to, “He said, I am
King,” etc, but Pilate curtly dismissed their com-

laint: “What I have written I have written’? (Jn).

hether Jesus still wore the crown of thorns is
doubtful. The garments of the Crucified were di-
vided among the soldiers, but for His inner garment,
woven without seam, they cast lots (cf Ps 22 18).

A draught of wine mingled with an opiate (gall or
myrrh), intended to dull the senses, was offered, but
refused.

The triumph of Christ’s enemies now seemed com-
plete, and their glee was correspondingly unre-
strained. Their victim’s helplessness


c) The was to them a disproof of His claims.
Mocking— Railing, and wagging their heads, they
the Peni- taunted Him, ‘If thou art the Son of
tent Thief God, come down from the’cross”’; ‘‘He
—Jesus saved others; himself he cannot save.”
and His At first the robbers who were crucified
Mother with Him (possibly only one) joined in

this reproach, but ere long there was
a change. The breast of one of the malefactors


opened to the impression of the holiness and mceek-
ness of Jesus, and faith took the place ofscorn. He
rebuked his neighbor for reviling One who had “‘done
nothing amiss”; then, addressing Jesus, he prayed:
“Jesus, remember me when thou_comest in thy
kingdom.” The reply of Jesus—His 2d word on
the cross—surpassed what even the penitent in these
strange circumstances could have anticipated, ‘“To-
day shalt thou be with me in Paradise” (Lk). A
not less touching incident followed—perhaps pre-
ceded—this rescue of a soul in its last extremity.
Standing near the cross was a group of holy women,
one of them the mother of Jesus Himself (Jn 19 25:
Mary the mother of Jesus, Mary’s sister, Mary the
wife of Clopas—some identify the two latter—Mary
Magdalene). Mary, whose anguish of spirit may
be imagined, was supported by the disciple John.
Beholding them—His 3d word from the cross-—Jesus
tenderly commended His mother to the care of
John; to Mary, “Woman, behold, thy son”; to
Jobn, “Behold, thy mother.” From that time Mary
dwelt with John. :

Three hours passed, and at noon mocking was
hushed in presence of a startling natural change.
The sun’s light failed (Lk), and a deep darkness,
lasting for 8 hours, settled over theland. The dark-
ness was preternatural in its time and occasion,
whatever natural agencies may have been con-
cerned in it. The earthquake a little later (Mt)
would be due to the same causes. It was as if


Nature veiled itself, and shuddered at the enormity
of the crime which was being perpetrated. But the
outer gloom was only the symbol of a yet
d) The more awful darkness that, toward the
Great close of this period, overspread the soul
Darkness— of Jesus Himself. Who shal] fathom the
the Cry of depths of agony that lay in that awful
Desertion cry—the 4th from the cross—that burst
p loudly from the lips of Jesus, “li,
Eli, lama sabachthant”—“My God, My God, why
hast thou forsaken me’ (or, “Why didst thou for-
sake me?”’)—words borrowed from Ps 22 1! It was
before remarked that death was not a natural event
to Jesus, but ever had in it to His mind its signifi-
cance as a judgment of God on sin. Here it was not
simply death that He experienced in its most. cruel
form, but death bereft of the sensible comforts of
the Father’s presence. What. explanation of that
mystery can be found which does not take into
account with Isa 53 (cf Jn 1 29) His character as
Sin-Bearer, even as the unbroken trust with which
in His loneliness He clings to God (“My God’’) may
be felt to have in it the element of atonement? On
this, however, the present is not the place to dwell.
The end was now very near. The victim of
crucifixion sometimes lingered on in his agony for
days; but the unexampled strain of
e) Last body and mind which Jesus had under-
Words and gone since the preceding day brought
Death of an earlier termination to His suffer-
Jesus ings. Light was returning, and with
it peace; and in the consciousness that
all things were now finished (Jn 19 28), Jesus spoke
again—the 5th word—“I thirst” (Jn). A sponge
filled with vinegar was raised on a reed to His lips,
while some who had heard His earlier words (“Eli,
Eli,” etc), and thought He called for Elijah, said,
“Let us see whether Elijah cometh to save him”
(Mt). With a last effort, Jesus cried aloud—6th
and memorable word—‘It is finished,’ then, in
a final utterance—the 7th—commended His spirit
to God: “Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit” (Lk). Following on this word, bowing His
head, He surrendered Himself to death. It will be
seen that of the 7 words spoken from the cross, 3
are preserved by Lk alone (1st, 2d, 7th), 3 by Jn
alone (8d, 5th, 6th), while the 4th ery (“#li, Eli,”
etc) occurs only in the first 2 evangelists (Mt and
Mk, however, speak of Jesus ‘crying with a loud
voice’’ at, the close).
Jesus had died; the malefactors still lived. It
was now 8 o’clock in the afternoon, and it was de-
sired that the bodies should not remain


f) The. upon the cross on the approaching
Spear- Sabbath. Permission was therefore
Thrust— obtained from Pilate for the soldiers


Earthquake to break the legs of the crucified (cruri-
and Rend- fragium), and so hasten death. When
ing of the it was discovered that Jesus was
Veil already dead, a soldier, possibly to

make sure, pierced His side with a
spear, and John, who was present, notices as a spe-
cial fact that “there came out, blood and water” (19
34). Whether this means, as Stroud and others
have contended, that Jesus literally died of rupture
of the heart, or what other physiological explana-
tion may be given of the phenomenon, to which the
apostle elsewhere attaches a symbolical significance
(1 Jn 5 6), need not be here discussed (see BLoop
AND WarTeR). This, however, was not the only
startling and symbolically significant fact attend-
ing the death of Jesus. A great darkness had pre-
luded the death; now, at the hour of His expiry,
the veil of the temple (i.e. of the inner shrine) was
rent from top to bottom—surely a sign that the way
into the holiest of all was now opened for mankind


Jesus Christ


(He 9 8.12)—and a great earthquake shook the
city and rent the rocks. Mt connects with this the
statement that from the tombs thus opened “many
bodies of the saints . .. . were raised; and coming
forth out of the tombs after his resurrection they
entered into the holy city and appeared unto many”
(27 52.53). There is nothing in itself improbable,
though none of the other evangelists mention it,
in such an early demonstration being given of what
the Lord’s death and resurrection meant for be-
lievers. In other ways the power of the cross
was revealed. A dying robber had been won to
penitence; now the centurion who commanded
the soldiers was brought to the avowal, “Truly
this was the Son of God” (Mt, Mk; in Lk, “a
righteous man”). The mood of the crowd, too,
was changed since the morning; they “returned,
smiting their breasts’ (Lk 23 48). “Afar off,’
speechless with sorrow, stood the women who had
followed Jesus from Galilee, with other friends and
disciples. The evangelists name Mary Magda-
lene, Mary, the mother of James and Joses,
Salome (Mk), and Joanna, the wife of Chuza,

Herod’s steward (Lk).
Jesus had conquered hearts on His cross; now
His death reveals friends from the wealthier classes,
hitherto kept back by fear (Jn 19


2. The 38.39), who charge themselves with
Burial (Mt His honorable burial. One was Joseph
27:57-66; of Arimathaea, a just man, “looking
cf 28:11- for the kingdom of God,” of whom the
15; Mk 165: interesting fact is recorded that,
42-47; Lk though a member of the Sanhedrin,
23: 60-56; “he had not consented to their coun-
Jn 19: sel and deed” (Lk); the other was
38-42)


Nicodemus, he alo came to Jesus by
night (Jn 3 1.2; 19 39), mentioned
again only in Jn 7 50-52, where, also as a member
of the Sanhedrin, he puts in a word for Jesus.
Joseph of Arimathaea takes the lead. “Having
dared,” as Mk says (15 43, Gr), he begged the body
of Jesus from Pilate, and having ob-
a) The tained it, bought linen cloth wherein
New Tomb to wrap it, and reverently buried it
in a new rock-tomb of his own (Mt,
Mk), ‘where never man had yet lain’ (Lk). Jn
furnishes the further particulars that the tomb was
in a “garden,” near where Jesus was crucified (19
41.42). He tells also of the munificence of Nico-
demus, who brought as much as 100 pounds (about
75 lbs. avoir.) of spices—“‘a mixture of myrrh and
aloes” (ver 39), with which to enwrap the body of
Jesus. This is not to be thought of as an “anoint-
ing’: rather, the spices formed a powder strewn
between the folds of the linen bandages (cf Lut-
hardt, Comm. on Jn 19 40). The body, thus pre-
pared, was then placed in the tomb, and a great
stone rolled to the entrance. The burial was of
necessity a very hurried one, which the holy women
who witnessed it—Mary Magdalene and Mary the
mother of Joses are specially mentioned (Mt, Mk)
—purposed to supplement by an anointing when the
Sabbath was past (cf Lk 23 56).
Though Jesus was dead, the chief priests and
Pharisees were far from easy in their minds about
Him. Mysterious words of His had


b) The been quoted about His building of the
Guard of | temple in three days; possibly Judas
Soldiers had told something about His sayings
(Mt) regarding His death and rising again


on the 3d day; in any case, His body
was in the hands of His disciples, and they might
remove it, and create the persuasion that He had
risen. With this plea they went to Pilate, and asked
from him a watch of soldiers to guard the tomb. To
make assurance doubly sure, they sealed the tomb
with the official seal. The result of their efforts


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1664


was only, under Providence, to provide new evi-
dence of the reality of the resurrection!

The uncertainty attaching to the site of Golgotha
attaches also to the site of Joseph’s rock-tomb. Opinion
is about equally divided in favor of, and against, the
traditional site, where the Church of the Holy Sepulchre
now stands. A principal ground of uncertainty is
whether that site originally lay within or without the
second wall of the city (cf Stanley, Sinai and Pal, 457 ff;
G. A. Smith, Jerus, II, 576; a good conspectus of the
different opinions, with the authorities, is given in
Andrews, Part VII).


F. THE RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION


The resurrection of Jesus, with its completion in
the ascension, setting the seal of the Father’s accept-
ance on His finished work on earth,
The Resur- and marking the decisive change from
rectiona His state of humiliation to that of
Funda- exaltation, may be called in a true
mental Fact sense the corner stone of Christianity
(cf 1 Cor 15 14.17). It was on the
preaching of Christ crucified and risen that the
Christian church was founded (e.g. Acts 2 32-36;
1 Cor 15 3.4). Professor Harnack would dis-
tinguish between “the Easter faith’ (that Jesus
lives with God) and ‘‘the Easter message,’”’ but the
church never had any Easter faith apart from the
Easter message. The subversion of the fact of the
resurrection is therefore a first task to which unbe-
lief addresses itself. ‘The modern spirit rules it out
a priori as miraculous. The historical fact is de-
nied, and innumerable theories (imposture, theories
of swoon, of hallucination, mythical theories, spirit-
ualistic theories, etc) are invented to explain the
belief. None of these theories can stand calm
examination (see the writer’s work, The Resurrec-
tion of Jesus). The objections are but small dust
of the balance compared with the strength of the
evidence for the fact. From the standpoint of
faith, the resurrection of Jesus is the most credible
of events. If Jesus was indeed such an One as the
gospel history declares Him to be, it was impossible
that death should hold Him (Acts 2 24). The
resurrection, in turn, confirms His claim to be the
Son of God (Rom 1 4).
With the narratives of the resurrection are
here included, as inseparably connected, those of
the appearances of Jesus in Jerus and


1. The Galilee. The accounts will show that,
Resurrec- while the body of Jesus was a true body,
tion (Mt identical with that which suffered on


28; Mk 16; the cross (it could be seen, touched,
Lk 24; Jn handled), it exhibited attributes which
20,21; 1 showed that Jesus had entered, even
Cor 15:3-8) bodily, on a new phase of existence,
ata in which some at least of the ordinary
limitations of body were transcended. Its condi-
tion in the interval between the resurrection and
the ascension was an intermediate one—no longer
simply natural, yet not fully entered into the state
of glorification. “I am not yet ascended .... I
ascend” (Jn 20 17); in these two parts of the one
saying the mystery of the resurrection body is

comprised.
The main facts in the resurrection narratives
stand out clearly. ‘According to all the Gospels,”’
the arch-skeptic Strauss concedes,


a) The “Jesus, after having been buried on the
Easter Friday evening, and lain during the
Morning— Sabbath in the grave, came out of it
the Open restored to life at daybreak on Sun-
Tomb day” (New Life of Jesus, I, 897, ET).


; Discrepancies are alleged in detail as
to the time, number, and names of the women, num-
ber of angels, etc; but most of these vanish on
careful examination. The Synoptics group their
material, while Jn gives a more detailed account of
particular events.


1665


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


(1) The angel and the keepers.—No eye beheld the
actual resurrection, which took place in the early
morning, while it was still dark. Mt records that
there was “a great earthquake,” and tells of the
descent of an angel of the Lord, who rolled away
the stone, and sat upon it. Before his dazzling
aspect the keepers became as dead men, and after-
ward fled. The chief priests bribed them to conceal
the facts, and say the body had been stolen (Mt 28
2-4,11-15).

(2) Visit of the women —The first intimation of
the resurrection to the disciples was the discovery
of the empty tomb by the women who had come at
early dawn (Mt 28 1; Mk 162; Lk 241; Jn
20 1) with spices, prepared to anoint the body of
Jesus (Mk 16 1; cf Lk 23 56). Apparently ig-
norant of the guard, the women were concerned
on their way as to who should roll away the stone
from the door of the tomb (Mk 16 3), and were
much surprised to find the stone rolled away, and
the tomb open. There is no need for supposing
that the women mentioned all came together. It
is much more probable that they came in different
groups or companies— perhaps Mary Magdalene
and the other Mary, or these with Salome, first
(Mt, Mk; ef the “we” of Jn 20 2); then Joanna
and other members of the Galilean band (Lk).
(On the appearance of Jesus to Mary, see below.)

(8) The angelic message. — As the women stood,
perplexed and affrighted, at the tomb, they received
@ vision of angels (Mt and Mk speak only of one
angel; Lk and Jn mention two; all allude to the
dazzling brightness), who announced to them that
Jesus had risen (‘‘He is not here; for he is risen;
. . . « come, see the place where the Lord lay’’), and
bade them tell His disciples that He went before
them to Galilee, where they should see Him (Mt,
Mk; Lk, who does not record the Galilean appear-
ances, omits this part, and recalls the words spoken
by Jesus in Galilee, concerning His death and re-
surrection; ef Mt 16 21). The women departed
with “trembling and astonishment” (Mk), yet
“with great joy’? (Mt). Here the original Mk
breaks off (ver 8), the remaining vs being an ap-
pendix. But it is granted that Mk must originally
have contained an account of the report to the dis-
ciples, and of an appearance of Jesus in Galilee.

The narrative in Jn enlarges in important respects
those of the Synoptics. From it we learn that Mary

Magdalene (no companion is named,
b) Visit of but one at least is implied in the “we”
Peter and of ver 2), concluding from the empty
John— tomb that the body of Jesus had been
Appearance removed, at once ran to carry the news
to Mary to Peter.and John (“They have taken


(Jn; cf Mk away the Lord out of the tomb, and
16:9.10; we know not where they have laid
Lk 24: him”). These apostles lost no time
12.24) in hastening to the spot. John, who


arrived first, stooping down, saw the
linen cloths lying, while Peter, entering, beheld also
the napkin for the head rolled up in a place by itself.
After John likewise had entered (‘He saw, and be-
lieved’’), they returned to their home. Meanwhile
Mary had come back disconsolate to the tomb,
where, looking in, she, like the other women, had a
vision of two angels. Jt was then that Jesus ad-
dressed her, ‘‘Why weepest thou?” At first she
thought it was the gardener, but on Jesus tenderly
naming her, ‘‘Mary,”’ she recognized who it was,
and, with the exclamation, ‘‘Rabboni” (‘Teacher’),
would have clasped Him, but He forbade: ‘“Touch
me not,” ete (ver 17, m “Take not hold on me”),
ie. “Do not wait, but hasten to tell my disciples
that I am risen, and ascend to my Father’’ (the
ascension-life had already begun, altering earlier
relations).


Report to the disciples—incredulity The appear-
ance of Jesus to the other women (Mt 28 9.10)
is referred to below. It is probable that, on the
way back, Mary Magdalene rejoined her sisters,
and that the errand to the disciples—or such of them
as could be found—was undertaken together. Their
report was received with incredulity (Lk 24 11;
ef Mk 16 11). The visit of Peter referred to in
mek 12 is doubtless that recorded more precisely
in Jn,

Ten appearances of Jesus altogether after His
resurrection are recorded, or are referred to; of

these five were on the day of resurrec-


c) Other tion. They are the following:
Easter-Day (1) The first is the appearance to
Appear- Mary Magdalene above described.
ances (2) The second is an appearance to
(Emmaus, the women as they returned from the


Jerusalem) tomb, recorded in Mt 28 9.10. Jesus

met them, saying, “All hail,” and as
they took hold of His feet and worshipped Him,
He renewed the commission they had received for
the disciples. Some regard this as only a general-
ization of the appearance to Mary Magdalene, but
it seems distinct.

(3) An appearance to Peter, attested by both
Lk (24 34) and Paul (1 Cor 15 5). This must
have been early in the day, probably soon after
Peter’s visit to the tomb. No particulars are given
of this interview, so marked an act of grace of the
risen Lord to His repentant apostle. The news of
it occasioned much excitement among the disciples
(Lk 24 34).

(4) The fourth was an appearance to two disci-
ples on their way from Jerus to Emmaus—a village
about two hours distant (Lk 24 12-35; Mk 16
12.13). They were conversing on the sad events
of the last few days, and on the strange tidings of
the women’s vision of angels, when Jesus overtook
them, and entered into conversation with them.
At first they did not recognize Him—a token, as
in Mary’s case, of change in His appearance—though
their hearts burned within them as He opened to
them the Scriptures about Christ’s suffermgs and
glory. As the day was closing, Jesus abode with
them to the evening meal; then, as He blessed and
brake the bread, ““Their eyes were opened, and they
knew him; and he vanished out of their sight”? (Lk
24 30.31). They hastily rose, and returned to the
corapany of disciples at Jerus. According to Mk
16 13, their testimony, like that of the women, was
not at first believed.

(5) The fifth appearance was that to ‘‘the eleven,”
with others, in the evening—an appearance recorded
by Luke (24 36 ff), and John (20 19-23), and al-
luded to by Paul (1 Cor 15 5). The disciples from
Emmaus had just come in, and found the company
thrilling with excitement at the news that the Lord
had appeared to Simon (Lk). The doors were
closed for fear of the Jews, when suddenly Jesus
appeared in their midst with the salutation, ‘Peace
be unto you” (Lk, Jn; doubt is unnecessarily cast
on Lk 24 36.40, by their absence from some West-
em texts). The disciples were affrighted; they
thought they had seen a spirit (Lk); ‘“disbelieved
for joy” (Lk 24 41). To remove their fears, Jesus
showed them His hands and His feet (in Jn, His
side), and ate before them (Lk). He then breathed
on them, saying, ‘“‘Receive ye the Holy Spirit,” and
renewed the commission formerly given to remit
and retain sins (Jn; cf Mt 18 17.18). The breath-
ing was anticipative of the later affusion of the
Spirit at Pentecost (cf Jn 7 39; Acts 2); the
authority delegated depends for its validity on the
possession of that Spirit, and its exercise according
to the mind of Christ (cf eg. 1 Cor 5 3). The
incident strikingly illustrates at once the reality of


Jesus Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1666


Christ’s risen body, and the changed conditions
under which that body now existed.
Eight days after this first appearance—i.e. the
next Sunday evening—a second appearance of Jesus
to the apostles took place in the same
d) The chamber and under like conditions
Second (“the doors being shut’’). The pecul-
Appearance iar feature of this second meeting was


to the the removal of the doubt of Thomas
Eleven— who, it is related, had not been present
the Doubt on the former occasion. Thomas,


of Thomas devoted (cf Jn 11 16), but of naturally
questioning temperament (14 5), re-
fused to believe on the mere report of others that
the Lord had risen, and demanded indubitable
sensible evidence for himself. Jesus, at the second
appearance, after salutation as before, graciously
gave. the doubting apostle the evidence he asked:
“Reach hither thy finger, and see my hands,” ete
(Jn 20 27), though, as the event proved, the sign
was not needed. The faith and love of the erst-
while doubter leaped forth at once in adoring con-
fession: ‘My Lord and my God.” It was well;
but Jesus reminded him that the highest faith is
not that which waits on the evidence of sense
(“Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed,” ver 29).
The scene now shifts for the time to Galilee.
Jesus had appointed to meet with His disciples in


Galilee (Mt 26 32; Mk167; cf
e) The Mk 14 28). Prior, however, to this
Galilean meeting—that recorded in Mt 28 16-
Appear- 20, probably to be identified with the
ances appearance “to above five hundred


brethren at once,’? mentioned by Paul


(1 Cor 15 6)—there is another appearance of Jesus
to seven disciples at the Lake of Galilee, of which
the story is preserved in Jn 21 1-23.

(1) At the Sea of Tiberias—the draught of fishes—
Peter's restoration—The chapter which narrates
this appearance of Jesus at the Lake of Galilee (‘Sea
of Tiberias”) is a supplement to the Gospel, but is
so evidently Johannine in character that it may
safely be accepted as from the pen of the beloved
disciple (thus Lightfoot, Meyer, Godet, Alford, etc).
The appearance itself 1s described as the third to
the disciples (ver 14), i.e. the third to the apostles
collectively, and in Jn’s record seven disciples are
stated to have been present, of whom five are
named—Peter, Thomas, Nathanael (probably to
be identified with Bartholomew), and the sons of
Zebedee, James and John. The disciples had spent
the night in fishing without result. In the morning
Jesus—yet unrecognized—appeared on the beach,
and bade them cast down their net on the right side
of the boat. The draught of fishes which they took
revealed to John the presence of the Master. “It
is the Lord,” he said to Peter, who at once flung
himself into the lake to go to Jesus. On landing,
the disciples found a fire of coals, with fish placed
on it, and bread; and Jesus Himself, after more
fish had been brought, distributed the food, and, it
seems implied, Himself shared in the meal. Still
a certain awe—another indication of a mysterious
change in Christ’s appearance—restrained the dis-
ciples from asking openly, ‘Who art thou?” (ver
12). It was not long, however (‘‘when they had
broken their fast’’), before Jesus sufficiently dis-
closed Himself in the touching episode of the res-
toration of Peter (the three-fold question, ‘“Lovest
thou me?” answering to the three-fold denial, met
by Peter’s heartfelt, “Yea, Lord; thou knowest
that I love thee,” with the words of reinstatement,
“Feed my lambs,” ‘‘Feed my sheep”). In another
way, Jesus foretold that Peter would have the oppor-
tunity of taking back his denial in the death by
which he should glorify God (vs 18.19; tradition


says he was crucified head-downward). Curious
inquiries were set aside, and attention recalled to
duty, ‘Follow thou me” (ver 22). ee

(2) On the mountain—the Great Commission—
baptism.—Though only the eleven apostles are
named in Matthew’s account (28 16), the fact of
an ‘appointment’ for a definite time and place
(“the mountain”), and the terms in which the mes-
sage was given to the “disciples,” suggests a collect-
ive gathering such as is implied in Paul’s “above
five hundred brethren at once” (1 Cor 15 6). The
company being assembled, Jesus appeared; till,
at first, with that element of mystery in His appear-
ance, which led some to doubt (ver 17). Such doubt
would speedily vanish when the Lord, aunonneiny
Himself as clothed with all authority in heaven an
earth, gave to the apostles the supreme commission
to “make disciples of all the nations’ (vs 18-20;
ef Mk 16 15, “Go ye into all the world,” etc).
Discipleship was to be shown by baptism “into the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit” (one name, yet threefold), and was to_be
followed by instruction in Christ’s commands. Be-
hind the commission, world-wide in its scope, and
binding on every age, stands the word of never-
failing encouragement, ‘Lo, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world.” Doubts of the
genuineness of these august utterances go as a rule
with doubt of the resurrection itself.

Jt will be noticed that the Lord’s Supper and
Baptism are the only sacraments instituted by Jesus
in His church.

Paul records, as subsequent to the above, an ap-
pearance of Jesus to James, known as “‘the Lord’s
brother” (1 Cor 15 7; ef Gal 1 19).
No particulars are given of this appear-
ance, which may have occurred either
in Galilee or Jerus. James, so far as
known, was not a believer in Jesus
before the crucifixion (cf Jn 7 3); after the ascen-
sion he and the other brethren of Jesus are found
in the company of the disciples (Acts 1 14), and he
became afterward a chief ‘‘pillar” of the church at
Jerus (Gal 1 19; 2 9). This appearance may have
marked the turning-point.

The final appearance of Jesus to the apostles
(1 Cor 15 7) is that which Luke in the closing

verses of his Gospel (44-53), and in


f) Appear-
ance to
James


g) The Acts 1 3-12, brings into direct rela-
Last tion with the ascension. In the Gos-
Meeting pel Luke proceeds without a break


from the first appearance of Jesus to

“the eleven” to His last words about “‘the promise
of my Father’; but Acts 1 shows that a period of
40 days really elapsed during which Jesus repeatedly
“appeared” to those whom He had chosen. This
last meeting of Jesus with His apostles was mainly
occupied with the Lord’s exposition of the pro-
phetic Scriptures (Lk 24 44-46), with renewed
commands to preach repentance and remission of
sins in His name, “beginning from Jerus” (vs 47.
48; cf Acts 1 8), and with the injunction to tarry in
Jerus till the Spirit should be given (ver 49; ef Acts
14.5). Then He led them forth to Olivet, ‘over
against Bethany,” and, while blessing them, ‘‘was
carried up into heaven’ (vs 50.51; cf Acts 1 10.12).
Jesus had declared, ‘‘I ascend unto my Father”
(Jn 20 17), and Luke in Acts 1 narrates the cir-
cumstances of that departure. Jesus

2. The might simply have ‘‘vanished” from
Ascension the sight of His disciples, as on pre-
(Lk 24:60- vious occasions, but it was His will to
53; Acts 1: leave them in a way which would vis-
6-14; cf Mk ibly mark the final close of His asso-
16:19) ciation with them. They are found,
; as in the Gospel, “assembled” with
Him at Jerus, where His final instructions are given.


1667


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jesus Christ


Then the scene insensibly changes to Olivet, where
the ascension is located (Acts 112). The disciples
inquire regarding the restoration of the kingdom to
Israel (even yet their minds are held in these tem-
poral conceptions), but Jesus tells them that it is
not for them to know times and seasons, which the
Father had set within His own authority (ver 7).
Far more important was it for them to know that
within the next days they should receive power from
the Holy Spirit to be witnesses for Him to the utter-
most part of the earth (ver 8). Even as He spake,
He was taken up, and a cloud received Him out of
their sight (ver 9). Then, as the apostles stood
gazing upward, two heavenly messengers appeared,
who comforted them with the assurance that in like
manner as they had seen Jesus ascend into heaven,
so also would He come again. For that return the
church still prays and waits (cf Rev 22 20). See,
further, ASCENSION.

Retracing their steps to Jerus, the apostles joined
the larger company of disciples in the ‘“‘upper room”
where their meetings seem to have been habitually
held, and there, with one accord, to the number of
about 120 (Acts 1 15), they all continued sted-
fastly in prayer till “the promise of the Father’’
(Lk 24 49; Acts 1 4) was, at Pentecost, hestowed
npon them.


Part IV. Epinocue: THe Arostotic TEACHING


The earthly life of Jesus is finished. With His res-
urrection and ascension a new age begins. Yet the
work of Christ continues. As Luke
1. After the expressively phrases it in Acts 1 1.2,
Ascension the Gospels are but the records of “all
that, Jesus began both to do and to
teach, until the day in which he was received np.”
It is beyond the scope of this art. to trace the suc-
ceeding developments of Christ’s activity through
His church and by His Spirit; in order, however,
to bring the subject to a proper close, it is necessary
to glance, even if briefly, at the light thrown back
by the Spirit’s teachings, after the ascension, on the
significance of the earthly life itself, and at the en-
largement of the apostles’ conceptions about Christ,
consequent on this, as seen in the Epistles and the
Apocalypse.
It was the promise of Jesus that, after His de-
parture, the Spirit would be given to His disciples,
to teach them all things, and bring to
2. Revela- their remembrance all that He had
tion through said to them (Jn 14 26). It was not
the Spirit a new revelation they were to receive,
but illumination and guidance of their
minds into the meaning of what they had received
already (Jn 16 13-15). This promise of the Spirit
was fulfilled at Pentecost (Acts 2). Only a few
personal manifestations of Jesus (Acts 7 55.56; 22
17.18; 28 11) are recorded after that. event—the
two chief being the appearance to Paul on the way
to Damascus (1 Cor 15 8; cf Acts 9 3 ff, etc), and
the appearance in vision to John in Patmos (Rev 1
10 ff). The rest was internal revelation (cf Gal 1
12.16; Eph 1 17; 3 3-5). The immense advance
in enlargement and clearness of view—aided, no
doubt, by Christ’s parting instructions (Lk 24 44-
48; Acts 1 2)—is already apparent in Peter’s
discourses at Pentecost; but it is not to be supposed
that much room was not left for after-growth in
knowledge, and deepened insight into the connec-
tion of truths. Peter, e.g., had to be instructed
as to the admission of the Gentiles (Acts 10 11);
the apostles had much gradually to learn as to
the relations of the law (cf Acts 15; 21 20 ff;
Gal 2, etc); Panl received revelations vastly widen-
ing the doctrinal horizon; both John and Paul
show progressive apprehension in the truth about


Christ.


It is therefore a question of much interest how the
apostolic conceptions thus gained stand related to
the picture of Jesus we have been
3. Gospels studying in the Gospels. It is the con-
and Epistles tention of the so-called “historical”
(anti-supernaturalistic) school of the
day that the two pictures do not correspond. The
transcendental Christ of Paul and John has little
in common, it is affirmed, with the Man of Nazareth
of the Synoptic Gospels. Theories of the “origins
of Christianity” are concocted proceeding on this
assumption (cf Pfleiderer, Weizsicker, Bousset,
Wernle, etc). Such speculations ignore the first
conditions of the problem in not accepting the self-
testimony of Jesus as to who He was, and the ends
of His mission into the world. When Jesus is taken
at His own valuation, and the great fact of His
resurrection is admitted, the alleged contradictions
between the “‘Jesus of history’’ and the ‘Christ of
faith” largely disappear.
It is forgotten how great a change in the center of
gravity in the conception of Christ’s person and


work was necessarily involved in the
4. Fact of facts of Christ’s death, resurrection and
Christ’s exaltation to the right hand of power.
Lordship The life is not ignored—far from it.


Its influence breathes in every page,

e.g. of Paul’s epistles. But the weakness, the limi-
tations, the self-suppression—what Paulin Phil 2 7
calls the ‘“emptying’’—of that earthly life have now
been left behind; the rejected and crucified One
has now been vindicated, exalted, has entered into
His glory. This is the burden of Peter’s first ad-
dress at Pentecost: ‘God hath made him both Lord
and Christ, this Jesus whom ye crucified” (Acts 2
86). Could anything look quite the same after
that? The change is seen in the growing substitu-
tion of the name ‘“Christ’’ for “Jesus” tee at be-
ginning of art.), and in the habitual speaking of
Jesus as “Lord.”
With belief in the lordship of Jesus went neces-
sarily an enlarged conception of the significance of
His person. The elements were all


5. Signifi- there in what the disciples had seen
cance of and known of Jesus while on earth
Christ's (In 114; 1 Jn 1 1-3), but His ex-
Person altation not only threw back light upon


His claims while on earth—confirmed,
interpreted, completed them—but likewise showed
the ultimate ground of these claims in the full Di-
vine dignity of His person. He who was raised to
the throne of Divine dominion; who was worshipped
with honors due to God only; who was joined, with
Father and with Holy Spirit as, codrdinately, the
source of grace and blessing, must in the fullest sense
be Divine. There is not such a thing as honorary
Godhead. In this is already contained in substance
everything taught about Jesus in the epistles: His
preéxistence (the Lord’s own words had suggested
this, Jn 8 58; 17 5, etc), His share in Divine attri-
butes (eternity, etc), in Divine works (creation, ete,
1 Cor 8 6; Col 1 16.17; He 1 2; Rev 1 8; 3 14,
etc), in Divine worship (Phil 2 9-11; Rev 6 11.12,
etc), in Divine names and titles (He 1 8, etc). It
is an extension of the same conception when Jesus is
represented as the end of creation—the ‘Head” in
whom all things are finally to be summed up (Eph
110; cf He 2 6-9). These high views of the per-
son of Christ in the Epistles are everywhere assumed
to be the possession of the readers.

Jesus had furnished His disciples with the means
of understanding His death as a necessity of His
Messianic vocation, endured for the salvation of
the world; but it was the resurrection and exalta-
tion which shed light on the utmost meaning of this
also. Jesus died, but it was for sins. He was a
propitiation for the sin of the world (Rom 3 25;


Jegus Christ, THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1 Jn 2 2; 4 10). He was ‘made sin’ for us (2 Cor
6 21). -The strain of Isa 53 runs through the
a NT teaching on this theme (cf 1 Pet
6. Signifi- 1 19; 2 22-25, etc). Jesus’ own word
cance of the “ransom” is reproduced hy Paul (1 Tim
Cross and 26). The song of the redeemed is,
Resurrec- ‘Thou didst purchase unto God with
tion thy blood men of every tribe,” etc
; (Rev 6 9). Is it wonderful, in view
of this, that in the apostolic writings—not in
Paul only, but in Pet, in Jn, in He, and Rev,
equally—the cross should assume the decisive im-
portance it does? Paul only works out more fully
in relation to the law and the sinner’s justification
a truth shared hy all. He himself declares it to
be ee, common doctrine of the churches (1 Cor
15 3.4).

The newer tendency is to read an apocalyptic

character into nearly all the teaching of Jesus

(cf Schweitzer, Quest of the Historical
7. Hope of Jesus). This is an exaggeration, but
the Advent that Jesus taught His disciples to look

for His coming again, and connected
with that coming the perfection of His kingdom, is
plain to every reader of the Gospels. It will not he
denied that the apostolic church retained this fea-
ture of the teaching of Jesus. In accordance with
the promise in Acts 1 11, it looked for the glorious
reappearing of its Lord. The Epistles are full of
this hope. Even Jn gives it prominence (1 Jn 2
28; 3 2). In looking for the parousia as something
immediately at hand, the early believers went even
beyond what had been revealed, and Paul had to
rehuke harmful tendencies in this direction (2 Thess
2). The hope might be cherished that the coming
would not long be delayed, but in face of the express
declarations of Jesus that no one, not the angels,
not even the Son, knew of that day and hour (Mt
24 36; Mk 13 32), and that the Father had set
these things in His own authority (Acts 1 7; ef
also such intimations as in Mt 13 30; 24 14; 25
19; 28 19; Lk 19 11, etc), none could affirm this
with certainty. Time has proved—proved it even
in the apostolic age (2 Pet 3 3.4)—that the Ad-
vent was not so near as many thought. In part,
perhaps, the church itself may be to blame for
the delay. Still to faith the Advent remains the
great fixed event of the future, the event which
overshadows all others—in that sense is ever
near—the polestar of the church’s confidence that
righteousness shall triumph, the dead shall! be
raised, sin shall be judged and the kingdom of
God shall come.

LirErators.—The lit. on the life and teaching of
Jesus is so voluminous, aud represents such diverse
standpoints, that it would be unprofitable to furnish
an extended catalogue of it. It may be seen prefixed
to any of the larger books. On the skeptical and ration-
alistic side the best account of the lit. will be found
in Schweitzer's book, From Reimarus to Wrede (ET, Quest
of the Historical Jesus). Of modern believing works may
be specially named those of Lange, Weiss, Ellicott, Eders-
heim, Farrar, D. Smith. Dr. Sanday's book, The Life of
Christ in Recent Research, surveys a large part of the field,
and is preparatory to an extended Life from Dr. Sanday's
own pen. His art. in HDB has justly attracted much
attention. Schiirer's Hist of the Jewish People in the Time
of Jesus Christ (ET, 5 vols; a new German ed has been
published) is the best authority on the external conditions.
The works on NT Bib. theology (Reuss, Weiss, Schmid,
Stevens, etc) deal with the teaching of Jesus; see also
Wendt, The Teaching of Jesus (ET). Works and arts. on
the Chronology, on Harmony of the Gospels, on geog-
raphy and topography (cf esp. Stanley, G. A. Smith) are
legion. A good, comprehensive book on these topics is
Andrews, Life of Our Lord (rev. ed). The present writer
has published works on The Virgin Birth of Christ and
The Resurrection of Jesus. On the relations of gospel aud
epistle, see J. Denney, Jesus and the Gospel. See also the
various arts. in this Enc, on Gospris; Tus Person or
Cuarist; Ernics or Jesus; Virein Birra; Jesus Curist,


ARREST aND TrRiaL Or; RESURRECTION; ASCENSION;
Puariskes; SappucEEs; Herop; JErusaLemM, etc.


JAMES ORR


1668


JESUS CHRIST, ARREST AND TRIAL OF:


1, Jewish and Roman Law
2. Difficulties of the Subject
3. Illustrations of Difficulties
I. Tus Arrest
1, Preparatory Steps
2, The Arrest in the Garden
3. Taken to the City
Il. Tus Jewisa Triar
1. The Jewish Law
The Mishna
. Criminal Trials
The Trial of Jesus 2
The Preliminary Examination
. The Night Trial
. False Witnesses
A Browbeating Judge
The Morning Session
10. Powers of the Sanhedrin
11. Condemnation for Blasphemy
12. Summary
III. Tas Roman Triau
1. Taken before Pilate


POM EYR 9989


2. Roman Law and Procedure
3. Full Trial Not Desired
4. Final Accusation .
5. Examination, Defence and Acquittal
6. Fresh Accusations
7. Reference to Herod
8. Jesus or Barabbas
9. Behold the Man!
10. Pilate Succumbs to Threats
11. Pilate Washes His Hands
12. The Sentence :
13. Review


This subject is of special interest, not only on
account of its inherent importance, hut more par-
ticularly on account of its immediately preceding,
and leading directly up to what is the greatest
tragedy in human history, the crucifixion of Our
Lord. It has also the added interest of being the
only proceeding on record in which the two great
legal systems of antiquity, the Jewish and the
Roman, which have most largely influenced modern
legislation and jurisprudence, each played a most
important part.

The coexistence of these two systems in Judaea, aud


their joint action in bringing about the tremendous results
in question, were made possible by the


1. Jewish generous policy pursued by Rome in allow-

dR ing conquered nations to retain their an-
ay oman cient laws, institutions and usages, in so
Law far as they were compatible with Rom


sovereignty and supremacy. Not only so,
but, in a large degree, they permitted these laws to be
administered by the officials of the subject peoples. This
privilege was not granted absolutely, but was permitted
only solong as it was not abused. It might be withdrawn
at any time, and the instances in which this was done
were by no means rare.


Of the matters considered in this article, the
arrest of Jesus and the proceedings before Annas,
Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin took place professedly
under Jewish law; the proceedings hefore Pilate
and the reference to Herod, under Rom law.

It is very difficult to construct from the materials
in the four Gospels a satisfactory continuous record

of the arrest, and of what may be
2. Diffi- called the twofold trial of Jesus. The
culties of | Gospels were written from different
the Subject viewpoints, and for different purposes,
: each of the writers selecting such par-
ticulars as seemed to him to he of special importance
for the particular ohject he had in view. Their
reports are all very brief, and the proper chrono-
logical order of the various events recorded in
different. Gospels must, in many cases, he largely a
matter of conjecture. The difficulty is increased
by the great irregularities and the tumultuous
character of the proceedings; by our imperfect
knowledge of the topography of Jerus at this time
(29 AD); also hy the fact that the reports are given
mainly in popular and not in technical language;
and when the latter form is used, the technical
terms have had to be tr4 into Gr, either from the
Heb or from the Lat.


1669


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Jesus Christ,


For instance, opinions are divided as to where Pilate
resided when in Jerus, whether in the magnificent palace
huiit by Herod the Great, or in the castie

3. Ilustra- of Antonia; as to where was the paiace
tions of occupied by Herod Erle ie during ane Pass-

, A ;,.whether Annas an: aiaphas occu-
Difficulties pied different portions of the same alace,

F .,0Fr whether they iived in adjoining or
different residences; whether the preliminary examination
of Jesus, recorded by John, was before Annas or Caiaphas,
and as to other similar matters. It is very satisfactory,
however, to know that, although it is sometimes difficult
to decide exactiy as to the best way of harmonizing the
different accounts, yet there is nothing irreconcilable or
contradictory in them, and that there is no materiai point
in the history of the very important proceedings faiiin,
within the scope of this articie which is seriousiy affecte
by_any of these debatabie matters.

For a clear historicai statement of the events of the
conciuding day in the life of Our Lord before His cruci-
fixion, see the article on Jesus Curist. The present
article will endeavor to consider the matters relating to
ee arrest and triai from a iegai and constitutionai point

ew.


_ I. The Arrest.—During the last year of the min-
istry of Jesus, the hostility of the Jews to Him had
greatly increased, and some six months before they
finally succeeded in accomplishing their purpose,
they had definitely resolved to make away with
Him. Atthe Feast of Tabernacles they sent officers
(the temple-guards) to take Him while He was
teaching in the temple (Jn 7 32); but these, after
listening to His words, returned without having
made the attempt, giving as a reason that ‘never
man so spake” (ver 46).

After His raising of Lazarus, their determination
to kill Him was greatly intensified. A special meet-
ing of the council was held to consider the matter.
There Caiaphas, the high priest, strongly advocated
such a step on national grounds, and on the ground
of expediency, quoting in support of his advice,
in a cold-blooded and cynical manner, the Jewish
adage that it was expedient that one man should
die for the people, and that the whole nation perish
not. Their plans to this end were frustrated, for
the time being, by Jesus withdrawing Himself to the
border of the wilderness, where He remained with
His disciples (Jn 11 47-54).

On His return to Bethany and Jerus, six days
before the Passover, they were deterred from carry-
ing out their design on account of His manifest
popularity with the people, as evidenced by His
triumphal entry into Jerus on the first day of the
Passover week (Palm Sunday), and by the crowds
who thronged around Him, and listened to His
teachings in the temple, and who enjoyed the dis-
comfiture of the Pharisees, Sadducees and Hero-
dians, as they successively sought to entangle Him
in His talk. :

Two days before the Passover, at a council meet-
ing held in the palace of Caiaphas, they planned
to accomplish their purpose by subtlety, but “not
during the feast, lest a tumult arise among the
people” (Mt 26 3-5; Mk 141.2). While they
were in this state of perplexity, to their great relief
Judas came to them and agreed to betray his
Master for money (Mt 26 14-16; Mk 14 10.11).

This time they determined not to rely solely upon
their own temple-guards or officers to execute their

warrant or order of arrest, fearing that
1. Prepara- these officials, being Jews, might again
tory Steps be fascinated by the strange influence

which Jesus exercised over His country-
men, or that His followers might offer resistance.
They therefore applied to Pilate, the Rom proc-
urator (governor), for the assistance of a band of
Rom soldiers. He granted them a cohort (Gr
spetra, 400 to 600 men) from the legion then quar-
tered in the castle of Antonia, which adjoined and
overlooked the temple-area. The final arrange-
ments as to these would probably be completed
while Judas was at the supper room. It has been


suggested that the whole cohort would not go, but
only a selection from them. However, it is said
that Judas “received the band [cohort] of soldiers”
(Jn 18 3), and that they were under the command
of a chief captain (Gr chiliarch, Lat tribune, ver 12).
If there had not been more than 100 soldiers, they
would not have been under the command of a
captain, but the chief officer would have been a
centurion. The amazing popularity of Jesus, as
shown by His triumphal entry into the city, may
have led the authorities to make such ample provi-
sion against any possible attempt at rescue.

The Garden of Gethsemane, in which Judas knew
that Jesus would be found that night, was well
known to him (Jn 18 2); and he also knew the
time he would be likely to find his Master there.
Thither at the proper hour he led the band of sol-
diers, the temple officers and others, and also some
of the chief priests and elders themselves; the
whole being described as “a great multitude with
swords and staves’ (Mt 26 47). Although the
Easter full moon would be shining brightly, they
also carried “lanterns and torches” (Jn 18 3), in
order to make certain that Jesus should not escape
or fail to be recognized in the deep shade of the olive
trees in the garden.

On their arrival at the garden, Jesus came forward
to meet them, and the traitor Judas gave them the

appointed signal by kissing Him. As
2. The the order or warrant was a Jewish one,
Arrestin the temple officers would prohably be
the Garden in front, the soldiers supporting them

as reserves. On Jesus announcing to
the leaders that He was the one they sought,
what the chief priests had feared actually oc-
curred. There was something in the words or
bearing of Jesus which awed the temple officers;
they were panic-stricken, went backward, and fell
to the ground. On their rallying, the impetuous
Peter drew his sword, and cut off the ear of one
of them, Malchus, the servant of the high priest
(Jn 18 6-10).

On this evidence of resistance the Rom captain
and soldiers came forward, and with the assistance
of the Jewish officers bound Jesus. Under the
Jewish law this was not lawful before condemnation,
save in exceptional cases where resistance was either
offered or apprehended.

Even in this trying hour the concern of Jesus was
more for others than for Himself, as witness His
miracle in healing the ear of Malchus, and His
request that His disciples might be allowed their
liberty (Jn 18 8). Notwithstanding His efforts, His
followers were panic-stricken, probably on account
of the vigorous action of the officers and soldiers
after the assault by Peter, ‘‘and they all left him
and fled” (Mk 14 50).

lt is worthy of note that: Jesus had no word of
blame or censure for the Rom officers or soldiers
who were only doing their sworn duty in supporting
the civil authorities; but His pungent words of
reproach for not having attempted His arrest while
He was teaching openly in the temple were reserved
for “the chief priests, and captains of the temple,
and elders” (Lk 22 52), who had shown their in-
ordinate zeal and hostility by taking the unusual,
and for those who were to sit as judges on the
case, the improper and illegal course of accom-
panying the officers, and themselves taking part
in the arrest.

The whole body departed with their prisoner for
the city. From the first three Gospels one might

infer that they went directly to the pal-
8. Taken to ace of Caiaphas, the high priest.
the City In the Fourth Gospel, however, we

are told that they took him first to
Annas (Jn 18 13).


Jesus Christ,
Arrest, Trial


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1670


Why they did so we are not informed, the only state-
ment made being that he was the father-in-law of Caia-
phas (ver 13). He had been the high priest from 7 AD
to 15 AD, when he was deposed by Valerius Gratus, the
Rom _ procurator. He was still the most influential
member of the Sanhedrin, and, being of an aggressive
disposition, it may be that it was he who had given in-
structions as to the arrest, and that they thought it their
duty to report first to him.


Annas, however, sent Jesus bound to Caiaphas
(ver 24). Having delivered over their prisoner, the
Rom soldiers would proceed to their quarters in the
castle, the temple officials retaining Jesus in their
charge.

Meanwhile, the members of the Sanhedrin were
assembling at the palace of the high priest, and the
preliminary steps toward the first or Jewish trial
were being taken.

Il. The Jewish Trial.—It is the just boast of those
countries whose jurisprudence had its origin in the

common law of England, that their
1. The Jew- system of criminal law is founded upon
ish Law the humane maxims that everyone is
presumed to be innocent until he is
proved to he guilty, and that no one is bound to
criminate himself. But the Jewish law went even
farther in the safeguards which it placed around an
accused person. In the Pent it is provided that
one witness shall not he sufficient to convict any
man of even a minor offence. “One witness shall
not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for
any sin, i any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth
of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses,
shall a matter be established” (Dt 19 15).
These principles of the Mosaic law were elaborated


and extended in the system which grew up after the
return from Babylon. It was hegun hy


2. The the men of the Great Synagogue, and was
Mishn afterward completed by the Sanhedrin
isona which succeeded them. Up to the time of


__,,Our Lord, and for the first two centuries
of the Christian era, their rules remained largely in an
oral or unwritten form, until they were compiled or codi-
fied in the Mish by Rabbi Judah and his associates and
successors in the early part of the 3dcent. Itis generally
conceded by both Jewish and Christian writers that the
main DEV YISIOLS therein found for the protection of
accused persons, had been long incorporated in the oral
law and were recognized as a part of it in the time of
Annas and Caiaphas. |

The provisions relating to criminal trials, and esp. to
those in which the offence was punishable by death,

MUSTO Very Stringent and were tae framed
2 iminal in e interest o e@ accused. Amon
a ee Y al them were the following: The trial ae
rials he begun by day, and if not completed
before night it must be adjourned and
resumed by day; the quorum of judges in capital cases
was 23, that being the quorum of the Grand Council; a
verdict of acquittal, which required only a majority of
one, might be rendered on the same day as the trial was
completed; any other verdict could only be rendered
on a subsequent day and required a majority of at least
two; no prisoner could be convicted on his own evidence;
it was the duty of a judge to see that the interests of the
accused were fully protected.

The modern practice of an information or complaint
and a preliminary investigation before a magistrate was
wholly unknown to the Jewish law and foreign to its
genius. The examination of the witnesses in open court
was in reality the beginning of a Jewish trial, and the
crime for which the accused was tried, and the sole charge
he had to meet, was that which was disclosed by the evi-
dence of the witnesses.


Let us see how far the foregoing principles and
rules were followed and observed in the proceedings
before the high priest in the present


4. The instance. The first step taken in the
Trial of trial was the private examination of
Jesus Jesus hy the high priest, which is


recorded only in Jn 18 19-23. Opin-
ions differ as to whether this examination was con-
ducted by Annas at his residence before he sent
Jesus to Caiaphas (ver 24), or by the latter after
Jesus had been delivered up to him.


Calaphas was actually the high priest at the time, and
had been for some years. Annas had heen deposed from


the office about 14 years previously by the Rom procu-
rator; but he was still accorded the title (Acts 4 6).
Many of the Jews did not concede the right of the proc-
urator to depose him, and looked upon him as still the
rightful high priest. He is also said to have been at
this time the vice-president of the Sanhedrin. The
arguments as to which of them is called the high ek
by John in this passage are based largely upon two dlffer-
ent renderings of Jn 18 24. In AV the verse reads
‘‘Now Annas had sent him hound unto Caiaphas the
high priest,’ a reading based upon the 7R whichimplies
that Jesus had been sent to Caiaphas before the exami-
nation. On the other hand, RV, following the Gr text
adopted by Nestle and others, reads, “Annas therefore
sent him hound unto Caiaphas the high priest,” implying
that Annas sent him to Caiaphas on account of what had
taken place in the examination.


However, it is not material which of these two
leading members of the Sanhedrin conducted the
examination. The same may also he said as to the
controversy regarding the residence of Annas at the
time, whether it was in some part of the official
palace of the high priest or elsewhere. The im-
portant matters are the fact, the time, and the
manner of the examination by one or other of these
leading members of the council, not the precise
place where, or the particular person by whom, it
was conducted.

The high priest (whether Annas or Caiaphas)
proceeded to interrogate Jesus concerning His dis-

ciples and His doctrine (Jn 18 19).
5. The Pre- Such a proceeding formed no part of a


liminary regular Jewish trial, and was, more-
Examina- over, not taken in good faith; but
tion with a view to entrapping Jesus into


admissions that might be used against
Him at the approaching trial before the council.
It appears to have heen in the nature of a private
examination, conducted probably while the mem-
bers of the council were assembling. The dignified
and appropriate answer of Jesus pointedly brought
before the judge the irregularity he was committing,
and was a reminder that His trial should begin with
the examination’of the witnesses: ‘I spake openly
to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and
in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and
in secret have I said nothing. Why askest thou
me? Ask them which heard me, what I have said
unto them: behold, they know what I said” (vs
20.21 AV). The reply to this was a blow from one
of the officers, an outrageous proceeding which
appears to have passed unrebuked by the judge,
and it was left to Jesus Himself to make the appro-
priate protest.
The next proceeding was the trial before the
council in the'palace of Caiaphas, attended at least
by the quorum of 23. This was an
6. The illegal meeting, since a capital trial,
Night Trial as we have seen, could not either be
egun or proceeded with at night.
Some of the chief priests and elders, as previously
stated, had been guilty of the highly improper
act for judges, of taking part in and directing
the arrest of Jesus. Now, “the chief priests and
the whole council” spent the time intervening be-
tween the arrest and the commencement of the
trial in something even worse: they “sought false
witness against Jesus, that they might put him to
death” (Mt 26 59). This, no doubt, only means
that they then collected their false witnesses and
instructed them as to the testimony they should
give. For weeks, ever since the raising of Laza-
rus, they had been preparing for such a trial,
ee wu: ie ee : eu plage day forth they
ook counsel that they might put hi i
Gn 53) y might put him to death
Caiaphas, as high priest and president of the San-
hedrin, resided at the meeting of the council. The
oath administered to witnesses in a Jewish court
was an extremely solemn invocation, and it makes


1671


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Jesus CBrist,


one shudder to think of the high priest pronouncing
these words to perjured witnesses, known by him
to have been procured by the judges before him in
the manner stated.

But even this did not avail. Although “many
bare false witness against him,” yet on account of

their having been imperfectly tutored
qT. False by their instructors, or for other cause,
Witnesses “their witness agreed not together”
_ . (Mk 14 56), and even these prejudiced
and partial judges could not find the concurring
testimony of two witnesses required by their law
(Dt 19 15).

The nearest approach to the necessary concur-
rence came at last from two witnesses, who gave a
distorted report of a figurative and enigmatic state-
ment made by Jesus in the temple during His early
ministry: ‘‘Destroy this temple, and in three days
I will raise it up” (Jn 219). The explanation is
given: ‘‘He spake of the temple of his body’ (ver
21). The testimony of the two witnesses is reported
with but slight variations in the two first Gospels
as follows: “This man said, I am able to destroy
the temple of God, and to build it in three days”
(Mt 26 61); and ‘We heard him say, I will destroy
this temple that is made with hands, and in three
days I will build another made without hands”
(Mk 14 58). Whether these slightly different
statements represent the discrepancies in their tes-
timony, or on account of some other variations or
contradictions, the judges reluctantly decided that
‘not even so did their witness agree together’
(ver 59).

Caiaphas, having exhausted his list of witnesses,
and seeing the prosecution on which he had set his

heart in danger of breaking down for
8. A Brow- the lack of legal evidence, adopted a
beating blustering tone, and said to Jesus,
Judge “Answerest thou nothing? what is it

which these witness against thee? But
Jesus held his peace’ (Mt 26 62.63), relying on the
fact that the proseeution had utterly failed on
account of the Jack of agreement of two witnesses
on any of the charges. As a final and desperate
resort, Caiaphas had recourse to a bold strategic
move to draw from Jesus an admission or confession
on which he might base a condemnation, similar to
the attempt which failed at the preliminary exami-
nation; but this time fortifying his appeal by a
solemn adjuration in the name of the Deity. He
said to Jesus: “I adjure thee by the living God, that
thou tell us whether thou art the Christ, the Son
of God. Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said:
nevertheless I say unto you, Henceforth ye shall see
the Son of man sitting at the right hand of Power,
and coming on the clouds of heaven’’ (vs 63.64).
Caiaphas, although knowing that under the law
Jesus could not be convicted on His own answers
or admissions, thereupon in a tragic manner “rent
his garments, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy:
what further need have we of witnesses? behold,
now ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye?
They answered and said, He is worthy of death”
(vs 65.66). 3

The night session then broke up to meet again
after daybreak in order to ratify the decision
just come to, and to give a semblance of le-
gality to the trial and verdict. The closing scene
was one of disorder, in which they spat in their
prisoner’s face and buffeted him (vs 67.68, Lk 22
63-65).

Th following morning, ‘‘as soon as it was day,”
the council reassembled in the same place, and Jesus
was led into their presence (Lk 22 66). There
were probably a number of the council present
who had not attended the night session. For the
benefit of these, and perhaps to give an appearance


of legality to the proceeding, the high priest began
the trial anew, but not with the examination of
witnesses which had proved such a


9. The failure at the night session. He pro-
Morning ceeded at once to ask substantially the
Session same questions as had finally brought


out from Jesus the night before the
answer which he had declared to be blasphemy, and
upon which the council had ‘‘condemned him to be
worthy of death” (Mk 14 64). The meeting is
mentioned in all the Gospels, the details of the ex-
amination are related by Luke alone. When asked
whether He was the Christ, He replied, ‘‘If I tell
you, ye will not believe: and if I ask you, ye will
not answer. But from henceforth shall the Son of
man be seated at the right hand of the power of
God” (Lk 22 67-69). This answer not being suf-
ficient to found a verdict of blasphemy upon, they
all cried out, ‘“‘Art thou then the Son of God?” To
this He gave an affirmative answer, ‘Ye say that I
am. And they said, What further need have we of
witness? for we ourselves have heard from his own
mouth” (vs 70.71).

It will be observed that neither at the night nor

at the morning session was there any sentence pro-

nounced upon Jesus by the high priest.
10. Powers There was on each occasion only what
of the San- would be equivalent to a verdict of
hedrin guilty found by a jury under our

modern criminal practice, but no
sentence passed upon the prisoner by the presiding
judge. When Judaea lost the last vestige of its
independence and became a Rom province (6 AD),
the Benhadad ceased to have the right to inflict
capital punishment or to administer the law of
life and death. This jurisdiction was thenceforth
transferred to the Rom procurator. The San-
hedrin submitted very reluctantly to this cur-
tailment of its powers. A few years later it
exercised it illegally and in a very riotous manner
in the case of Stephen (Acts 7 58). Annas, how-
ever, of all men, had good reason not to violate
this law, as his having done so during the absence
of the procurator was the cause of his being de-
posed from the office of high priest by Valerius
Gratus (15 AD).

The proceedings may have been taken before the
high priest in the hope that Pilate might be induced
to accept the verdict of the Sanhedrin as conclusive
that Jesus had been guilty of an offence punishable
by death under the Jewish law.

Now what was the precise crime or crimes for
which Jesus was tried at these two sittings of the

council? The first impression would


11. Con- probably be that there was no connec-
demnation tion between the charge of destroying
for Blas- the temple and building another in
phemy three days, and His claiming to be the


Son of God. And yet they were
closely allied in the Jewish mind. The Jewish
nation being a pure theocracy, the overthrow of the
temple, the abode of the Divine Sovereign, would
mean the overthrow of Divine institutions, and be
an act of treason against the Deity. The profession
of ability to build another temple in three days
would be construed as a claim to the possession of
supernatural power and, consequently, blasphemy.
‘As to the other claim which He Himself made and
confessed to the council, namely, that He was the
Christ, the Son of God, none of them would have
any hesitation in concurring in the verdict of the
high priest that it was rank blasphemy, when made
by one whom they regarded simply as a Galilean
peasant. : :

To sum up:. The Jewish trial of Our Lord was
absolutely illegal, the court which condemned Him
being without jurisdiction to try a capital offence,


Jesus Christ,
Arrest, Trial


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1672


which blasphemy was under the Jewish law. Even
if there had been jurisdiction, it would have been

irregular, as the judges had rendered
12. Sum- themselves incompetent to try the
mary case, having been guilty of the viola-

tion of the spirit of the law that re-
quired judges to be unprejudiced and impartial,
and carefully to guard the interests of the accused.
Even the letter of the law had been violated in a
number of important respects. Among these may
be mentioned: (1) some of the judges taking part
in and directing the arrest; (2) the examination
before the trial and the attempt to obtain admis-
sions; (3) endeavors of the judges to procure the
testimony of false witnesses; (4) commencing and
continuing the trial at night; (5) examining and
adjuring the accused in order to extort admissions
from Him; (5) rendering a verdict of guilty at the
close of the night session, without allowing a day
to intervene; (7) holding the morning session on a
feast day, and rendering a verdict at its close; and
(8) rendering both verdicts without any legal
evidence.

HI. The Roman Trial.—Early on the mornin
of Friday of the Passover week, as we have ab
ready seen, “the chief priests with the elders and
scribes, and the whole council’ held a consulta-
tion (Mk), in the palace of the high priest; and
after the examination of Jesus and their verdict
that He was guilty of blasphemy, they took coun-
sel against Him “to put him to death” (Mt), this
being, in their judgment, the proper punishment
for the offence of which they had pronounced Him
guilty.

For the reasons already mentioned, they came
to the conclusion that it would be necessary to

invoke the aid of the Rom power in


1. Taken carrying out this sentence. They
before thereupon bound Jesus, and led Him
Pilate away and delivered Him up to Pilate,


who at this time probably occupied,
while in Jerus, the magnificent palace built by Herod
the Great. Jesus was taken into the judgment hall
of the palace or Praetorium; His accusers, unwill-
ing to defile themselves by entering into a heathen
house and thereby rendering themselves unfit to
eat the Passover, remained outside upon the marble
pavement.
The proceedings thus begun were conducted under a


system entirely different from that which we have thus
far been considering, both in its nature


2. Roman and its administration. The Jewish law
Law and was a part of the religion, and In its

growth and development was adminis-
Procedure tered in important cases by a large body


of trained men, who were obliged to follow
strictly a well-defined procedure. The Rom law, on the
other hand, had its origin and growth under the stern
and manly virtues and the love of justice which char-
acterized republican Rome, and it still jealously guarded
the rights and privileges of Rom citizens, even in a con-
quered province. Striking illustrations of this truth
are found in the life of St. Paul (see Acts 16 35-39; 22
24-29; 25 10-12). | The lives and fortunes of the natives
in an imperial province like Judaea mney be said to have
been almost completely at the mercy of the Rom procu-
rator or governor, who was responsible to his imperial mas-
ter alone, and not even to the Rom senate. Pilate there-
fore was well within the mark when, at a later stage of the
trial, being irritated at Jesus remaining silent when
questioned by him, he petulantly exclaimed: ‘‘Speakest
thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power
to release thee, and have power to crucify thee?” (Jn
19 10). While, however, the procurator was not com-
pelled in such cases to adhere strictly to the prescribed
procedure, and had a wide discretion, he was not allowed
Le solate: or depart from the establlshed principles of

e law.


On this occasion, Pilate, respecting the scruples
of the chief priests about entering the palace, went
outside at their request, apparently leaving Jesus
in the Praetorium. He asked them the usual for-


mal question, put at the opening of a Rom trial:
“What accusation bring ye against this man?
They answered and said unto him, If


3. Full he were not an evil-doer, we should not
Trial Not have delivered him up unto thee”
Desired (Jn 18 29f AV). Pilate could see at


once that this was a mere attempt to
evade the direct question he had asked, and was
not such an accusation as disclosed any offence
known to the Rom Jaw. Affecting to treat it with
disdain, and as something known only to their own
law, he said, “Take him yourselves, and judge him
according to your law. The Jews said unto him,
It is not lawful for us to put any man to death”
(ver 31).. , :
Perceiving that Pilate would not gratify their
desire to have Jesus condemned on the verdict
which they had rendered, or for an
4, Final offence against their own law only,
Accusation “they began to accuse him, saying,
We found this man perverting our
nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, and
saying that he himself is Christ a king’? (Lk 23 2).
This was an accusation containing three charges,
much like a modern indictment containing three
counts. Pilate appears to have been satisfied that
there was nothing in the first two of these charges;
but the third ‘was too serious to be ignored, esp.
as it was a direct charge of majesias or treason,
the greatest crime known to the Rom law, and
as to which the reigning emperor, Tiberius, and
his then favorite, Sejanus, were particularly sen-
sitive and jealous. The charges in this case were
merely oral, but it would appear to have been
in the discretion of the procurator to receive them
in this form in the case of one who was not a Rom
citizen.
The accusers having been heard, Pilate returned
to the Praetorium to examine Jesus regarding the
last and serious accusation. The Four
5. Exami- Gospels give in the same words the
nation, De- question put to him by Pilate, ‘‘Art
fence and thou the King of the Jews?’ The
Acquittal _ first three record only the final affirma-
tive answer, “Thou sayest,” which if
it stood alone might have been taken as a plea of
guilty; but John gives the intervening discussion
which explains the matter fully. He tells us that
Jesus did not answer the question directly, but
asked Pilate, “Sayest thou this of thyself, or did
others tell it thee concerning me?” (Jn 18 34)
(apparently not having been outside when the
charges were made). On being told that it came
from the chief priests, He went on to explain that
His kingdom was not of this world, but was a spirit-
ual kingdom. Being again asked if He was a king,
He replied in effect, that He was a king in that
sense, and that His subjects were those who were
of the truth and heard His voice (vs 35-37). Pilate,
being satisfied with His explanation, ‘went out
again unto the Jews,” and apparently having taken
Jesus with him, he mounted his judgment seat or
movable tribunal, which had been placed upon the
tesselated pavement, and pronounced his verdict,
“T find in him no fault at all’ (ver 38 AV, RV “I
find no crime in him’’).
According to the Rom law, this verdict of ac-
quittal should have ended the trial and at once
secured the discharge of Jesus; but
6. Fresh instead it brought a volley of fresh
Accusations accusations to which Jesus made no
reply. Pilate hesitated, and hearing
a charge that Jesus had begun His treasonable
teaching in Galilee, the thought occurred to him
that he might escape from his dilemma by sending
Jesus for trial to Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of


1673


Galilee, who was then in Jerus for the feast, which
he accordingly did (Lk 23 7).

Herod had long been desirous to sce Jesus—
“hoped to see some miracle done by him,” and
“questioned him in many words; but


7. Refer- he answered him nothing.” The
ence to chief priests and scribes, who had
Herod followed him from the Praetorium to


the Maccabean palace, which Herod
was then occupying, “stood, vehemently accus-
ing” Jesus (vs 8-10). “That fox,” however, as
Jesus had called him (Lk 13 32), was too astute to
intermeddle in a trial for treason, which was a dan-
gerous proceeding, and possibly he was aware that
Pilate had already acquitted Him; in which case
a retrial by him would be illegal. He ‘and his
soldiers, probably irritated at the refusal of Jesus
to give him any answer, mocked Him, and array-
ing Him in a gorgeous robe, no doubt in ridicule
of His claim to be a king, sent Him back to
Pilate. This reference to Herod in reality formed
no effective part of the trial of Jesus, as Herod
declined the jurisdiction, although Pilate sought
to make use of it in his subsequent discussion
with the chief priests. The only result was that
Herod was flattered by the courtesy of Pilate, the
enmity between them ceased, and they were made
friends (Lk 23 11.12.15).
On their return, Pilate resumed his place on the
judgment seat outside. What followed, however,
properly formed no part of the legal
8. Jesus or trial, as it was a mere travesty upon
Barabbas law as well as upon justice. Pilate
resolved to make another attempt to
secure the consent of the Jews to the release of
Jesus. To this end he summoned not only the
chief priests and the rulers, but “the people” as
well (Lk 23 18), and after mentioning the failure
to prove any of the charges made against Jesus,
he reminded them of the custom of releasing at the
feast a prisoner selected by them, and offering as
a compromise to chastise or scourge Jesus before
releasing Him. At this point Pilate’s anxiety to
release Jesus was still further increased by the mes-
sage he received from his wife concerning her dis-
turbing dream about Jesus and warning him to
“have... . nothing to do with that righteous
man” (Mt 27 19). Meanwhile, the chief priests
and elders were busily engaged in canvassing the
multitude to ask for the release of Barabbas, the
notable robber, and destroy Jesus (ver 20). When
Pilate urged them to release Jesus, they cried out
all together, “Away with this man, and release unto
us Barabbas”; and upon a further appeal on behalf
of Jesus they cried, “Crucify, crucify him.” A
third attempt on his part met with no better result
(Lk 23 18-23).
The Fourth Gospel alone records a final attempt
on the part of Pilate to save Jesus. He scourged
Him, it has been suggested, with a
9. Behold view to satisfying their desire for His
the Man! punishment, and afterward appealing
to their pity. He allowed his soldiers
to repeat what they had seen done at Herod's
palace, and place a crown of thorns upon His head,
array Him in a purple robe, and render mock hom-
age to Him as king of the Jews. Pilate went out
to the Jews with Jesus thus arrayed and bleeding.
Again declaring that he found no fault in Him, he
presented Him, saying, “Behold, the man!” This
was met by the former cry, ‘“‘Crucify him, crucify
him.” Pilate replied, ‘“Take him yourselves . .. .
for I find no crime in him.” The Jews referred him
to their law by which He deserved death because
He made Himself the Son of God. This alarmed
Pilate’s superstitious fears, who by this time appears
to have wholly lost control of himself. He took


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Jesus Christ,


Arrest, Trisl


Jesus into the palace and said to Him, ‘(Whence art
thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.” Irritated
at His silence, Pilate reminded Him of his absolute
powcr over Him. The mysterious answer of Jesus
as to the source of power still further alarmed him,
and he made new efforts to securc His discharge
(Jn 19 1-9).

The Jews were well awarc that Pilate was arbi-

trary and cruel, but they had also found that he

was very sensitive as to anything that
10. Pilate might injuriously affect his official
Succumbs position or his standing with his mas-
to Threats ter, the emperor. As a last resort

they shouted to him, ‘‘If thou release
this man, thou art not Caesar’s friend: every one
that maketh himself a king speaketh against
Caesar” (ver 12). The prospect of a charge of his
aiding and abetting such a crime as treason, in addi-
tion to the other charges that a guilty conscience
told him might be brought against him, proved too
much for the vacillating procurator. He brought
Jesus out, and sat down again upon the judgment
seat placed upon the pavement. He made one
more appeal, “Shall I crucify your King?” The
chief priests gave the hypocritical answer, “We have
no king but Caesar” (ver 15). Pilate finally suc-
cumbed to their threats and clamor; but took his
revenge by placing upon the cross the superscription
that was so galling to them, ‘‘Tus Kine or THE
Jaws.”

Then occurred the closing scene of the tragedy,

recorded only in the First Gospel, when Pilate

washed his hands before the multitude
11. Pilate (a Jewish custom), saying to them,
Washes His “I am innocent of the blood of this
Hands righteous man; see ye to it.” The

reply was that dreadful imprecation,
“His blood be on us, and on our children” (Mt 27
24.25).

Pilate resumes his place upon the judgment seat,

the fatal sentence at last falls from his lips, and

Jesus is delivered up to be crucified.
12. The Now, how far were these proceed-
Sentence ings in accordance with the Rom law
under which they purported to have
been taken and conducted? In the first place,
Pilate, as procurator, was the proper officer to try

the charges brought against Jesus.
13. Review In the next place he acted quite prop-

erly in declining to entertain a charge
which disclosed no offence known to the Rom law,
or to pass a sentence based on the verdict of the
Sanhedrin for an alleged violation of the Jewish
law. He appears to have acted in accordance with
the law, and indeed in a judicial and praiseworthy
manner in the trial and disposition of the threefold
indictment for treason (unless it be a fact that Jesus
was not present when these accusations were brought
against Him outside the Praetorium, which would be
merely an irregularity, as they were made known to
him later inside). Pilate’s initial mistake, which
led to all the others, was in not discharging Jesus
at once, when he had pronounced the verdict of
acquittal.:

All the subsequent proceedings were contrary
to both the letter and the spirit of the law. Al-
though Pilate took his place upon the judgment
seat, his acts, properly speaking, were not those
of a judge, and had no legal force or value; but were
rather the futile attempts of a weak and vacillating
politician to appease an angry mob thirsting for the
blood of an innocent countryman. The carrying
out of a sentence imposed in such circumstances,
and under such conditions, may not inaptly be
described as a judicial murder.

Joun James MacuarEN


Jesus, Geneal. of HE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jezebel


1674


JESUS, GENEALOGY OF. See GENEALOGY


OF JESUS.


JESUS JUSTUS, jé@zus jus’tus (Inoots 6 deys-
pevos 'loteros, [ésous ho legimenos Ioustos, “Jesus
that is called Justus,’ Col 4 11):
One of three friends of Paul—the
others being Aristarchus and Mark—
whom he associates with himself in
sending salutations from Rome to the church at
Colossae. Jesus Justus is not mentioned elsewhere
in the NT, and there is nothing more known about
him than is given in this passage in Col, viz. that
he was by birth a Jew—‘‘of the circumcision”—
that he had been converted to Christ, and that he
was one of the inner circle of intimate friends and
associates of the apostle during his first Rom cap-
tivity.

The words also contain the information that at a stage
in Paul's imprisonment, when the welcome extended to


1. A Jew
by Birth


him by the Christians in Rome on his

2, He Re~ arrival there had lost its first warmth, and
ains True when in consequence, prohahly, of their fear
mal of persecution, most of them had proved
to Paul untrue and were holding aloof from him,


J. J. and his two friends remained faith-
ful. It would be pressing this passage unduly to make
it mean that out of the large number—hundreds, or
perhaps even one or two thousands—who composed the
membership of the church in Rome at this time, and
who within the next few years proved their loyalty
to Christ by their stedfastness unto death in the Ne-
ronic persecution, all fell away from their affectionate
allegiance to Paul at this difficult time. The words
cannot be made to signify more than that it was the
Jewish section of the church in Rome which acted in this
unworthy manner—only temporarily, it is to he hoped.
But among these Jewish Christians, to such dimensions
had this defection grown that Aristarchus, Mark and
J. J. alone were the apostle’s fellow-workers unto the
kingdom of God. These three alone, at that particular
time—from among the Jewish Christians—were helping
him in the work of the gospelin Rome. That this de-
fection refers to the Jewish section of the church and not
to the converts from among the Gentiles, is evident from
many considerations. It seems to be proved, for example
by ver 14 of the same chapter (i.e. Col 4 14), as well as
by Philem ver 24, in hoth of which passages Paul names
Demas and Luke as his fellow-laborers, and Luke was
not a Jew hy hirth. But in the general failure of the
Christians in Rome in their conduct toward Paul, it is
with much affection and pathos that he writes concerning
Aristarchus, Mark, and J. J., ‘‘ These only are my fellow-
workers unto the kingdom of God, men that have heen
a comfort unto me.”

Joun RUTHERFURD


JETHER, jé’thér ("%)", yether, ‘“abundance’’):

(1) Ex 4 18 RVm, AVm. See JETHRO.

(2) Gideon’s eldest son (Jgs 8 20), who was
called upon by his father to slay Zebah and Zal-
munnah, but “feared, because he was yet a youth.”
The narrative there (8 4ff) should be connected
with that of 6 34, where Gideon is followed by his
clan, and not with that of ch 7, where he has 300
picked men. The captives would be taken to Or-
pah, Gideon’s home, and slain there.

(3) Father of Amasa (1 K 2 5.32); he was an
Ishmaelite according to 1 Ch 2 17=“Ithra, the
Israelite’ of 2S 17 25, where ‘‘the Ishmaelite”’
should be read for “‘the Israelite.”

(4) A Jerahmeelite (1 Ch 2 32 bis).

(5) A Judahite (1 Ch 4 17).

(6) A man of Asher (1 Ch 7 38)=“Ithran” of
ver 37. Davip Francis RoBerts


JETHETH, jé’theth (1)", ythéth, meaning un-
known): A chief (or clan) of Edom (Gen 36 40 ||
1 Ch 1 51), but probably a mistake for “Jether”
=“Tthran’”’ (Gen 36 26),


JETHLAKH, jcth’la (2m, yithlah). See Irauan.


JETHRO, jeth’ré, je’thro AIM, yithro, ‘‘excel-
lence,” Ex 3 1; 4 18b; 18 1-12 [in 4 18a, probably
a textual error, "4", yether, ‘‘Iether,”’ AVm, RVm];


ve?


LXX always ’Io0ép, Iothér): The priest of Midian
and father-in-law (hdthén) of Moses.


It is not easy to determine the relation of J. to
Reuel and Hobab. If we identify J. with Reuel as in
Ex 218; 31 (and in Ant, III, ili; V,
ji, 3), we must connect ‘‘ Moses’ father-in-


1, His Re- j27"" ‘in Nu 10 29 immediately with
lation to “Reuel” (AV ‘“Raguel”’), and make Hohab
Reuel and the brother-in-law of Moses. But while
Hobab it is possible that héthen may be used in

akss the wider sense ofa wife's relative, it is


nowhere trd ‘‘hrother-in-law’’ except in
Jgs 1 16;_4 11 (‘‘father-in-law,"" AV, RVm). If we
insert, as Ewald suggests (HI, II, 25), ‘Jethro son of
before ‘‘Reuel”’ in Ex 2 18 (cf LXX ver 16, where the
name “Jethro” is given), we would then identify J. with
Hobab, the son of Reuel, in Nu 10 29, taking ‘‘ Moses
father-in-law” to refer back to Hobah. Against this
identification, however, it is stated that J. went away
into his own country without any effort on the part of
Moses to detain him (Ex 18 27), whereas Hohah, though
at first he refused to remain with the Israelites, seems to
have yielded to the pleadings of Moses to hecome their
guide to Canaan (Nu 10 29-32; Jgs 1 16, where Kittel
reads ‘‘Hobab the Kenite"; 4 11). It may he noted
that while the father-in-law of Moses is spoken of as a
“Midianite" in Ex, he is called a ‘‘ Kenite"’ in Jgs 1 16;
411. From this Ewald infers that the Midianites were
at that time intimately blended with the Amalekites,
to which tribe the Kenites belonged (HI, II, 44).


When Moses fled from Egypt he found refuge in
Midian, where he received a hearty welcome into
the household of J. on account of the


2. His courtesy and kindness he had shown
Hearty to the priest’s 7 daughters in helping
Reception them to water their flock. This
of Moses friendship resulted in J. giving Moses

his daughter, Zipporah, to wife (Ex
2 15-21). After Moses had been for about 40


years in the service of his father-in-law, the angel of
the Lord appeared to him in the burning bush as
he was keeping the flock at Horeb, commanding
him to return to Egypt and deliver his enslaved
brethren out of the hands of Pharaoh (8 1 ff).
With J.’s consent Moses left Midian to carry out

the Divine commission (4 18).
When tidings reached Midian of “all that God
had done for Moses, and for Israel’ in delivering
them from Egyp bondage, J., with a


3. His natural pride in the achievements of
Visit to his relative, set out on a visit to Moses,
Moses in taking Zipporah and her two sons with


the Wilder- him (Ex 18 1-12). On learning of
ness his father-in-law’s arrival at the
‘mount of God,’ Moses went out to
meet him, and after a cordial exchange of courtesies
they retired to Moses’ tent, where a pleasant inter-
view took place between them. We are told of the
interest J. felt in all the particulars of the great de-
liverance, how he “rejoiced for all the goodness
which Jeh had done to Israel,” and how the con-
viction was wrought within him that Jeh was
“greater than all gods; yea, in the thing wherein
they dealt proudly against them” (ver 11). In this
condition so expressed there is evidently a reference
to the element by which the Egyptians thought in
their high-handed pursuit they would be able to
bring back Israel into bondage, but by which they
were themselves overthrown.
_ It is worth noting that in the religious service
in which J. and Moses afterward engaged, when J.,
as priest, offered a burnt offering, and Aaron with
all the elders of Israel partook of the sacrificial
feast, prominence was given to J. over Aaron, and
thus a priesthood was recognized beyond the limits
of Israel.
This visit of J. to Moses had important conse-
quences for the future government of Israel (Ex
; _ 18 18-27). The priest of Midian
4. His Wise became concerned about his son-in-
Counsel law when he saw him occupied from
morning to night in deciding the dis-
putes that had arisen among the people. The labor


1675


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 4848, Geneal. of


Jezebel


this entailed, J. said, was far too heavy a burden
for one man to bear. Moses himself would soon
be worn out, and the people, too, would become
weary and dissatisfied, owing to the inability of one
judge to overtake all the cases that were brought
before him. J., therefore, urged Moses to make
use of the talents of others and adopt a plan of
gradation of judges who would dispose of all cases
of minor importance, leaving only the most difficult
for him to settle by a direct appeal to the will of
God. Moses, recognizing the wisdom of his father-
in-law’s advice, readily acted upon his suggestion
and appointed ‘‘able men out of all Israel, and made
them heads over the people, rulers of thousands,
rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of
tens.’ Thereafter, J. returned to his own country.
The story of J. reveals him as a man of singular
attractiveness and strength,in whom a kind, con-
siderate disposition, a deeply religious


5. His spirit, and a wise judgment all met
Character in happy combination. And this an-
and In- cient priest of Midian made Israel and
fluence all nations his debtors when he taught


the distinction between the legislative
and the judicial function, and the importance of
securing that all law be the expression of the Divine
will, and that its application be entrusted only to
men of ability, piety, integrity and truth (Ex 18
21). JamMEs CRICHTON


JETUR, jé’tur (170, ytdr, meaning uncertain):
A “son” of Ishmael (Gen 26 15 jj) 1 Ch 1 31);
against this clan the two and a half tribes warred
(1 Ch 5 18f); they are the Ituraeans of NT times.
See Irurazra.


JEUEL, jé-t’el, ji’el Ox _y @ él, meaning un-
known): ;

(1) A man of Judah (1 Ch 9 6); the name is not
found in the || of Neh 11 24.

(2) A Levite, AV ‘‘Jeiel” (2 Ch 29 138).

(3) A companion of Ezra, AV ‘“‘Jeiel’’ (Ezr 8 13).

(4) The name oceurs also as K°thibh in 1 Ch 9
35; 2 Ch 26 11. See Jemmt, (2), (6).


JEUSH, jée’ush (W197, y‘ush, probably “he pro-
tects,’ “he comes to help”; see TPN, 109; Kethibh
is OD, yish, in Gen 36 5.14; 1 Ch 7 10):

(1) A “son” of Esau (Gen 36 5.14.18; 1 Ch 1
35). “The name is thought by some to be identical
with that of an Arabian lion-god Yagut....,
meaning ‘helper,’ whose antiquity is vouched for
by inscriptions of Thamud”’ (Skinner, Gen, 482).

(2) A Benjamite (1 Ch 7 10), but probably a
Zebulunite. See Curtis, Ch, 145 ff.

(3) A descendant of King Saul, AV “Jehush”
(1 Ch 8 39). ;

(4) A Gershonite Levite (1 Ch 23 10.11).

(5) A son of King Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 19).

Davip Francis Ropers

JEUZ, je’uz (7197, yde, “he counsels’): The

eponym of a Benjamite family (1 Ch 8 10).


W, ju, jo0, JEWESS, JEWISH, ji'ish, joo'ish
ote a aL Beane yhadhim; "Lov8ato.,
Toudatoi; adj.f. DTW), ychudhith; "lovbaikés, Jou-
daikés): ‘““Jew’’ denotes originally an inhabitant of
Judah (2 K 16 6 applies to the two tribes of the
Southern Kingdom), but later the meaning was
extended to embrace all descendants of Abraham.
In the OT the word occurs a few times in the sing.
(Est 2 5; 3 4, ete; Jer 34 9; Zee 8 23); very fre-
quently in the pl. in Ezr and Neh, Est, and in Jer
and Dnl. The adj. in the OT applies only to the
“Jews’ language” or speech (2 K 18 26.28 | Neh
13 24; Isa 36 11.13). “Jews” (always pl.) is the


familiar term for Israelites in the Gospels (esp. in
Jn), Acts, Epp., ete. ‘Jewess”’ occursin 1 Ch 4 18;
Acts 16 1; 24 24. In Tit 1 14 a warning is given
against ‘Jewish fables” (in Gr the adj. is found also
in Gal 2 14). The “‘Jews’ religion” (Ioudaismés)
is referred to in Gal 1 13.14. On the ‘Jews’ lan-
guage,”’ see LANGUAGES OF THE OT; on the “Jews’
religion,” see IsranL, RELIGION or. JAMES ORR


JEWEL, ji’el, js0’el: An ornament of gold, silver
or of precious stones in the form of armlet, bracelet.
anklet, nose-ring, etc. Oriental dress yields itself
freely to such adornment, to which there are many
allusions in Scripture. A frequent term in Heb is
kelt (“utensil,’”’ “vessel’’), coupled with mention of
“gold” or “silver” or both (Gen 24 53; Ex 3 22;
11 2; 12 35; 35 22: 1 § 6 8.15, ete; RVin2 Ch
32 27 tr® ‘‘vessels’). In Cant 1 10, where AV
has “rows [of jewels],”” RV has “plaits [of hair]’’;
in 7 1, the word is from a root halah, meaning “to
adorn.” ‘In 3 instances in AV “jewel’’ represents
the Heb nezem (Prov 11 22; Isa 3 21; Ezk 16
12); ARV changes Prov 11 22 to “ring” (LXX
here=“‘earring’’), and both ERV and ARV have
“ring” in Ezk 16 12. The familiar phrase in Mal
3 17, “in that day when I make up my jewels,”
becomes in ERV, “in the day that I do make, even
a peculiar treasure’ (m “or, wherein I do make a
peculiar treasure’), and im ARV, “even mine own
possession, in the day that I make’ (m “or, do this”).
See, further, ORNamENT; Dress; Stones, PRECIOUS.

JAMES ORR

JEWRY, ji’ri, joo’ri: In Dn] 6 13 AV, where
RV has ‘Judah’; in the NT, in two places in AV
Lk 23 5; Jn 7 1, where RV has correctly “Judaea’
(Ioudata) (q.v.).


JEWS, jiiz, jo6z. See Jew.


JEZANIAH, jez-a-ni’a (UT), yzanyahi, prob-
ably “Jeh hears’; cf JaazaniaH): In Jer 40 8,
and also 42 1 where LXX has “‘Azariah,”’ as in 48 2
(see Driver, Jer)=Jaazaniau, (1) (q.v.).


JEZEBEL, jez’é-bel (AhN, "tzebhel, “unexalted,”
“anhusbanded” [?]; "Le{aBed, Iezdbel; see BDB; 1 K
16 31; 18 4.13.19; 19 1.2; 21 5ff; 2 K 9 7ff.30ff;
Rev 2 20): Daughter of Ethbaal, king of the Zido-
nians, i.e. Phoenicians, and queen of Ahab, king of
Northern Israel. Ahab (c 874-853 BC) carried out
a policy, which his father had perhaps started, of
making alliances with other states. The alliance
with the Phoenicians was cemented by his marriage
with J., and he subsequently gave his daughter
Athaliah in marriage to Jehoram, son of Jehosha-
phat, king of Judah. His own union with Jezebel
is regarded as asin in 1 K 16 31, where the MT is
difficult, being generally understood as a question.
The LXX tr*: “And it was not enough that he should
walk in the sins of Jeroboam ben Nebat, he also took
to wife Jezebel,”’ etc. The Heb ean be pointed to
mean, ‘‘And it was the lightest thing for him to walk
in the sins of Jeroboam ben Nebat, he also took to
wife Jezebel, and went and served Baal and wor-
shipped him,” i.e. all the other sins were light as
compared with the marriage with Jezebel and the
serving of Baal (cf Mic 6 16). Is this a justifiable
view to take of the marriage? One answer would
be that Ahab made a wise alliance; that Baal-
worship was not non-Heb, that Ahab named his
children not after Baal but after Jeh (cf Ahaziah,
Jehoram, Athaliah), and that he consulted the
prophets of Jeh (cf 1 K 22 6); further, that he
only did what Solomon had done on a much larger
scale; it may be added too that Ahab was in favor
of religious toleration, and that Elijah and not the
king is the persecutor. What then can be said for


Jezebel
Joab


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1676


the unfavorable verdict of the Heb historians?
That verdict is based on the results and effects of
the marriage, on the life and character of J., and

in that life two main incidents demand attention.
This is not described; it is only referred to in 1 K
18 4, “when J. cut off the prophets of Jeh”; and
this shows the history of the time to


1. Perse- be incompletely related. In 1 K 18
cution of 19 we are further told that ‘450
Jeh’s prophets of Baal ate at her table’
Prophets (commentators regard the reference to

“400 prophets of the Asherah”’ as an ad-
dition). In 1 K 19 1 Ahab tells J. of the slaughter


of the prophets of Baal by Elijah, and then J. (19 2)
sends a messenger to Elijah to threaten his life.
This leads to the prophet’s flight, an object which
J. had in view, perhaps, for she would hardly dare
to murder Elijah himself. 2 K 9 7 regards the
massacre of Ahah’s family as a punishment for the
persecution of the prophets by J.
Ahab expresses a desire to possess the vineyard neigh-
boring upon his palace in Jezreel, owned by Nahoth,
who refuses to part with the family inherit-
2. Jezebel’s ance though offered either its money value


s or a better vineyard in exchange. Ahab
Plot Against is depressed at this, and J., upou finding the


Naboth cause of his melancholy feelings, asks him
(1 K 21) sarcastically if he is not king, suggesting
that as king his wishes should he imme-


diately jie by his subjects. She there-
upon plots to secure him Nahoth's vineyard. J. sends
letters sealed in Ahah's name to the elders of Naboth's
township, and bids them arrange a public fast and make
Naboth ‘‘sit at the head of the people"’ (RVm), a phrase
taken by some to mean that he is to be arraigned, while
it is explained hy others as meaning that Naboth is to
be given the chief place. Two witnesses—a sufficient
number for that purpose—are to be brought to accuse
Naboth of blasphemy and treason. This is done, and
Naboth is found guilty, and stoned to death. The
property is confiscated, and falls to the king (vs 1-I6).
lijah hears of this, and is sent to threaten Ahab with
Divine vengeance; dogs shall lick his dead hody (ver
19). But in vs 20-23 this prophecy is made, not con-
cerning Ahab but against Jezebel, and ver 25 attributes
the sins of Ahab to her influence over him.
The prophecy js fulfilled in 2 K 9 30-37. Ahaziah
and Jehoram had succeeded their father Ahab; the one
reigned for 2 years (1 K 22 51), the other 12 years (2 K
3 Jehu heads a revolt against the house of Ahah,
and one day comes to Jezreel. J. had ‘‘ painted her eyes,
and attired her head," and sees Jehu coming. She
greets him sarcastically as his master's murderer. Ac-
cording to MT, Jehu asks, “‘ Who is on my side? who?”’
but the text is emended by Klostermann, following LXX
in the main, ‘' Who art thou that thou shouldest find fault
with me?" i.e, thou art but a murderess thyself. She
is then thrown down and the horses tread upon_her
(reading ‘‘they trod'’ for ‘‘he trod"' in ver 33). When
search is afterward made for her remains, they are found
terribly mutilated. Thus was the prophecy fulfilled.
(Some comms. hold that Nahoth's vineyard and Ahah’s
garden were in Samaria, and Nahoth a Jezreelite. The
words, ‘‘which was in Jezreel,”’ of 1 K 21 I are wanting
in L.XX, which has ‘‘And Naboth had a vineyard by the
threshing-floor of Ahab king of Samaria.'’ But cf 1K
18 45; 21 23; 2 K 8 29; 9 10.15 7.307.) See Anap;
JEau.
The character of J. is seen revived in that of her
daughter, Athaliah of Judah (2 K 11); there is no
doubt that J. was a powerful person-
3. Jezebel’s ality. She brought the worship of
Character the Phoen Baal and Astarte with her
into Heb life, and indirectly introduced
it into Judah as well as into the Northern King-
dom. In judging her connection with this propa-
gation, we should bear in mind that she is not a
queen of the 20th cent.; she must be judged in
company with other queens famous in_ history.
Her religious attitude and zeal might profitably be
compared with that of Mary, queen of Scots. It
must also be remembered that the introduction of
any religious change is often resented when it comes
from a foreign queen, and is apt to be misunder-
stood, e.g. the attitude of Greece to the proposal of
Queen Olga to have an authorized edition of the
Bible in modern Gr. ,
On the other hand, although much may be said


that would be favorable to J. from the religious
standpoint, the balance is heavy against her when
we remember her successful plot against Naboth.
It is not perhaps blameworthy in her that she upheld
the religion of her native land, although the nat-
ural thing would have been to follow that of her
adopted land (cf Ruth 1 16f). The superiority
of Jeh-worship was not as clear then as it is to
us today. It may also be held that Baal-worship
was not unknown in Heb life (cf Jgs 6 25 f), that
Baal of Canaan had become incorporated with Jeh
of Sinai, and that there were pagan elements in the
worship of the latter. But against all this it: must
be clear that the Baal whom J. attempted to intro-
duce was the Phoen Baal, pure and simple; he
was another god, or rather in him was presented an
idea of God very different from Jeh. And further,
“in Phoenicia, where wealth and luxury had been
enjoyed on a scale unknown to either Israel or the
Canaanites of the interior, there was a refinement,
if one may so speak, and at the same time a prodi-
gality of vicious indulgences, connected with the
worship of Baal and Astarte to which Israel had
hitherto been a stranger... .. It was like a cancer
eating into the vitals or a head and heart sickness
resulting in total decay (Isa 1 6). In Israel, moral
deterioration meant political as well as spiritual
death. The weal of the nation lay in fidelity to Jeh
alone, and in His pure worship’ (7PM, §213).

The verdict of the Heb historian is thus sub-
stantiated. J. is an example—an extreme one no
doubt—of the bad influence of a highly developed
civilization forcing itself with all its sins upon a
community less highly civilized, but possessed of
nobler moral and religious conceptions. She has
parallels both in family and in national life. For a
parallel to Elijah’s attitude toward J. cf the words
of Carlyle about Knox in On Heroes and Hero-
Worship, IV, esp. the section, ‘“We blame Knox for
his intolerance,” etc.

In Rev 2 20, we read of Jezabel, “the woman
Jezebel, who calleth herself a prophetess’; not “thy
wife” (i.e. the wife of the bishop) RVm, but as Mof-
fat (Expos Gr Test.) aptly renders, ‘‘that Jezebel
of a woman alleging herself a prophetess.’’ Some
members of the church at Thyatira ‘‘under the
sway of an influential woman refused to separate
from the local guilds where moral interests, though
not ostensibly defied, were often seriously com-
promised..... Her lax principles or tendencies
made for a connection with foreign and compro-
mising associations which evidently exerted a dan-
gerous influence upon some weaker Christians in the
city.” Her followers ‘prided themselves upon
their enlightened liberalism (ver 24).” Moffat
rejects both the view of Schtirer (Theol. Abhand-
lungen, 39{), that she is to be identified with the
Chaldaean Sibyl at Thyatira, and also that of Selwyn
making her the wife of the local asiarch. “It was
not the cults but the trade guilds that formed the
problem at Thyatira.” Sce also Zahn, Intro to the
NT, § 73, 0.7; Anas; Baau; Exiag.

: Davi Francis Roperts

JEZELUS, je-zé'lus, jez'é-lus (’letq\os, Iezélos):

(1) In 1 Esd 8 32; called ‘“Jahaziel” in Ezr 8 5.

(2) In 1 Esd 8 35; called “Jehiel” in Ezr 8 9.


" JEZER, je'zér (IZ), yecer, “form” or “purpose”):
“son” of Naphtali (Gen 46 24; Nu 26 49:
1 Ch: 7 13): oor ,


JEZERITES, jé’zér-its, THE (ET, ha-yigri
[collective with art.]): Descendants of “Jezer”’
(Nu 26 49).


JEZIAH, jé-zi'a. See Izztaz.


1677


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jezebel
Joab


JEZIEL, jé’zi-cl, jé-ziel (Kethibh is DX",
y'2i’él, or D84TY, yzd’el; Keré SNM, yezi’al= “God
gathers,” perhaps): One of David’s Benjamite
recruits at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 3).


JEZLIAH, jez-li’a.
JEZOAR, jé-zi/ar. See IzHar.
JEZRAHIAH, jez-ra-hi’a. See IzraHran.


JEZREEL, jez‘ré-el, jez‘rél (SNP, yizr'e’l,
“God soweth”’):
(1) A city on the border of the territory of
Issachar (Josh 19 18). It is named with Chesul-
loth and Shunem (modern Jksal and
1. Territory Sdlam). It remained loyal to the
house of Saul, and is mentioned as
part of the kingdom over which Abner set Ish-
bosheth (2 S 2 9). From Jezreel came the tidings
of Saul and Jonathan’s death on Gilboa, which
brought disaster to Mephibosheth (2 8 4 4). The
city plays no important part in the history till the
time of Ahab. Attracted, doubtless, by the fine
position and natural charms of the place, he made it
one of his royal residences, building here a palace
(1 K 211). This was evidently on the eastern
wall; and the gate by which Jehu entered was over-
looked by the quarters of Queen Jezebel (2 K 9
30f). ‘The royal favor naturally enhanced the
dignity of the city, and ‘elders’ and ‘nobles’ of
Jezreel are mentioned (1 K 21 8, etc). Under the
influence of Jezebel, an institution for the worship
of Baal was founded here, from which, probably, the
men were drawn who figured in the memorable con-
test with Elijah on Carmel (2 K 1011). ‘“Thetower
in Jezreel” was part of the defences of the city.
It commanded a view of the approach up the valley
from Beth-shean—the way followed by the hordes
of the E., who, from time immemorial, came west-
ward for the rich pasture of the plain (2 K 9 17).
It was necessary also to keep constant watch, as
- the district E. of the Jordan was always more un-
settled than that on the W.; and danger thence
might appear at any moment. The garden of
Naboth seems to have lain to the E. of the city
(2 K 9 21), near the royal domain, to which Ahab
desired to add it as a garden of herbs (1 K 21 1 ff).
See Nasora. This was the scene of the tragic
meetings between Elijah and Ahab (1 K 21 17 ff),
and between Jehu and Joram and Ahaziah (2 K 9
21). Joram had returned to Jezreel from Ramoth-
gilead to be healed of his wounds (9 15). By the
gateway the dogs devoured Jezebel’s body (vs 31
ff). Naboth had been stoned to death outside
the city (1 K 21 13). Jos lays the scene by the
fountain of Jezreel, and here, he says, the dogs
licked the blood washed from the chariot of Ahab
(Ant, VIII, xv, 6). This accords with 1 K 21 19;
but 22 38 points to the pool at Samaria.
The site of Jezreel must be sought in a position where


a tower would command a view of the road coming up the
valley from Beth-shean. It has long been


See Iziian.


2. Identi- the custom to identify it wlth the modern
eeu village, Zer‘in, on the northwestern spur of
fication Gilboa. This meets the above condition;


and it also agrees with the indications in
Onom as lying between Legio (Lejjan) and Scythopolis
(Beisan). “Recently, however, Professor A. R. S. Mac-
alister made a series of excavations here, and failed to find
any evidence of ancient Israelite occupation. This casts
douht upon the identification, and further excavatlon is
necessary before any certain conclusion can be reached.
For the “fountain which is in Jezreel,’' see Harop, WELL
OF.


(2) An unidentified town in the uplands of Judah
(Josh 15 56), the home of Ahinoam (1 S 27 38, etc).
W. Ewine
JEZREEL, VALE OF. See EsprarLon, PLAIN
OF.


JEZREELITE, jez’ré-cl-it, jez/rélit CONT,
ha-yizr@lt): Applied to Naboth, a native of Jez-
reel (1) (1 K 21 1, ete).


JEZREELITESS, jez‘ré-cl-it-ea, jez‘rél-it-es
(MSRM , yizre’lith, “of Jezreel,” fem.): Applied
to Ahinoam, one of David’s first two wives, a native
of Jezreel in Judah (1 S 27 3; 305; 25 2 2;
32; 1 Ch 3 1).


JEZRIELUS, jez-ri-é’lus (’Tetpejdos, Tezriélos; AV
Hierielus; 1 Esd 9 27): Corresponding to “‘Jehiel’’
in Ezr 10 26.


JIBSAM, jib’sam.


JIDLAPH, jid'laf (99°, yidhlaph, perhaps “he
weeps”): A “son” of Nahor (Gen 22 22).


JIMNA, JIMNAG, jim’na (73'0", yimnah, per-
haps=“good fortune’): A “son” of Asher (Gen
46 17, AV “Jimnah”’; Nu 26 44, AV “Jimna”’),
whereas RV has Imnag (q.v.).


JIMNITES, jim’nits, THE (same as “Jimna,”
only collective with the def. art.; Nu 26 44 AV,
where RV has “Imnites’’): Descendants of Jimna
or Imna.


JIPHTAH, jif'ta (MD?, yiphiah).
JIPHTHAHEL, jif’tha-el.


JOAB, jO’ab (ANT, ys'abh, ‘“Jeh is father’;
TwdB, Tad):

(1) Sori of Zeruiah, David’s sister. He was
‘captain of the host”’ (cf 2 S 19 13) under David.

(a) Joab is first introduced in the narrative of
the war with Abner, who supported the claims of

Ishbosheth to the throne against those
1. Joab of David (28 2 8—3 1). The two
and Abner armies met, and on Abner’s suggestion

a tournament took place between 12
men from each side; a general engagement follows,
and in this J.’s army is victorious. Asahel, J.’s
brother, is killed in his pursuit of Abner, but the
latter’s army is sorely pressed, and he appeals to J.
for a cessation of hostilities. J. calls a halt, but
declares that he would not cease had Abner not
made _his plea.

(b) 2S 3 12-29. Abner visits David at, Hebron,
and makes an alliance with David. He then leaves
the town, apparently under royal protection. J.
is absent at the time, but returns immediately after
Abner’s departure, and expostulates with David
for not avenging Asahel’s death, and at the same
time attributes a bad motive to Abner’s visit. He
sends a message, no doubt in the form of a royal
command, for Abner to return; the chief does so,
is taken aside ‘“‘into the midst of the gate” (or as
LXX and commentators read, ‘into the side of the
gate,” 3 27), and slain there by J. David pro-
claims his own innocence in the matter, commands
J. as well as the people to mourn publicly for the
dead hero (3 31), composes a lament for Abner, and
pronounces a curse upon J. and his descendants
(ver 30 is regarded as an editorial note, and com-
mentators change ver 39).

(a) 28 10 1-14; 1 Ch 19 1-15. David sends
ambassadors with his good wishes to Hanun on his

ascending the throne of the Ammon-
2. The Am- ites; these are ill-treated, and war


See Ipsam.


See IPHTAH.


See IpHTAHEL.


monite follows, David’s troops being com-
War: manded by J. On finding himself
Death of placed between the Ammonites on the
Uriah one hand, and their Syrian allies on


the other, he divides his army, and
himself leads one division against the Syrians,


Joab
Job, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1678


leaving Abishai, his brother, to fight the Ammonites;
the defeat of the Syrians is followed by the rout of
the Ammonites.

(b) 28 10 15-19; 1 Ch 19 16-19 describes a
second war between Hadarezer and David. J. is
not mentioned here.

(c) 2 § 11 1 narrates the resumption of the war
against the Ammonites; J. is in command, and the
town of Rabbah is besieged. Here occurs the
account of David’s sin with Bathsheba, omitted
by Ch. David gets J. to send Uriah, her husband,
to Jerus, and when he refuses to break the soldier’s
vow (11 6-13), J. is used to procure Uriah’s death
in the siege, and the general then sends news of it
to David (11 14-27). After capturing the ‘water-


city’ of Rabbah, J. sends for David to complete the -


capture and lead the triumph himself (12 26-29).

(a) The next scene depicts J. attempting and
succeeding in his attempt to get Absalom restored

to royal favor. He has noticed that
3. Joab and “the king’s heart is toward Absalom”
Absalom (14 1), and so arranges for “a wise

woman” of Tekoa to bring a supposed
complaint of her own before the king, and then
rebuke him for his treatment of Absalom. The
plan succeeds. David sees J.’s band in it, and
gives him permission to bring Absalom to Jerus.
But the rebel has to remain in his own house, and is
not allowed to see his father (14 1-24).

(b) Absalom attempts to secure J.’s intercession
for a complete restoration to his father’s confidence.
J. turns a deaf ear to the request until his field is
put on fire by Absalom’s command. He then sees
Absalom, and gets David to receive his prodigal
son back into the royal home (14 28-33).

(c) Absalom revolts, and makes Amasa, another
nephew of David, general instead of J. (17 24f).
David flees to Mahanaim, followed by Absalom.
J. is given a third of the army, the other divisions
being led by Abishai and Ittai. He is informed
that Absalom has been caught in a tree (or thicket),
and expostulates with the informer for not having
killed him. Although he is reminded of David's
tender plea that Absalom be kindly dealt with, he
dispatches the rebel himself, and afterward calls
for a general halt of the army. When David gives
vent to his feelings of grief, he is sternly rebuked by
J., and the rebuke has its effect (17—19 8a).

28 19 8b-15. On David’s return to Jerus,
Amasa is made ‘‘captain of the host” instead of J.

(19 13). Then Sheba revolts, Amasa
4. Joab and loses time in making preparation for
Amasa quelling it, and Abishai is bidden by

David to take the field (20 6). The
Syr VS reads ‘‘J.” for “Abishai” in this verse, and
some commentators follow it, but LX X supports
MT. J. seems to have accompanied Abishai; and
when Amasa meets them at Gibeon, J., on pretense
of kissing his rival, killshim. Hethen assumes com-
mand, is followed by Amasa’s men, and arranges
with a woman of Abel beth-maacah to deliver to
him Sheba’s head. The revolt is then at an end.

J. subsequently opposed David’s suggestion of a
census, but eventually carried it out (2 S 24 1-9;

1 Ch 21 1-6), yet 1 Ch 21 6 and 27
5. Joab’s 24 relate that he did not carry it
Death out fully. He was one of Adonijah’s

supporters in his claim to the throne
(1 K 1 7.19.41). For this he had to pay the penalty
with bis life, being slain at the altar in the “Tent of
Jeh” (1 K 2 28-34) by Benaiah, who acted upon
Solomon’s orders. His murderer became his suc-
cessor as head of the army. 1 K 2 5 makes David
advise Solomon not to forget that J. slew Abner and
Amasa, and 1 K 11 14-22 contains a reference to
the dread of his name in Edom. 1 Ch 11 6 makes
him win bis spurs first at the capture of Jerus, but


2S 2, 3 are previous in time to this event (cf 2 85
6-10), and 1 Ch 11 8 makes him repair the city,
while 1 Ch 26 28 refers to a dedication of armor
by him.

In summing up J.’s character, we must remember
the stirring times in which he lived. That he was

a most able general, there is no doubt.
6. Joab’s He was, however, very jealous of his
Character position, and this accounts for Amasa’s
murder, if not partially for that of
Abner too: if he was afraid that Abner would sup-
plant him, that fear may be held to be justified, for
Amasa, who had not been too loyal to David did
take J.’s place for a time. But blood revenge for
Asahel’s death was perhaps the chief cause. Yet
even when judged in the light of those rough times,
and in the light of eastern life, the murder of Abner
was a foul, treacherous deed (see Trumbull, Studies
in Oriental Social Life, 129-31). }

J. opposed the census probably because It was an
innovation. His rebuke of David’s great grief
over Absalom’s death can only be characterized
as just; he is the stern warrior who, after being
once merciful and forgiving, will not again spare
a deceitful rebel; and yet David shows how a
father’s conduct toward a prodigal, rebellious son
is not regulated by stern justice. J.’s unswerving
loyalty to David leads one to believe that no dis-
loyalty was meant by his support of Adonijah, who
was really the rightful heir to the throne. But
their plans were defeated by those of the harem,
and J. had to pay the price with his life.

Taken as a whole, his life, as depicted in the very
reliable narrative of 2 S and 1 K, may be said to
be as characteristic of the times as that of David
himself, with a truly Homeric ring about it. He
was a great man, great in military prowess and also
in personal revenge, in his loyalty to the king as
well as in his stern rebuke of his royal master. He
was the greatest of David’s generals, and the latter’s
success and glory owed much to this noblest of that
noble trio whom Zeruiah bore.

(2) A Judahite, father or founder of Ge-harashim .
(1 Ch 4 14, “valley of craftsmen’? RVm). See
GE-HARASHIM.

(3) A family of returned exiles (Ezr 2 6 || Neh
7 11; Ezr 8 9; 1 Esd 8 35).

(4) See ATROTH-BETH-JOAB.

: Davip Francis RoBERTS

JOACHAZ, jo’a-kaz (Iwxét, Lochdz, "lexovlas,
fechonias): Son of Josiah (1 Esd 1 34). In Mt
‘1 11 “Jechoniah”’ is the reading.


JOACIM, jd’a-sim. See Joakim.


JOADANUS, jo-a-da’nus (IwaSdvos, Jdaddnos):
In 1 Esd 9 19, apparently, through some corrup-
tion; the same as Gedaliah, a son of Jeshua, the son
of Jozadak, in Ezr 10 18.


JOAH, jo’a (IRN, yo’ah, “Jeh is brother’):

_(1) Son of Asaph and recorder under King Heze-
kiah (2 K 18 18.26; Isa 36 3.11.22); he was one
of the 3 officers sent by the king to speak to the
Assyr envoys at the siege of Jerus (c 701 BC).

(2) In 1 Ch 6 21 (Heb 6); 2 Ch 29 12, a
Levite (son of Zimmah)=‘‘Ethan” of 1 Ch 6 42
(Heb 27).

(3) A son of Obed-edom (1 Ch 26 4). ;

(4) Son of Joahaz and recorder under King
Josiah (2 Ch 34 8).


JOAHAZ, ji’a-haz (TNT, yo’ahaz, “Jeh has
grasped” =‘‘Jehoahaz’’):

(1) Father of Joan (4) (2 Ch 34 8).

(2) RV and Heb in 2 K 14 1 for Jehoahaz, king
of Israel. See JnHoauaz.


1679


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joab
Job, Book of


_(3) RV and Heb in 2 Ch 36 2.4 for Jenoanaz,
king of Judah (q.v.).


JOAKIM, AV
Joacim):

(1) Jehoiakim, king of Judah and Jerus (1 Esd
1 37-39; Bar 1 3).

(2) Jehoiachin, son of (1) (1 Esd 1 48).

(3) Son of Jeshua (1 Esd 5 5), called by mistake
son of Zerubbabel; in Neh 12 10.26 his name occurs
as in 1 Esd, among the priests and Levites who
returned to Jerus with Zerubbabel.

(4) High priest of Jerus in the time of Baruch
(Bar 1 7).

(5) High priest in Jerus in the days of Judith who F
along with “the ancients of the children of Israel,’
welcomed the heroine back to the city after the
death of Holofernes (Jth 4). He cannot be identi-
fied with any of the high priests in the lists given in
1 Ch or in Jos, Ant, X, viii, 6. The word means
“the Lord hath set up.” It is probably symbolical,
and tends with other names occurring in the narra-
tive to establish the supposition that the book was
a work of imagination composed to support the
faith of the Jews in times of stress and difficulty.

(6) The husband of Susanna (Sus vs 1 ff), perbaps
here also a symbolical name. J. Horcuison


jo’a-kim (Iwaxely, Idaketm; -


JOANAN, jé-a’nan (Ieavay WH, Idandn; 'To-
avva TR, Idannd; AV Joanna):

(1) A grandson of Zerubbabel in the genealogy of
Jesus according to St. Luke (3 27).

(2) Theson of Eliasib(1 Esd 9 1 AV, RV Jonas”).


JOANNA, jé-an’a (Clwdva, Jédna, or 'Iwdvva,
Iédnna): The wife of Chuzas, Herod’s steward.
She was one of the “women who had been healed
of evil spirits and infirmities” which “ministered
unto him [AV, i.e. Jesus, or “them” RV, ie. Jesus
and His disciples] of their substance,” on the occa-
sion of Jesus’ tour through Galilee (Lk 8 2.3).
Along with other women she accompanied Jesus
on His last journey from Galilee to Jerus, and was
present when His body was laid in the sepulcher
(Lk 28 55). She was thus among those who pre-
pared spices and ointments, who found the grave
empty, and who “told these things unto the apostles”:


(Lk 28 56—24 10). C. M. Kerr
JOANNES, jé-an’es, jé-an’éz (Twdvvys, [odnnés;
AV Johannes):


(1) Son of Acatan (1 Esd 8 38), called also
“Johanan” in Ezr 8 12.

(2) Son of Bebai (1 Esd 9 29), called “Jehohan-
an’ in Ezr 10 28.


JOARIB, ja’a-rib’ ("IwapiB, Zdarib; AV Jarib):
Ancestor of Mattathias (1 Macc 14 29), given as
“Joarib” in AV of 1 Macc 2 1; he was chief of the
first of the 24 courses of priests in the reign of David.
Varieties of the name are Jarib, Joarib, and Je-


hoiarib (1 Ch 24 7).


JOASH, jo’ash (UNM, yad’ash, “Ich is strong” or
“Jeh has bestowed’’; ’Iwds, Jods): ;

(1) Father of Gideon, of the clan of Abiezer and
the tribe Manasseh (Jgs 6 11.29.30.31; 7 14; 8
13.29.32). Gideon declares (6 15) that the family
is the poorest in Manasseh, words similar to those
of Saul (1 S 9 21), and not to be taken too literally.
J. would be a man of standing and wealth, for
Gideon was able to command 10 servants to destroy
the altar and the Asherah (Jgs 6 27.34), and also
to summon the whole clan to follow him. Further,
the altar that J. had was that used by the com-
munity (6 28), so that he would be the priest, not
only of his own family qué paterfamilias, but also


of the community in virtue of his position as chief.
When Gideon destroyed the altar and the Asherah
or sacred pillar by it, J. refused to deliver his son
to death, declaring that Baal, if he was a god, should
aveuge himself (cf Elijah in 1 K 18).

(2) Called ‘‘the king’s son” (1 K 22 26; 2 Ch
18 25; cf Jer 36 26; 38 6), or, less probably, “‘the
son of Hammelech,’’ RVm; perhaps a son of Ahab.
Micaiah the prophet was handed over to his custody
and that of Amon by Ahab.

(3) A Judahite, descendant of Shelah (1 Ch 4
2


).
(4) A Benjamite recruit of David at Ziklag.
Commentators read here, ‘J. the son of Shemaiah
{or Jehoshamai], the Gibeathite” (1 Ch 12 3).
(5) In2 K 11 2, ete=Jehoash, king of Judah.
(6) In2 K 13 9, ete=Jehoash, king of Northern
Israel. Daviv Francis RoBERTS


JOASH (W715, yo'ash, “Jeh has aided”):

(1) A Benjamite, or, more probably, a Zebulunite
(1 Ch 7 8).

(2) One of David’s officers; J. was ‘over the
eellars of oil”? (1 Ch 27 28).


JOATHAM, jo’a-tham (Iwé@ap, Iddtham): AV
for RV “Jotham” (Mt 19). See JorHam (the king).


JOB, job (AVS, ’Zydbh, meaning of name doubt-
ful; some conjecturing “object of enmity,” others
“he who turns,” etc, to God; both uncertain
guesses; '168, [6b): The titular hero of the Book
of Job, represented as a wealthy and pious land-
holder who lived in patriarchal times, or at least
conditions, in the land of Uz, on the borders of
Idumaea. Outside of the Book of Job he is
mentioned by Ezekiel (Ezk 14 14.20) as one of 3
great personages whose representative righteousness
would presumably avail, if that of any mdividuals
could, to redeem the nation; ‘the other two being
Noah, an ancient patriarch, and Daniel, a con-
temporary of the prophet. It is difficult to deter-
mine whether J. was an actual personage or not. If
known through legend, it must have been on account
of some such experience as is narrated in the book,
ah experience unique enough to have become a

otent household word; still, the power and in-
finence of it is due to the masterly vigor and exposi-
tion of the story. It was the J. of literature, rather
than the J. of legend, who lived in the hearts of
men; a character so commanding that, albeit
fictitious, it could be referred to as real, just as we
refer to Hamlet or Othello. It is not the way of
Heb writers, however, to evolve literary heroes from
pure imagination; they crave an authentic basis of
fact. It is probable that such a basis, in its essen-
tial outlines, existed under the story of Job. Itis
not necessary to suppose, however, that the legend
or the name was known to Israel from ancient
times. Job is introduced (Job 1 1) as if he had
not been known before. The writer, who through-
out the book shows a wide acquaintance with the
world, doubtless found the legend somewhere, and
drew its meanings together for an undying message
to his and all times. JouN FRANKLIN GENUNG


JOB, BOOK OF:
I.


INTRODUCTORY
1. Place in the Canon
2. Rank and Readers
Il. Tue Lirerary Framework
1. Setting of Time, Place and Scene
2, Characters and Personality
3. Form and Style
If. THe Course or THe Story
A) To Job’s Blessing and Curse
1. His ‘Autumn Days”
. The Wager in Heaven
. The Silent Friends
4, Whose Way Is Hid


wre


Job, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1680


B) To Joh’s Ultimatum of Protest
1. The Veiled Impeachment
2. Wisdom Insipid, Friends Doubtful
3. Crookedness of the Order of Things
4. No Mediation in Sight
C) To Job’s Ultimatum of Faith
1. Detecting the Friends’ Faise Note
2. Staking All on Integrity
3. ‘Ifa Man Die”
4. The Surviving Next of Kin
D) To Job’s Verdict on Things as They Arc |
Climax and Subsidence of the Friends’
Charge
2. The Reai Cause of Job’s Dismay
3. Manhood in the Ore
4. Job Reads His Indictment
E£) The Dénouement
1. The Self-constituted Interpreter
2. The Whirlwind and the Voice
3. The Thing That Is Right
4. The Restored Situation
IV. Tue Prospiem ano THE PURPOSE
1. Beyond the Didactic Tether
2. What Comes of Limiting the Purpose
3. The Book’s Own Import of Purpose
4. Problem of the Intrinsic Man
V. Consroprations or AGE ANo Serrino
1. Shadowy Contacts with History
2. Place in Bib. Literature
3. Parallels and Echoes
LiveRATURE


I. Introductory.—The greatest production of the
Heb Wisdom literature, and one of the supreme
literary creations of the world. Its
1. Place in place in the Heb Canon corresponds
the Canon to the high estimation in which it was
held; it stands in the 3d section, the
“writings” (kethabhim) or Hagiographa, next after
the two great anthologies Pss and Prov; apparently
put thus near the head of the list for weighty read-
ing and meditation. In the Gr Canon (which ours
follows), it is put with the poetical books, standing
at their head. It is one of 3 Scripture books, the
others being Pss and Prov, for which the later Heb
scholars (the Massoretes) employed a special system
of punctuation to mark its poetic character.
The Book of Job was not one of the books desig-
nated for public reading in the synagogues, as were
the Pent and the Prophets, or for


2. Rank occasional reading at feast seasons, as
and were the 5 megilloth or rolls. It was
Readers rather a book for private reading, and


one whose subject-matter would appeal
esp. to the more cultivated and thoughtful classes.
Doubtless it was all the more intimately valued for
this detachment from sanctuary associations; it
was, like Prov, a people’s book; and esp. among
the cultivators of Wisdom it must have been from
its first publication a cherished classic. At any
rate, the patriarch Job (though whether from the
legend or from the finished book is not clear; see
Jos) is mentioned as a well-known national type by
Ezk (14 14.20); and James, writing to Jewish
Christians (6 11), refers to the character of ithe
patriarch as familiar to his readers. It was as one
of the great classic stories of their lit., rather than
as embodying a ritual or prophetic standard, that
it was so universally known and cherished.

I. The Literary Framework.—In view of the
numerous critical questions by which the inter-
pretation of the book has been beclouded—ques-
tions of later alterations, additions, corruptions,
dislocations—it may be well to say at the outset
that what is here proposed is to consider the Book
of Job as we have it before us today, in its latest and
presumably definitive edition. It will be time
enough to remove exerescences when a fair view of
the book as it is, with its literary values and rela-
tions, makes us sure that there are such; see III,
below. Meanwhile, as a book that has reached a
stage so fixed and finished that at any rate modern
tinkering cannot materially change it, we may
consider what its literary framework does to justify
itself. And first of all, we may note that preémi-


~—


nently among Scripture books it bears the matured
literary stamp; both in style and structure it is a
work, not only of spiritual edification, but of
finished literary art. This may best be realized,
perhaps, by taking it, as from the beginning it
purports to be, as a continuously maintained story,
with the consistent elements of plot, character
scheme, and narrative movement which we nat-
urally associate with a work of the narrator’s art.
The story of the Book of Job is laid in the far-off
patriarchal age, such a time as we find elsewhere
represented only in the Book of Gen;
a time long before the Israelitish state,
with its religions, social and political
organization, existed. Its place is “the
land, of Uz,” a little-known region
S.E. of Pal, on the borders of Edom;
a place remote from the ways of thinking péculiar
to Israelitish lawgivers, priests and prophets. Its
scene is in the free open country, among mountains,
wadies, pasture-lands, and rural towns, where the
relations of man and man are more elemental and
primitive, and where the things of God are more
intimately apprehended than in the complex affairs
of city and state. It is easy to see what the writer
gains by such a choice of setting. The patriarchal
conditions, wherein the family is the social and
communal unit, enable him to, portray worship
and conduct in their primal elements: religious
rites of the simplest nature, with the family head
the unchallenged priest. and intercessor (cf 1 4.5;
42 8), and without the austere exactions of sanctu-
ary or temple; to represent God, as in the old
folk-stories, as communicating with men in audible
voice and in tempest; and to give to the patriarch
or sheikh a function of counsel and succor in the
community analogous to that of the later wise man
or sage (cf ch 29). The place outside the bounds
of Pal enables him to give an international or rather
intercommunal tissue to his thought, as befits the
character of the wisdom with which he is dealing,
a strain of truth which Israel could and did share
with neighbor nations. This is made further evi-
dent by the fact that in the discourses of the book,
the designation of God is not Jeh (with one excep-
tion, 12 9), but Elohim or Eloah or Shaddai, appel-
latives rather than names, common to the Sem
peoples. The whole archaie scene serves to detach
the story from complex conditions of civilization,
and enables the writer to deal with the inherent and
intrinsic elements of manhood.
All the characters of the story, J. included, are
from non-Palestinian regions. The chief spokes-
man of the friends, Eliphaz, who is
2. Charac- from Teman, is perhaps intended to
ters and represent a type of the standard and
Personality orthodox wisdom of the day; Teman,
; and Edom in general being famed for
wisdom (Jer 49 7; Ob vs 8.9). The characters of
the friends, while representing in general a remark-
able uniformity of tenet, are quite aptly individnal-
ized: Eliphaz as a venerable and devout sage who,
with his eminent penetrativeness of insight, com-
bines a yearning compassion; Bildad more as a
scholar versed in the derived lore of tradition; and
Zophar more impetuous and dogmatic, with the
dogmatist’s vein of intolerance. In Elihu, the
young Aramaean who speaks after the others, the
writer seems endeavoring to portray a young man’s
positiveness and absoluteness of conviction, and
with it a self-conceit that quite outruns his ability.
The Satan of the Prologue, who makes the wager
with Jeh, is masterfully individualized, not as the
malignant tempter and enemy of mankind, but as
a spint compact of impudent skepticism, who can
appreciate no motive beyond self-advantage. Even
the wife of J., with her peremptory disposition to


1. Setting
of Time,
Place and
Scene


1681


make his affliction a personal issue with God, is not
without an authentic touch of the elemental femi-
nine. But high above them all is the character of
J. himself, which, with all its stormy alternations
of mood, range of assertion and remonstrance and
growth of new conviction, remains absolutely con-
sistent with itself. Nor can we leave unmentioned
what is perhaps the hardest achievement of all, the
sublime venture of giving the very words of God, in
such a way that He speaks no word out of character
noe measures His thought according to the standards
of men.


_The Prologue, chs 1 and 2, a few verses at the begin-
ning of ch 32 (vs 1-6a), and the Epilogue (42 7-17) are
written in narrative prose. The rest of


3. Form the hook (except the short sentences in-
a Stl troducing the speaker) is In poetry; a
and Style oetic tissue conforming to the type of the


: is ater mdshal (see under Provers), which,
in continuous series of couplets, is admirably adapted
alike to imaginative subllmity and impassioned address.
Beginning with J.’s curse of his day (ch 3), J. and his
three friends answer each other back and forth in three
rounds of speeches, complete except that, for reasons which
the subject makes apparent, Zophar, the third friend, falls
to speak the third time. After the friends are thus put
to silence, J. speaks three times in succession (chs 26—
31), and then “the words of J. are ended.” At this
point (ch 32) a fourth speaker, Elihu, hitherto unmen-
tioned, is introduced and speaks four times, when he
abruptly ceases in terror at an Sppeoaching whirlwind
(8% 24). Jeh speaks from the whirlwind, two speeches,
each of which J. answers briefly (40 8-5; 42 1-6), or
rather declines to answer. Such, which we may sum-
marize in Prologue (chs 1, 2), Body of Discussion (3—
42 6), and Epilogue (42 7-17), is the literary framc-
work of the book. The suhstance of the hook is in a
way dramatic; it cannot, however, be called so truly
a drama as a kind of forum of debate; its movement is
too rigid for dramatic action, and it lacks besides the
give-and-take of dialogue. In a hook of mine published
some years ago I ventured to call it ‘‘ The Epic of the
Inner Life,’’ epic not so much in the technical sense, as
in recognition of an underlying epos which for funda-
mental] significance may he compared to the story under-
lying the Prometheus Bound of Aeschylus, It will not
do, however, to make too much of either of these forms
as designating the Book of Job; either term has to he
accommodated almost out of recognition, hecause the
Heb literary forms were not conceived according to the
Gr categories from which our terms ‘‘epic” and ‘‘dra-
matic” are derived. A greater limitation on our appre-
ciation of its form, I think, is Imposed by those who
regard it as a mixture of forms. It is too generally di-
vided between narrative and didactic dehate. To the
Heb mind it was all a continuous narrative, in which the
poetic discussion, though overweighting the current of
visualized action, had nevertheless the movement and
value of real events. It is in this light, rather than in
the didactic, that we may most profitably regard it.


Il, The Course of the Story.—To divide the story
of J. into 42 parts, according to the 42 numbered
chapters, fs in the last degree arbitrary. Nothing
comes of it except convenience in reading for those
who wish to take their Job in little detached bits.
The chapter division was no part of the original,
and a very insignificant step in the later apprehen-
sion of the original. To divide according to the
speeches of the interlocutors is better; it helps us
realize how the conflict of views brought the various
phases of the thought to expression; but this too,
with its tempting three-times-three, turns out to be
merely a framework; it corresponds only imperfectly
with the true inwardness of the story’s movement;
it is rather a scheme than a continuity. We are
to bear in mind that this Book of Job is funda-
mentally the inner experience of one man, as he
rises from the depths of spiritual gloom and doubt
to a majestic table-land of new insight and faith;
the other characters are but ancillary, helps and foils,
whose function is subordinate and relative. Hence,
mindful of this inwardness of Job’s experience, I
have ventured to trace the story in 5 main stages,
naming them according to the landing-stage attained
in each.

The story begins (1 1-5) with a brief description
of J. as he was before his trial began; the elements
of his life, outer and inner, on which is to be


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Job, Book of


raised the question of motive. A prosperous land-
holder of the land of Uz, distinguished far and wide

as the greatest (i.e. richest) of the sons
A) To Job’s of the East, his inner character corre-
Blessing sponds: to all appearance nothing lack-
and Curse ing, a man “perfect and upright, and

one that feared God, and turned away
from evil.’ The typical Heb blessings of life were
his to the full: wealth, honor, health, family. He
is evidently set before us as the perfect example
of the validity of the -established Wisdom-tenet,
that righteousness and Wisdom are jdentical (see
under Proverss, THe Boox or), and that this
is manifest in its visible rewards. This period of
his life J. describes afterward by retrospect as his
“autumn days,’ when the friendship or intimacy
(10, sddh) of God was over his tent (see 29 4, and
the whole ch). Nor are we left without a glimpse

into his heart: his constant attitude of


1. His worship, and his tender solicitude lest,
“Autumn in their enjoyment of the pleasures of
Days” life, his sons may have been disloyal


to God (1 4.5). It is easy to see that

not J. alone, but Wisdom as embodied in J., is
postulated here for its supreme test.

Nor is the test delayed, or its ground ambiguous

when it comes. Satan proposes it. Two scenes

are given (1 6-12; 2 1-6) from the


2. The court, of God, wherever that is; for
Wager in they are overheard by the reader, not
Heaven seen, and of course neither J. nor any


inhabitant of earth is aware of them.

In these scenes the sons of God, the spirits who
rejoiced over creation (38 7), are come together to
render report, and Satan, uninvited, enters among
them. He is a wandering spirit, unanchored to any
allegiance, who roams through the earth, prying
and criticizing. There is nothing, it would seem,
in which he cannot find some flaw or discount. To
Jeh’s question if he has considered J., the man
pers and upright, he makes no denial of the fact,
ut raises the issue of motive: “Doth J. fear God
for nought?” and urges that J.’s integrity is after
all only a transparent bargain, a paying invest-
ment with only reward in view. It is virtually an
arraignment both of God’s order and of the essen-
tial human character: of God’s order in connecting
righteousness so intimately with gain; and of the
essential human character, virtually denying that
there is such a thing as disinterested, intrinsic
human virtue. The sneer strikes deep, and J., the
perfect. embodiment of human virtue, is its desig-
nated victim. Satan proposes a wager, to the issue
of which Jeh commits Himself. The trial of J. is
carried out in two stages: first against his property
and family, with the stipulation that it is not to
touch him; and then, this failing to detach him
from his allegiance, against his person in sore disease,
with the stipulation that his life is te be spared.
Jeh acknowledges that for once He is consenting to
an injustice (2 3), and Satan, liar that he is, uses
instrumentalities that men have ascribed to God
alone: the first time, tempest and lightning (as well
as murderous foray), the second time, the black
leprosy, a fell disease, loathsome and deadly, which
in men’s minds meant the immediate punitive
stroke of God. The evil is as absolute as was the
reward; a complete reversal of the order in which
men’s wisdom had come to trust. But in the imme-
diate result, Jeh’s faith in His noblest creature is
vindicated. Urged by his wife in his extremity to
“curse God and die,” J. remains true to his allegi-
ance; and in his staunch utterance, “‘Jeh gave, and
Jeh hath taken away; blessed be the name of Jeh,’’
J., a8 the writer puts it, ‘sinned not, nor attributed


aught unbeseeming [29M , tiphlah, lit, “tasteless”]


Job, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1682


to God.’ Such is the first onset of J.’s affliction and
its result. It remains to be seen what the long issue,

days and months of wretchedness, will bring forth.
We are now to imagine the lapse of some time,
perhaps several months (cf 7 3), during which J.
suffers alone, an outcast from house


3. The and society, on a leper’s ash-heap.
Silent Meanwhile three friends of his who
Friends: have heard of his affliction make an


appointment together and come from
distant regions to give him sympathy and comfort
(2 11-13). On arriving, however, they find things
different from what they had expected; perhaps the
ominous nature of his disease has developed since
they started. What they find is a man wretched
and outcast, with a disease (elephantiasis) which
to them can mean nothing but the immediate
vengeance of God. The awful sight gives them
pause. Instead of condoling with him, they sit
silent and dismayed, and for seven days and nights
no word is spoken (cf Isa 53 3). What they were
debating with themselves during that time is be-
trayed by the after-course of the story. How can
they bless one whom God has stamped with His
curse? To do so would be taking sides with the
wicked. Is it not rather their duty to side with
God, and he safe, and let sympathy go? By this
introduction of the friends and their averted atti-
tude, the writer with consummate skill brings a new
element into the story, the element of the Wisdom-
philosophy; and time will show whether as a
theoretical thing, cold and intellectual, it will retain
or repress the natural outwelling of human friend-
ship. And this silence is ominous.
The man who, in the first onset of trial, blessed
Jeh and set himself to bear in silence now opens his
mouth to curse. His curse is directed,
4, Whose not against Jeh nor against the order
Way Is Hid of things, but against the day of his
birth. It is a day that has ceased to
have meaning or worthfor him. Theday stands for
life, for his individual life, a life that in the order of
things should carry out the personal promise and
fruitage for which it had been bestowed. And his
quarrel with it is that he has lost its clue. Satan
unknown to him has sneered because Jeh had
hedged him round with protection and favor (1 10);
but his complaint is that all this is removed without
cause, and God has hedged him round with darkness.
His way is hid (3 23). Why then was life given at all?
In all this, it will be noted, he raises no train of intro-
spection to account for his condition; he assumes no
sinfulness, nor even natural human depravity; the
opposite rather, for a baffling element of his case is
his shrinking sensitiveness against evil and disloyalty
(ef 3 25.26, in which the tenses should be past, with
1 5; see also 6 30; 1617). His plight has become
sharply, poignantly objective; his inner self has no
part in it. ‘Thus in this opening speech he strikes
the keynote of the real, against which the friends’
theories rage and in the end wreck themselves.
With all the gentle regret of having to urge a
disagreeable truth the friends, beginning with
Eliphaz, the wisest and most venerable,
B) To Job’s enter upon their theory of the case.
Ultimatum Eliphaz covers virtually the whole
of Protest ground; the others come in mainly to
echo or emphasize. Ue veils his re-
proof in general and implicatory terms, the seasoned
terms of wisdom in which Job himself is expert
(4 3-5); reminds him that no righteous


1. The man perishes, but that men reap what
Veiled they sow (4 7.8); adduces a vision that
Impeach- _he had had which revealed to him that
ment man, by the very fact of being mortal,


is impure and iniquitous (4 17-19);
implies that J.’s turbulence of mind precludes him


from similar revelations, and jeopards his soul (5 1.2);
advises him to commit his case to God, with the im-
plication, however, that it is a case needing correc-
tion rather than justification, and that the result
in view is restored comfort and prosperity. As J.
answers with a more passionate and detailed por-
trayal of his wrong, Bildad, following, abandons the
indirect impeachment and attributes the children’s
death to their sin (8 4), saying also that if J. were
pure and upright he might supplicate and regain
God’s favor (8 5.6). He then goes on to draw a
lesson from the traditional Wisdom lore, to the effect
that sure destruction awaits the wicked and sure
felicity the righteous (8 11-22). On J.’s following
this with his most positive arraignment of God’s
order and claim for light, Zophar replies with im-
petuous heat, averring that J.’3 punishment is less
than he deserves (11 6), and reproving him for his
presumption in trying to find the secret of God (11
7-12). All three of the friends, with increasing
emphasis, end their admonitions in much the same
way; promising J. reinstatement in God’s favor, but
always with the veiled implication that he must
own to iniquity and entreat as a sinner. :
To the general maxims of Wisdom urged against
him, with which he is already familiar (cf 13 2),
J.s objection is not that they are
2. Wisdom untrue, but that they are insipid


Insipid, (6 6.7); they have lost their appli-
Friends cation to the case. Yet it is pain to
Doubtful him to think that the words of the


Holy One should fail; he longs to die
rather than deny them (6 9.10). One poignant
element of his sorrow is that the intuitive sense
(tashityah; see under Proverss, THE Book oF) is
driven away from him; see 6 13. He is irritated
by the insinuating way in which the friends beg
the question of his guilt; longs for forthright and
sincere words (6 25). It is this quality of their
speech, in fact, which adds the bitterest. drop to his
cup; his friends, on whom he had counted for sup-
pal are deceitful like a dried-up brook (6 15-20);

e feels, in his sick sensitiveness, that they are not
sympathizing with him but using him for their cold,
calculating purposes (6 27). Thus is introduced
one of the most potent motives of the story, the
motive of friendship; much will come of it when
from the fallible friendships of earth he conquers
his way by faith to a friendship in the unseen (ef
16 19; 19 27).

With the sense that the old theories have become
stale and pointless, though his discernnient of the

evil of things is undulled by sin (6 30),


3. Crook- J. arrives at an extremely poignant
edness of realization of the hardness and crook-
the Order edness of the world-order, the result
of Things both of what the friends are saying


_ and of what he has always held in
common with them. It is the view that is forced
upon him by the sense that he is unjustly dealt with
by a God who renders no reasons, who on the score
of justice vouchsafes to man neither insight nor
recourse, and whose severity is out of all proportion
to man’s sense of worth (7 17) or right (9 17) or
claim as a creature of His hand (10 8-14). Ch 9,
which contains J.’s direct address to this arbitrary
Being, is one of the most tremendous, not to say
audacious conceptions in literature; in which a
mortal on the threshold of death takes upon himself
to read God a lesson in godlikeness. In this part
of the story J. reaches his ultimatum of protest; a
protest amazingly sincere, but not blasphemous when
we realize that it is made in the interest of the
Godlike.

The great lack which J. feels in his arraignment
of God is the lack of mediation between Creator
and creature, the Oppressor and His victim. ‘There


1683


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Job, Book of


is no umpire between them, who might lay his hand
upon hoth, so that the wronged one might have a
voice in the matter (9 32-35). The
4. No two things that an umpire might do:
Mediation to remove God’s afflicting hand, and
in Sight to prevent God’s terror from unman-
__ ning His victim (see 13 20-22, as com-
pared with the passage just cited), are the great
need to restore normal and reciprocal relations with
Him whose demand of righteousness is so inexorable.
This umpire or advocate idea, thus propounded
negatively, will grow to a sublime positive convic-
tion in the next stage of J.’s spiritual progress (16
19; 19 25-27).
_ As the friends finish their first round of speeches,
in which a remote and arbitrary God is urged upon
him as everything, and man so cor-


C) To__—srupé and blind that he cannot but he
Job’s Ulti- a worm and culprit (cf 25 4-6), J.’s
matum of eyes, which hitherto have seen with
Faith theirs, are suddenly opened. His first


: complaint of their professed friend-
ship was that it was fallible; instead of sticking to
him when he needed them most (6 14), and in spite

of his bewilderment (6 26), they were
1. Detect- making it virtually an article of traffic
ing the (6 27), as if it were a thing for their
Friends’ gain. It was not sincere, not intrinsic
False Note to their nature, but an expedient.

And now all at once he penetrates to its
motive. They are deserting him in order to curry
favor with God. That motive has prevented them
from seeing true; they see only their theoretical God,
and are respecting His person instead of responding
to the inner dictate of truth and integrity. To his
honest heart this is monstrous; they ought to be
afraid of taking falseness for God (13 3-12). Nor
does his inference stop with thus detecting their
false note. If they are ‘“forgers of lies” in this
respect, what of all their words of wisdom? They
have heen giving him “proverbs of ashes’ (13 12);
the note of false implication is in them all. From
this point therefore he pays little attention to what
they say; lets them go on to grossly exaggerated
statement of their tenet, while he opens a new way
of faith for himself, developing the germs of insight
that have come to him.

Having cut loose from all countenancing of the
friends’ self-interested motives, J. now, with the

desperate sense of taking his life in his
2..Staking hand and abandoning hope, resolves
All on that come what will he will maintain
Integrity his ways to God’s face. This, as he

believes, is not only the one course
for his integrity, but his one plea of salvation, for
no false one shall appear hefore him. How tre-
mendous the meaning of this resolve, we can think
when we reflect how he has just taken God in hand
to amend His supposed iniquitous order of things;
and that he is now, without mediator, pleading the
privilege that a mediator would secure (13 20.21; see
‘8, above) and urging a hearing on his own charges.
The whole reach of his sublime faith is involved in
this.

In two directions his faith is reaching out; in
both negatively at first. One, the belief in an

Advocate, has already been broached,
3. “Tf a and is germinating from negative to
Man Die” positive. The other, the question of
ife after death, rises here in the same
tentative way: using first the analogy of the tree
which sprouts again after it is cut down (14 7-9),
and from it inquiring, ‘If a man die—might he
live again?’ and dwelling in fervid imagination on
the ideal solution which a survival of death would
bring (14 13-17), but returning to his reluctant
negative, from the analogy of drying, waters (14 11)


and the slow wearing down of mountains (14 18.19).
As yet he can treat the idea only as a fancy; not
yet a hope or a grounded conviction.
The conviction comes by a nobler way than fancy
by the way of his personal sense of the just and
Godlike order. The friends in their
4, The second round of speeches have begun
Surviving their lurid portrayals of the wicked
Next of Kin man’s awful fate; but until all have
spoken again he is concerned with a
far more momentous matter. Dismissing these for
the present as an academic exercise composed in
cold blood (16 4.5), and evincing a heart hid from
understanding (17 4), he goes on to recount in the
most bitter terms he has yet used the flagrancy of
his wrong as something that calls out for expiation
like the blood of Cain (16 18), and breaks out with
the conviction that his witness and voucher who
will hear his prayer for mediation is on high (16
19-21). Then after Bildad in a spiteful retort has
matched his complaint with a description of the
calamities of the wicked (an augmented echo of
Eliphaz), and he has pathetically bewailed the
treachery of earthly friends (19 13.14.21.22), he
mounts, as it were, at a bound to the sublime ulti-
matum of his faith in an utterance which he would
fain see engraved on the rock forever (19 23-29).
“I know that my Redeemer liveth,” he exclaims;
lit. my Go’el CDM , 90 diz), or next of kin, the person
whose business in the old Heb idea was to maintain
the rights of an innocent wronged one and avenge
his blood. He does not recede from the idea that
his wrong is from God (cf 19 6.21); but over his
dust stands his next of kin, and as the result of this
one’s intercession J., in his own integral person,
shall see God no more a stranger. So confident is
he that he solemnly warns the friends who have
falsely impeached him that it is they, not he, who
are in peril (19 28.29; cf 13 10.11).
That in this conviction of a living Redeemer
J.’s faith has reached firm and final ground is evi-
dent from the fact that he does not


D) To recur to his old doubts at all. They
Job’s Ver- are settled, and settled right. But
dict on now, leaving them, he can attend to
Thingsas what the friends have been saying.
They Are Zophar, the third speaker, following,


presses to vehement extreme their
iterated portrayal of the wicked man’s terrific
woes; it seems the design of the writer to make
them outdo themselves in frantic overstatement
of their thesis. As Zophar ceases, and J. has thus,
as it were, drawn all their fire, J. refutes them

squarely, as we shall presently see.


1. Climax Meanwhile, in the course of his ex-
and Sub-__ tended_ refutation, the friends begin
sidence of a third round of speeches. Eliphaz,


the Friends’ who has already taken alarm at the
Charge tendency of J.’s words, as those of a

depraved skeptic and ruinous to de-
votion (15 4-6), now in the interests of his ortho-
doxy brings in his bill of particulars. It is the kind
of theoretical cant that has had large prevalence
in dogmatic religion, but in J.’s case atrociously
false. He accuses J. of the most heartless cruelties
and frauds (22 5-11), and of taking occasion to
indulge in secret wickedness when God was not
looking (22 12~14); to this it is that he attributes
the spiritual darkness with which J. is encompassed.
Then in a beautiful exhortation—heautiful when we
forget its unreal condition (22 23)—he ends by
holding open to J. the way of reinstatement and
peace. This is the last word of the friends that
has any weight. Bildad follows J.’s next speech
indeed very briefly (ch 25), giving a last feeble echo
of their doctrine of total depravity; a reply which


Job, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1684


J. ridicules and carries on in a kind of parody (ch
26). Zophar does not speak a third time at all.
He has nothing to say. And this silence of his is
the writer’s way of making the friends’ theory sub-
side ingloriously.
The idea that J. has a defensible cause or sees
farther than they is wholly lost on the friends; to
them he is simply a wicked man tor-
2. The mented by the consciousness of guilt,
Real Cause and they attribute the tumult of his
of Job’s thoughts to a wrath, or vexation, which
Dismay blinds and imperils his soul (cf 5 2;
18 4). That is not the cause of his
dismay at all, nor is it merely that his personal fate
is inscrutable (cf 28 17m). He is confounded
rather, even to horror, because the probable facts
of the world-order prove the utter falsity of all that
they allege. Leaving his case, the righteous man’s,
out of the account, he sees the wicked just as pros-
perous, just as secure, just as honored in life and
death, as the righteous (21 5-15.29-33). The
friends ought to see so plain a fact as well as he
(21 29). To all outward appearance there is abso-
lutely no diversity of fate between righteous and
wicked (21 23-26). The friends’ cut-and-dried
Wisdom-doctrine and their thrifty haste to justify
God (cf 13 7.8) have landed them in a lie; the truth
is that God has left His times mysterious to men
(24 1). They may as well own to the full the
baffling fact of the impunity of wickedness; the
whole of ch 24 is taken up with details of it. Wis-
dom, with its rigid law of reward and punishment,
has failed to penetrate the secret. A hard régime of
justice, work and wage, conduct and desert, does
not sound the deep truth of God’s dealings, either
with righteous or wicked. What then? Shall
Wisdom go, or shall it rise to a higher level of out-
look and insight?
In some such dim inquiry as this, it would seem,
J. goes on from where his friends sit silenced to
figure some positive solution of things


3. Man- as they are. He begins with himself
hood in and his stedfastly held integrity, seal-
the Ore ing his utterance by the solemn Heb


oath (27 2-6), and as solemnly dis-
avowing all part or sympathy with the wicked
(27 7; cf 21 16). He has already found a meaning
in his own searching experience; he is being tried
for a sublime assay, in which all that is permanent
and precious in him shall come out as gold (23 10).
But this thought of manhood in the ore 1s no monop-
oly of his; it may hold for all. What then of the
wicked? In a passage which some have deemed
the lost third speech of Zophar (27 8-23), and which,
indeed, recounts what all the friends have seen (27
12), he sets forth the case of the wicked in its true
light. The gist of it is that the wicked have not
the joy of God (27 10), or the peace of a permanent
hope. It is in much the same tone as the friends’
diatribes, but with a distinct advance from out-
ward disaster toward tendency and futility. The
ore is not being purged for a noble assay; and this
will work their woe. Then finally, in the celebrated
ch 28, comes up the summary of wisdom itself.
That remains, after all this testing of motive, a
thing intact and elemental; and man’s part in it
is just what J.’s life has been, to fear God and shun
evil (28 28). 2
As the crowning pronouncement on things as
they are, J. in his final and longest speech, describes
in a beautiful retrospect his past life,
4. Job from his “autumn days” when the
Reads His friendship of God was over his tent
Indictment and he was a counselor and benefactor
among men (ch 29), through this con-
trasted time of his wretchcdness and _curse-betray-
ing disease, when the most degraded despise him


(ch 30), until now as he draws consciously near the
grave, he recounts in solemn review the principles
and virtues that have guided his conduct—a noble
summary of the highest Heb ideals of character
(ch 81). This he calls, in sublime irony, the indict-
ment which his Adversary has written; and like
a prince, bearing it upon bis shoulder and binding
it to him like a crown, he is ready to take it with
him beyond the bourn to the ee of his Judge.
With this tremendous proposal, sanctioned Hebrew-
fashion by a final curse if it prove false, the words of

J. are ended.
The friends are silenced, not enlightened. They
have clung to their hard thesis to the stubborn end;
postulating enough overt crime on J.’s


£) The part to kill him (22 5-9), and clinching
Dénoue- their hypothesis with their theory of
ment innate depravity (4 18.19; 15 14.15;


25 4-6) and spiritual hebetude (6 2;
15 26.27; 22 10.11); but toward J.’s higher level
of honest integrity and exploring faith they have
not advanced one inch; and here they lie, fossil-
ized dogmatists, fixed and inveterate in their
odium theologicum—a far cry from the friendship
that came from afar to condole and console. J.,
on the other hand, staking all on the issue of his
integrity, has held on his way in sturdy con-
sistency (cf 17°9), and stood his ground before the
enigma of things as they are. Both parties have
said their say; the story is evidently ready for its
dénouement. J., too, is ready for the determining
word, though it would seem he expects it to bespoken
only in some unseen tribunal; the friends rather
savagely wish that God would speak and reprove
Job for his presumption (cf 11 5.11). But how
shall the solution be brought about in this land of
Uz where all may see? And above all, how shall
it affect the parties concerned? A skilfully told
story should not leave this out.
For this determining pronouncement the writer
has chosen to have both parties definitely repre-
sented, apparently at their best. So,
1. The instead of proceeding at once to the
Self-consti- summons from the whirlwind, he intro-
tuted In- duces here a new character, Elihu,
terpreter a young man, who has listened with
y ; growing impatience to the fruitless
discuasion, and now must set both parties right or
burst (82 19). It is like the infusion of young
blood into a theodicy too arrogant in its antiquity
(ef 8 8-10; 15 10.18; 12 12 m, or better as ques-
tion). This character of Elihu is conceived in a
spirit of satire, not without a dash of grim humor.
His self-confidence, not to say conceit, is strongly
accentuated (32 11-22); he assumes the umpire
function for which J. has pleaded (33 6.7; cf 9
33-35; 13 20-22); and is sure he represents the
perfect in knowledge (86 2-4; 37 16). He speaks
four times, addressing himself alternately to J. and
the friends. His words, though designedly diffuse,
are not without wisdom and beauty; he makes less
of J.’s deep-seated iniquity than do the friends, but’
blames him for speaking in the wicked man’s idiom
(34 7-9.36.37), and warns him against inclining
more to iniquity than submission (36 21); but his
pace contribution to the discussion is the view
e holds of the chastening influence of dreams and
visions (83 14-18; cf 7 18-15), and of the pains
of disease (83 19-28), esp. if the sufferer has an
‘‘angel [messenger] interpreter” to reveal its mean-
ing, such a one perhaps as Elihu feels himself to be.
As he proceeds in his speech, his words indicate that
a storm is rising; and so jong as it is distant he
employs it to descant on the wonders of God in
Nature, wonders which to him mean little more
than arbitrary marvels of power; but as it ap-
proaches neare. and shows exceptional phenomena


1685


as of a theophany, his words become incoherent, and


he breaks off with an abject attempt to disclaim

his pretensions. Such is the effect, with him, of the

near presence of God. It overwhelms, paralyzes,

stops the presumptuous currents of life.

_ The writer of the book has not committed the

literary fatuity of describing the whirlwind, except
as Elihu has seen its oncoming, first


2. The with conceit of knowledge, then with
Whirlwind wild access of terror—a description in
and the which his essentially vapid personality
Voice _ is reflected. For the readers the sig-


_,, nificance of the whirlwind is in the
Voice it incloses, the thing it says. And here the
writer has undertaken the most tremendous task
ever attempted by the human imagination: to
make the Almighty speak, and speak in character.
And one fatuity at least he has escaped; he has not
made God bandy arguments with men, or piece
together the shifting premises of logic. The whole
of the two discourses from the whirlwind is descrip-
tive; a recounting of observable phenomena of
created nature, from the great elemental things,
earth and sea and light and star and storm, to
the varied wonders of animal nature—all things in
which the questing mind of man may share, laying
hold in his degree on its meaning or mystery. Thus,
as a sheer literary personation, it fails at no point
of the Godlike. It begins with a peremptory dis-
missal of Elihu: “Who is this that darkeneth counsel
by words without knowledge?” (88 2). Then J.
is bidden gird up his loins like a strong man, and
listen and answer. The fact that J. alone, of all
the company, can stand, as it were, on common
terms with God is premonitory of the outcome. Of
the two Divine discourses, the first (chs 38, 39)
emphasizes more especially the unsearchable wis-
dom of creation; and the lesson it brings home to
J. is that a being who is great enough—or presump-
tnons enough—to criticize and censure is great
enough to resolve his own criticism (40 2). To
this, of course, J. has no answer; he has presented
his plea, which he neither adds to nor takes back
(40 3-5). Resuming, then, the Voice in the second
discourse (40 6—41 34) goes on to describe two
great beasts, as it were, elemental monsters of Na-
ture: Behemoth—probably the hippopotamus—
vast in resisting and overcoming power, yet un-
aware of it, and easily subduable by man; and
Leviathan—probably the crocodile—a wonder of
beautiful adaptedness to its function in Nature, yet
utterly malignant, unsubduable, untamable. And
the lesson brought home to J. by this strange dis-
tribution of creative power is that he, who has
called in question God’s right to work as He does,
had better undertake to lower human pride and
“tread down the wicked where they stand” (40 12),
thus demonstrating his ability to save himself and
manage mankind (40 14). By this illuminating
thought J.’s trenchancy of demand is utterly melted
away into contrition and penitence (42 1-6); but
one inspiring effect is his, the thing indeed which he
has persistently sought (cf 23 3): God is no more
a hearsay, such as the friends have defended and
his Wisdom has speculated about; his eye sees
Him here on earth, and in his still unremoved afflic-
tion, no stranger, but a wise and communable Friend,
just as his confident faith had pictured he would, in
some embodied sphere beyond suffering (19 27).

Two of the parties in the story have met the
august theophany, and it has wrought its effect

on them according to the spirit of


3. The the man. The self-constituted inter-
Thing That preter, Elihu, has collapsed as suddenly
Is Right as he swelled up and exhibited him-


self. The man of integrity, J., has
reached the beatific goal of his quest. What now


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Job, Book of


of. the friends who came from far to confirm their
Wisdom, and who were so sure they were defend-
ing the mind of God? They are not left without
a sufficing word, addressed straight to their spokes-
man Eliphaz (42 7); but their way to light is
through the man whose honesty they outraged.
Eliphaz’ closing words had promised mediatorial
power to Job if he would return from iniquity and
acquaint himself with God (22 30); Job is now
the mediator, though he has held consistently to
the terms they reprobated. And the Divine ver-
dict on them is: ‘Ye have not spoken of me the
thing that is right, as my servant J. hath” (42 7).
These are the words of the Being who acknowledged
that in permitting this whole trial He was ‘swallow-
ing Job up causelessly’ (2 3). J.’s honest and
immensely revelatory words, anger, remonstrance,
bold arraignment of God’s way and all, were ‘‘the
thing that is right.’ There is no more tremendous
Divine pronouncement in all Scripture than this.
Here certain myopic students of the Book of Job
think the story should end. It offends them, ap-
parently, to see Satan’s work undone; -
if they had had the making of the


4. The
Restored story they would have left J. still
Situation suffering, asif disinterested virtue could


not be its own reward without it.
The author, at least the final anthor, evidently
did not think so; in the ideals and sanctions that
prevailed in his age he knew better what he was
about. It is not my business to cut the book to a
modern pattern, but to note what is there. J. is
restored to health, to double his former wealth, to
family and honor and a ripe old age. These were
what the friends predicted for him on condition of
his owning to guilt and calling injustice desert; but
in no word of his has he intimated that worldly
reinstatement was his wish or his object, the con-
trary rather. And what he sought he obtained, in
richer measure than he sought; obtained it still
in sufféring, and on earth, ‘“‘in the place where al!
may see” (cf 34 26m). It is no discount to the
value of this, nor on the other hand is it an essen-
tial addition, to express it not only in spiritual
terms, but in terms current among men. And one
fundamental thing this restored situation shows, or
at least takes for granted, namely, that the quarrel
has not been with Wisdom itself, its essence or its
sanctions, but only with its encroaching false motive.
Deepened, not invaded, its Newtonian law that it is
well with the righteous, ill with the wicked, remains
intact, an external sanction to live by, in spite of
temporal exceptions. A spiritual principle of great
significance, too, seems to be indicated, as it were,
furtively, in the words, “And Jeh turned the cap-
tivity of J., when he prayed for his friends.” He
had stood on his integrity demanding his right, and
became a self-loathing penitent; out of dust and
ashes he prayed for his friends, and became again
such a power in health and wealth as he had been
in his “autumn days.” ;
IV. The Problem and the Purpose.—If the fore-
going section has rightly shown that the main
thrust and interest of the Book of Job
1. Beyond lies not in its debate but in its narra-
the Didactic tive, we have therein the best clue to
Tether its problem and its purpose. The snb-
lime self-portrayal of a man who held
fast his integrity against God and man and death
and darkness tells its own story and teaches its own
lesson, beyond the power of didactic propositions or
deductions to compass. The book is not a sermon
but a vital, throbbing uprise of the human spirit.
It is warm with the life of sound manhood, the
inner life with its hopes, its doubts, its convictions,
its supreme affiance; to impose on this any tether
of didacticism is to chill its spirit and make it dog-


Job, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1686


matic and academic. The reading of its problem
which mainly holds the field today is expressed in
the question, ‘“Why does God afflict the righteous ?”
and so the book is resolved into a theodicy, a justi-
fication of God’s ways with man. Well, the friends
of J. do their best to make their interpretation a
theodicy, even outraging palpable fact to do it;
they monopolize the didactic element of the poem;
but their chief contention is that God does not
afflict the righteous but the wicked, and that J. is
a flagrant case in point who adds rebellion to his
sin (cf 34 37). J. does not know why God afflicts
the righteous; he only knows that it is a grievous
fact, which to him seems utterly un-Godlike. God
knows, undoubtedly, but He does not tell. Yet
all the while an answer to the question is shaping
itself in personality, in intrinsic manhood, in the
sturdy truth and loyalty of J.’s spirit. So, going
beyond the didactic tether, we may say that in a
deeper sense God is justified after all; if such a
result of desperate trial is possible in man, it is
worth all the rigor of the experiment. But it is as
truly an anthropodicy (excuse the word!) as a
theodicy; it puts the essential man on a plane
above all that Satan can prove by his lying sneers
of self-interest, or the friends’ poisoning of the wells
by their theory of natural depravity. It comes
back after all to the story of J.; he lives the answer
to the problem, his personality is the teaching.

It is from this poiut of view that we can hest judge of


the critical attacks that have been made on the structure
and coherence of the Book of Job. The hook


2. What has suffered its full share of negative dis-
C g integration at the hands of the critics;
‘OMeS 0 mostly suhjective it seems to me, coming
Limiting froma too restricted view of its problem and
the purpose, or from lack of that long patient
induction which will not be content until

Purpose it sees all the elements of its creative idea


in fitting order and proportion. To limit
the purpose to the issue of a debated theodicy, is to put
some parts iu precarious tenure; accordingly, there are
those to whom the Epilogue seems a superfluity, the
Prologue an afterthought, ch 28 a fugitive poem put
in to fill up—not to go on to still more radical excisions.
On the score of regularity of structure, too, this limita-
tion of design has had equally grave results. Elihu has
perhaps fared the worst. He must go, the critics almost
universally say, because forsooth he was not formally
introduced in the Prologue; and naturally enough, as
soon as he has received notice to quit, the language
which in one view fits him so dramatically to his part
hegins to bristle with Aramaisms (‘of the kindred of
Ram,’ 32 2) aud strange locutions, the alleged marks
of a later bungling hand. Then, further, Zophar must
needs round ont the mechanical three-times-three of
structure by coming up the third time; accordingly, J.
is levied upon to coutribute some of his words (27 13-23)
to help him ont. I need not go into further detail. The
foregoing section has done something, I hope, to justify
my conviction that the book has a homogeneous design
and structure just as it is. Whatever its vicissitudes
since the first draft was made, it may turn out after all
that the last edition is the best.


Weare not left in the dark as to the large purpose
of the Book of Job, if we will follow its own indi-
cations consistently. Satan’s ques-

3. The tion at the beginning, ‘‘Doth Job fear
Book’s Own God for nought?” sets us on the track
Import of of it. To give that question a Godlike
Purpose and not a Satanic answer, to prove in
the person of J. that man has it in him

to make his life an unbought loyalty to the Divine, is
a, purpose large enough to include many subsidiary
purposes. But behind this appears, on the part
of the author, a purpose which relates his story
intimately to the intellectual tendencies of his day.
The Book embodies, esp. in the theories of the
friends, a searching epitome of the status to which
the wisdom philosophy of his time had_arrived.
That philosophy was a nobly founded theory of
life; J. himself had been and continued (cf 28 28)
thoroughly at one with it. Soundly identified with
righteousness and piety, Wisdom had in religious
idiom defined the elements of right and wrong living,


and had in no uncertain terms fixed its sanctions of
reward and penalty. But from a warm, pulsating
life it had become an orthodoxy. Its rigid world
had room for only two classes of men: the righteous,
bound for the sure rewards of life; the wicked,
bound for sure failure and destruction. It brooked
no real exception to this austere law of being. But
two grave evils were invading its system. One was
its hard blindness to facts, or, what is as bad, its
determination at all hazards to explain them away.
From the psalms of the period (cf e.g. Pss 37, 49,
73) we can see how the evident. happiness and pros-
perity of the wicked was troubling devout minds.
The other was that under this prevailing philosophy
life was becoming too cold-blooded and calculable
a thing, a virtual feeder of self-interest. The doubt
lay very near whether conduct so sanctioned was
a thing intrinsic and sincere or a thing bought and
sold. ‘This equivocal state of things could not long
endure. Sooner or later Satan’s question of mo-
tive must stab it to the heart; and we may be sure
that to the author of the book the impulse to ask
the question was not all Satanic. The interests of
true wisdom, no less than of skepticism, demanded
that the question of inner motive be raised aud
solved. Nay, Jeh Himself, whom Satan mocked
as abettor of the situation, was on trial. Have we
not material here, then, for a sublime purpose, a
mighty epic of test and trial and victory? Out of
it, not J. alone, but Wisdom must emerge purified,
enlightened, spiritualized.
So much for the purpose of the book. The prob-
lem corresponds to it. If we take it as the baffling
problem of suffering, or more specifi-
4. Prohlem cally why God afflicts the righteous,
of the the sufficing answer is, Jobiswhy. To
Intrinsic give such essential integrity as his its
Man ultimate proof and occasion is worth
the injustice and the unmerited pain,
In other words, the problem is more deeply con-
cerned with man’s intrinsic nature than with God’s
mysterious dealings. When God created man in
His own image, did He endow him most funda-
mentally with the spirit of commercialism, or with
the spirit of unbought loyalty to the Godlike? And
when created man was made fallible and mortal,
did that mean an unescapable inherent depravity,
or was the potency of noblest manhood still left
at the center of his being? Here again J. is the
embodied answer. The friends, veritable Cal-
vinists before Calvin, urge depravity; they would
exalt God by making man His utter contrast. But
J.’s stedfast integrity proves that man, one man at
least, is at heart sound and true. And if one man,
then the potency of soundness exists in manhood.
The book is indeed a theodicy; but still more truly
it is a boldy maintained anthropodicy, a vindication
of the intrinsic worth of man.
V. Considerations of Age and Setting.—The
questions who was the personal author of the Book
of ‘Job, and what was its age, are at
1. Shadowy best only a matter of conjecture; and


Contacts my revised conjecture, arrived at since
with I wrote my Epic of the Inner Life, must
History go for what it is worth. It seems to


me much better to regard a story so
homogeneous and interrelated as in the main the
composition of one mind than to distribute it, as
some critics do, among various authors, supple-
menters, and editors. As to its age, there is so little
identifiable contact with political or ecclesiastical
history that its composition has been ascribed to
many periods, from the time of Abraham to late in
post-exilic times. The fact that its scene is laid
in the patriarchal past and in a land outside of Pal
indicates the author’s design to dissociate it from
contemporary events and conditions; such contact


1687


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Job, Book of


with these as exist, therefore, must be read between
the lines. The book dees not hold with full con-
sistency to patriarchal conditions. Job’s friends
appeal with the complacency of wisdom-prospered
men,to the ancient tenure of the land (16 19); and
yet, as Job complains, the heartless greed of the
landholding class in removing landmarks and op-
pressing the poor (24 2-12) connotes the prevalence
of such outrages as were denounced by Isaiah and
Micah before the Assyr crisis. Such evils would
not decrease under Manasseh and Jehoiakim, and
might well be portrayed in reminiscence by an
exilic writer. On the top of this consideration
may be cited the most definite reference to a his-
torical event that the book contains: the passage
12 17-25, which vividly describes, by an eye-
witness (“‘Lo, mine eye hath seen all this,” 13 1), a
wholesale deportation and humiliation of eminent
persons, just like that told of Jehoiachin and his
court, in 2 K 24 13-15. To my mind this is
illuminative for the age of the book. It seems to
have been written by one who saw the Chaldaean
deportation of 587 BC. May I be suffered to carry
the suggestion a step farther? It will be remem-
bered that the chief personage of that, deportation
was for 37 years a state prisoner in Babylon, at the
end of which time he was “taken from durance and
judgment” (cf Isa 63 8 AV) and lived thenceforth
honored with kings (2 K 25 27-30=Jer 62 31-34).
I take him to have been the original of the indi-
vidualized Servant of Jeh described and describing
himself in Second Isa. In one of his self-descrip-
tions he says that, Jeh has given him “the tongue
of them that are taught’’ (Isa 60 4); in another
that Jeh has made his “mouth like a sharp sword”
and himself ‘‘a polished shaft’’ (Isa 49 2). What
he said or wrote is of course unidentifiable; but it is
certain that in some cultural way he was a hidden
power for good to his people. What if this Book of
Job were a prison-made book, like Pilgrim’s Prog-
ress and Don Quixote, but as much greater as the
experience that underlay it was more momentous?
I do not see but this suggestion is as probable as
any that have been made; and some expressions
of the book become thereby very striking, as for
instance, the reference to prisoners (3 18.19), to
the servant longing for release (7 2), the general
sense of being despised, the several references to
Job as “my servant Job” (1 8; 23; 42 7.8), the
description of his restoration as a turned captivity,
and his successful intercession for the friends (42
10; cf Isa 53 12). I would merely suggest the
idea, however, not press it.

If the Book of Job is a product of the time of Jehoia-


chin’s imprisonment, it is in worthy and congenial lit-
m erary company. Isaiah, fostering the faith


i of a new-born spiritual ‘‘remnant,’’ had
alee ™ gathered the elements of that sublime
Bi 1¢a. vision (Isa 1 1) of Israel’s mission among
Literature the nations which a later hand was even


now, four generations after, working to
supplement and finish, in a prophecy (Isa 40-66) which,
as all recognize, constitutes the closest parallel in
spirited idea to our book. Seers, priests and singers
had long busled themselves with the literary treasures
of the past; drawing out of dusty archives and putting
into popular idiom the ancient laws and counsels of
Moses (Db: see under Josrag); collecting and adapting
the old Davidic psalms and composing new ones, as
Hezekiah’s reorganization of the worship required.
Ezekiel was at Tel Abib planning for the reconstruction
of the temple, and perhaps by his use of the name Job’
yeiling a cryptic reference (Ezk 14 14.20). The affili-
ations of the Book of Job, however, were more specifi-
cally with the wisdom literature; and long before this
the “‘men of Hezekiah” (Prov 25 1) had gathered their
aftermath of the Solomonic proverde: to supplement
the maxims which had been the educative pabulum of
the people (see under Proverss, Boox OF). It was
with the care and principle of this diffused instruction,
now the most popular vein of literature, that the Book of
Job concerned itself. That had become apparent as
soon as the maxims were coérdinated in an anthology,
and an Introduction to the collection had been composed,


extolling Wisdom as the guide and savior of life. To
a spiritually-mindéd thinker with the Heb genius for
religion the motivatlon of Wisdom must sooner or later
come. With its values should be apprehended also its
unguarded points and tendencies. It was exposed to
the one-sided drift of all popular things. Inan age when
revision and deeper Insight were the literary order of the
day, Wisdom would come in with the other strains of
Nterature for purification and maturing; and there was
not wanting an experience, the hasis of an almost unbe-
lievable report (cf Isa 53 1) to give depth and poign-
ancy to Joh’s personal story of suffering and integrity.


In the amazing sureness and vigor of its message
the Book of Job stands out unique and alone; but
it is by no means without its lesser
3. Parallels parallels in faith and doubt, above
and Echoes which it rises like a mountain above
its retinue of foothills. Mention has
been made above of a number of Pss (e.g. 37, 49,
73) which with different degrees of assurance wit-
ness to the struggle of faith with the problem of the
rampant and successful wicked. Ps 49, one of the
pss of the sons of Korah, is esp. noteworthy, because
it expressly employs the popular mashél, that is,
the Wisdom vehicle, to convey a corrective lesson
about unblest riches, drawing a conclusion not
unlike that of Job 27 8-23, though in milder tone.
Not less noteworthy also is the note of suffering
and its mysteriousness which pervades many of the
pss, esp. of Asaph and Heman; Pss 88 and 102
might both have been composed with special refer-
ence to Hezekiah’s sickness and set beside his ps
in Isa 38, but also they are so fully in the tone of
Js complaint, esp. 88, that, Professor Godet, not
unplausibly, conjectures that the Book of Job was
written by its author Heman. Hezekiah’s deadly
sickness itself (Isa 38), which was of a leprous
nature, banishing him from the house of God, and
which was miraculously healed—an experience re-
garding which Hezekiah’s own writing (Isa 38 10-
20) is strikingly in the key of Job’s complaint—
furnishes the nearest parallel to, or adumbration of,
Job's affliction; but also in the accounts of the
Servant of Jeh there are hints of a similar stroke
of God’s judgment (cf Isa 62 14; 63 3). The pas-
sage Job 7 17.18 has been called “a bitter parody”
of Ps 8 4; it may be so, but the conditions are in
utter contrast, and nothing can be concluded as to
which is original and which echo. As to expression,
the most remarkable parallel to Job, perhaps, is the
passage Jer 20 14-18, in which, like Job, the prophet
Jeremiah curses the day of his birth. This curse in
Job would naturally be remembered by all readers
as one of the most characteristic features of the
book; and in like manner the curse in Jer may have
stood out in the memory of his disciples, of whom
the writer of Job may have been one, and figure in a
similar literary situation. Ezekiel’s naming of Job
along with Noah and Daniel (Ezk 14 14.20), asa
type of atoning righteousness, is doubly remarkable
if the writer of Job was a contemporary; he ma
have taken the name from a well-known legend,
and there may have underlain it a double meaning,
known to an inner circle, referring cryptically to one
whose real name it, might be impolitic to pronounce.
Whenever written, the outline and meaning of J.’s
momentous experience must have won speedily
to a permanent place in the universal Heb memory;
so that centuries afterward St. James could write
to the twelve tribes scattered abroad (6 11), “Ye
have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen
the end of the Lord.”

Literators.—A. B. Davidson, ‘‘The Book of Job”
(Cambridge Bible for Schools), 1884; A. S. Peake, ‘‘ Job”
(New Century Bible), 1905; S. R. Driver, The Book
of Jab in the Revised Version, 1906; J. T. Marshall, The
Book of Job, 1904; J. F. Genung, Epic of the Inner Life,
1891; G. G. Bradley, Lectures on Job in Westminster
Abbey, 1887; F.'C. Cook in The Speaker's Commentary,


1882. Among German writers, A. Dillmann, Hiod
erkldrt, 1891; K. Budde, Das Buch Hiob tibersetzt und


Job, Test. of
Joel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1688


erkldrt, 1896 (see Expos T, VIII, iii); B. Duhm, Das Buch
Hiob erkldrt, 1897; G. Beer, Der Text des Buches Hiob
untersucht, 1897; Gibson, ‘‘The Book of Job” (Ozford Com-
mentaries), 1899.


JoHN FRANKLIN GENUNG
JOB, TESTAMENT OF. See ApocaLyptic
LITERATURE.


JOBAB, jo’bab (241, yabhabh, perhaps ‘“‘howl-
ing’; *IwBa8, J6bdb):

(1) “Son” of Joktan (Gen 10 29; 1 Ch 1 23).
See Taste or Nations.

(2) An Edomite king (Gen 36 33.34; 1 Ch 1
44.45).

(3) King of Madon (Josh 11 1).

(4) 1 Ch 8 9; and (5) 1 Ch 8 18, Benjamites.

The name is confused with that of Job in LXX of
Job 42 17.


JOCHEBED, jok’é-bed (291, ydkhebhedh, “‘Jeh
is glory”): Daughter of Levi, wife of Amram and
mother of Moses (Ex 6 20; Nu 26 59). Accord-
ing ie Ex 6 20, she was asister of Kobath, Amram’s
father.


JOD, jod (1): Yédh, the tenth letter of the Heb
alphabet. See ALpHaBEt; JoT; Yopu.


JODA, jo’da (WH, *Iw84, Jédd; TR, "Iov5d,
Toudd):

(1) A Levite, whose sons were ‘‘over the works of
the Lord,” corresponding to Sudias (1 Esd 5 26),
Hodaviah (Ezr 2 40), Judah (Ezr 3 9), Hodevah
(Neh 7 48).

(2) An ancestor of Jesus in Lk’s genealogy (Lk
3 26, AV “Juda’”).


JOED, jd’ed (WP, ya'edh, “Jeh is witness”):
A “son” of Benjamin (Neh 11 7), wanting in 1 Ch
9 7. é


JOEL, jé’el Oxn, yo’él, popularly interpreted
as “Jeh is God”; but see HPN, 153; BDB, 222a):

(1) The firstborn of Samuel (1 S 8 2; 1 Ch 6
33 (Heb 18], and supplied in RV of 1 Ch 6 28,
correctly).

(2) A Simeonite prince (1 Ch 4 35).

(3) A Reubenite chief (1 Ch 5 4.8).

(4) A Gadite chief, perhaps the same as (3)
(1 Ch 5 12). He might be the chief of ‘‘a family
or clan whose members might be reckoned as be-
longing to either or both of the tribes” (Curtis,
Ch, 122).

(5) A Levite ancestor of Samuel (1 Ch 6 36
{Heb 21], called “Shaul” in ver 24 [Heb 9]).

(6) A chief of Issachar (1 Ch 7 3).

(7) One of David’s mighty men (1 Ch 11 38),
brother of Nathan. 2 8 23 36 has “Igal son of
Nathan,” and LXX B has “son” in 1 Ch, a read-
ing which Curtis adopts. See Icat.

(8) A_Levite (1 Ch 15 7.11.17), probably the
J.of 1 Ch 23 8and 26 22.

(9) David’s tribal chief over half of Manasseh
(1 Ch 27 20).

(10) A Levite of Hezekiah’s time (2 Ch 29 12).

(11) One of those who had married foreign wives
(Ezr 10 43)=‘Juel” of 1 Esd 9 35.

(12) A Benjamite “‘overseer’’ in Jerus (Neh 11 9).

(13) ’Iw%A, fdél, the prophet (Joel 1 1; Acts 2
16). See following article.

2 Davio Francis Roperts

JOEL ORM, yo'el; ‘Tosd, 1561):

I. Tue Propuer

II, Tue Boox
1. Literary Form
2. Outline of Contents
3. Interpretation


o ‘Literal
2) Allegorical


4. Indications of Date
(1) Place in the Canon
(2) Language and Style
(3) Quotations
(4) The Situation
(a) Political
2) Ritwaustl ;
G itualistic
(5) ree Nations Mentioned or Omitted
(6) Some Notable Expressions
5. View of Professor Merx
6. Connections with the NT
LITERATURE f


I. The Prophet.—The Book of Joel stands second
in the collection of the Twelve Prophets inthe Heb
Canon. The name O81, yd’él), meaning “Jeh is
God,” seems to have been common, as we find a
dozen other persons bearing it at various periods
of the Bib. history. Beyond the fact that he was
the son of Pethuel, there is no intimation in the book
as to his native place, date, or personal history; nor
is he mentioned in any other part of the OT; so
that any information on these points must be matter
of inference, and the consideration of them must
follow some examination of the book itself.

Il, The Book.—This takes largely the form of
addresses, the occasion and scope of which have to

be gathered from the contents. There
1. Literary is no narrative, properly so called,
Form . except at one place (2 18), “Then was

Jeh jealous for his land,’’ etc, and even
there the narrative form is not continued. Yet,
though the earlier portions at least may be the
transcript of actual addresses in which the speaker
had his audience before him, this would not apply
to the later portions, in which also the direct address
is still maintained (e.g. 3 11, ‘““Haste ye, and come,
all ye nations round about’). This form of direct
address is, indeed, characteristic of the style through-
out (e.g. 2 21; 3 4.9.13). There is this also to be
said of its literary character, that ‘‘the style of Joel
is bright and flowing,” his ‘imagery and language
are fine’ (Driver, LOT); “his book is a descrip-
tion, clear, well arranged, and carried out with
taste and vivacity, of the present distress and of
the ideal future. J. may be reckoned among the
classics of Heb lit. The need of a commentary
for details, as is the case with Amos and Hosea, is
here hardly felt” (Reuss, Das AT).

The book in the original consists of 4 chapters,
which, however, are in our VS reduced to 3, by

making the portion which constitutes
2. Outline ch 3 in the Heb the concluding portion
of Contents (vs 28-32) of ch 2. The book begins

in gloom, and its close is bright. Up
to 2 18 there is some great trouble or a succession
of troubles culminating at 2 28-32 (ch 3 in Heb).
And the concluding portion, ch 8 (ch 4 in Heb), in
which the prophet projects his view into futunty,
begins with judgment but ends with final blessed-
ness. There is a progression in the thought, rising
from the solid, sorely smitten earth to a region
ethereal, and the stages of advance are marked by
sudden, sharp calls (1 2.14; 3 9), or by the blasts
a the ra which prelude the shifting scenes

1.15).

Ch 1 begins with an address, sharp and peremp-
tory, in which the oldest inhabitant is appealed to
whether such a calamity as the present has ever
been experienced, and all are called to take note so
that the record of it may be handed down to re-
motest posterity. The land has suffered from a
succession of disasters, the greatest that could befall
an agricultural country, drought and locusts. The
two are in fact inextricably connected, and the fea-
tures of both are mixed up in the description of their
effects. The extent of the disaster is vividly de-
picted by the singling out of the classes on whom the
calamity has fallen, the drinkers of wine, the priests,


1689


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Job, Test. of
Joel


the vine-dressers, the husbandmen; and, toward the
close of the chapter, the lower animals are patheti-
cally introduced as making their mute a peal to
heaven for succor (vs 18-20). Specially to Be noted
is the manner in which the priests are introduced
(ver 9), and how with them is associated the climax
of the affliction. The prophet had just said “my
land” (ver 6), “my vine” and ‘my fig-tree” (ver 7);
and, though many modern expositors take the pro-
noun as referring to the nation or people, it would
appear more appropriate, since the people is ob-
Jectively addressed, to regard the prophet as identi-
fying himself with the God in whose name he is
speaking. And then the transition to ver 8 be-
comes intelligible, in which certainly the land is per-
sonified as a female: ‘‘Lament like a virgin girded
with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.” The
underlying idea seems to be the conception of the
land as Jeh’s and of Jeh as the ba‘al “lord,” or hus-
band of people and land. ‘This is the idea so much
in evidence in the Book of Hos, and so much per-
verted by the people whom he addressed, who
ascribed their corn and wine and oil to the Can.
ba‘als, The idea in its purer form is found in the
‘land Beulah,” “married land” (Isa 62 4.5). If
it was this that was in J.’s mind, the mention of the
priests comes naturally. The products of the land
were Jeh’s gifts, and the acknowledgment of His
lordship was made byofferings of the produce laid
on His altar. But if nothing was given, nothing
could be offered; the ‘‘cutting off’’ of the meal and
drink offerings was the mark of the widowhood and
destitution of the land. Hence the pathetic long-
ing (2 14) that at least. so much may be left as to
assure the famished land that the supreme calamity,
the loss of God, has not fallen. Thus the visitation
is set in a religious light: the graphic description
is more than a poetic picture.’ It is the Lord’s land
that is wasted; hence the summons (1 14) to “ery
unto Jeh,” and in the vs that follow the supplication
by man and beast for deliverance.

Ch 2 up to ver 17 seems to go over the same
gronnd as ch 1, and it has also two parts || respec-
tively to two parts of that chapter: 2 1-11 is || to
1 2-12, and 2 12-17 to 1 13-20. The former part
in both cases is chiefly descriptive of the calamity,
while the latter part 1s more hortatory. Yet there
is an advance; for, whereas in 1 2-12 the attention
is fixed on the devastation, in 2 1-11 it is the devas-
tator, the locust, that is particularly described;
also, in 2 12-17 the tone is more intensely religious:
“Rend your heart, and not your garments” (ver
13). Finally it is to be noted that it is at the close
of this portion that we get the first reference to
external nations: “Give not thy heritage to re-
proach, that the nations should use a byword against
them: wherefore should they say among the peoples,
Where is their God?” (ver17m). Ifthe view given
above of 1 6-8 be correct, this is merely an expan-
sion of the germinal idea there involved. And so
it becomes a pivot on which the succeeding portion
turns: “Then was Jeh jealous for his land, and had
pity on his people” (2 18).

There is a sharp turn at 2 18, marked by the
sudden variation of the verbal forms. Just as in
Am 7 10, in the midst of the prophet’s discourse,
we come upon the narration, “Then Amaziah the

riest, of Beth-el sent to Jeroboam,”’ etc, so here we
EaveeBeoaaly to take the narrative to be the se-
quence of the foregoing address, or,-more properly
speaking, we bave to infer that what J. had coun-
seled had been done. The fast had been sanctified,
the solemn assembly had been called, all classes or
their representatives had been gathered to the house
of the Lord, the supplication had been made, and
“then was Jeb jealous for his land, and _had pity on
his people.” In point of fact, as the Heb student


will perceive, all the vbs. from ver 15 may be read,
with a change of the points, as simple perfects, with
the exception of the vbs. for “weep” and “say” in
ver 17, which might be descriptive imperfects.
But no doubt the imperative forms are to be read,
expressing as they do more graphically the doing
of the thing prescribed. And, this sharp turn
having been made, it will be noticed how the dis-
course proceeds on a higher gradient, forming a
counterpart to the preceding context. Step by
step, in inverse order, we pass the former points,
beginning opposite what was last the “reproach
among the nations” (ver 19; cf ver 7), passing the
destruction of the great army (ver 20; cf vs 1-11),
then touching upon the various kinds of vegetation
affected (vs 21-24; ef 1 12.10, etc), and ending with
the reversal of the fourfold devastation with which
the prophet began (ver 25; cf 14). So that what
at the outset was announced as a calamity unprec-
edented and unparalleled, now becomes a deliv-
erance as enduring as God’s presence with His
people is forever assured.

Up to this point there has been an observable
sequence and connection, so that, while the prophet
has steadily progressed upward, we can look down
from the point reached and see the whole course
that has been traversed. But now in 2 28-32
(ch 3 in Heb) he passes abruptly to what “shall
come to pass afterward.” And yet no doubt there
was a connection of thought in his mind, of which
we obtain suggestions in the new features of the
description. There is ‘‘the sound of abundance of
rain” (1 K 18 41) in this pouring out of the Spirit
upon all flesh; in the sons and daughters, old men
and young, servants and handmaidens, we seem to
recognize the representative gathering of 2 15f,
those engaged in the priestly function of suppli-
cation here endued with prophetic gifts, ‘a king-
dom of priests, and a holy nation” (Ex 19 6), all
the Lord’s people become prophets (Nu 11 29).
Again we see the sky overcast and sun and moon
darkened before the great and terrible day of the
Lord, as if the prophet had said: There shall be
greater things than these; a new era is coming in
which God’s hand will be laid more heavily upon
the world, and His people will be quickened to a
clearer vision of His working. The “day of Jeh’’
has yet to come in a fuller sense than the locust
plague suggested, and there will be a more effective
deliverance than from drought and dearth; but
then as now there will be found safety in Mt. Zion
and Jerus. This, however, implies some danger
with which Jerus has been threatened; a “remnant,”
an “escaped” portion involves a disaster or crisis
out of which new life comes. And so the prophet
goes on in ch 3 (ch 4 in Heb), still speaking of ‘those
days’ and ‘‘that time,” to tell us of the greater
deliverance from the greater trouble to which he
has been alluding. There is nothing in the ante-
cedent chapters to indicate what “that time” and
“those days” are, or what the prophet means by
bringing again the captivity of Judah and_Jerus.
These are questions of interpretation. In the
meantime, we may note the general features of the
scene now set before us. A great assize is to be
held in the valley of Jehoshaphat, in which “all
nations” there assembled by Divine summons will
be judged for offences against God's people and
heritage (vs 1-8). And again, just as in chs 1, 2
the prophet exhibited the plague of locusts in two
pictures, so here in vs 9-21 the picture of the great
agsize is transformed into a bloody picture in the
same valley, not so much of battle as of slaughter,
a treading of the wine-press. There is a confused
multitude in “the valley of decision”; sun and moon
are darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining;
the “‘day of Jeh” has finally come; and, when the


Joel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1690


din is silenced and clear light again falls upon
the scene, all is peace and prosperity, the last of
the enemies destroyed, and the Lord dwelleth in
Zion.

(1) Literal.—Thus the book forms a fairly intelligible


and connected whole when we read in the lit. sense of
the language. That is to say: a time of


3. Inter- continued drought combined with an un-
. precedented visitation of locusts gives
pretation = occasion to the prophet to call his people


to the recognition of the Divine hand and
to earnest supplication that the threatened ruin of people
and land may he averted. The removal of the calamity
is interpreted as a mark of restored Divine favor and an
assurance of prosperity based on God’s unchangeable
purpose of good to His people. But these great doings
of Nature’s God suggest yet greater deeds of Israel’s God
of a more spiritual kind, the outpouring, like copious
showers, of Divine blessing, so that the whole community
would be set on a higher level of spiritual apprehension.
And thus the prophet is led on to speak of the "last
things.’’ Judah and Jerus, highly distinguished and sig-
nally protected, are hound up with a world-wide purpose;
Israel, in a word, cannot be conceived apart from non-
Israel. And as non-Israe] had in the past been an oppos-
ing power, in the great ‘'day of Jeh,'’ wrong should be
at last righted, the nations judged, and Israel and Israel's
God be glorified. No douht the interpretation is not
without difficulties. We may not he able to detect the
motives of the sudden transitions, or to say how much
of the purport of the latter part was in the prophet’s
mind when he was engaged on the former part. And
the description of the locust is so highly poetical that
there is a temptation to see in it a reference to a great
invading army.

(2) Allegorical.—T bese considerations, combined with
the undoubted eschatological strain of the closing part
of the book, led early commentators (and they have
had followers in modern times) to an allegorical inter-
pretation of the locust, and to regard the whole hook
as pointing forward to future history. Thus, in Jerome's
time, the 4 names of the locust in 1] 4 were supposed to
designate (1) the Assyrians and Babylonians, (2) the
Medes and Persians, (3) the Macedonians and Antiochus
Epiphanes, and (4) the,Romans. But, apart from _ the
consideration that the analogy of prophecy would lead
us to look for some actual situation or occurrence of
his time as tbe starting-point of J.'’s discourse, a close
ohservation and acquaintance with the habits of the
locust confirm the prophet's description, albeit highly
figurative and poetical, as minutely accurate in all its
details. It is to be observed that, though spoken of as
an army (and at the present day the Oriental calls the
locust the '‘army of God"’), there is no mention of blood-
shed. The designation ‘‘the northern one,” which has
heen considered inappropriate because the locust comes
from the parched plain of the eastern interior, need not
cause perplexity; for tbe Heb, while it has names for
the 4 cardinal points of the compass, has none for the
intermediate points: Judaea might be visited by locusts
coming from the N.E., or, coming from the E., they
might strike the country at a point to the N. of Pal and
travel southward. So the wind which destroys the
locust (2 20) would be a northwesterly wind, driving
the forepart into the Dead Sea and the hinder part into
the Mediterranean.


The Book of Joel has been assigned by different
authorities to very various dates, ranging over 4 or
5 cents.; but, as will appear in the


4. Indica- sequel, it comes to be a question
tions of whether the book is very early or very
Date late, in fact, whether J. is perhaps the


very earliest or the very last or among
the last of the writing prophets. This diversity of
opinion is due to the fact that there are no direct
indications of date in the book itself, and that such
indirect indications as it affords are held to be capa-
ble of explanation on the one view or the other. It
will be noticed also that, to add to the uncertainty,
many of the arguments adduced are of a negative
kind, i.e. consideration of what the prophet does


not mention or refer to, and the argument from:


silence is notoriously precarious. It will, therefore,
be convenient to specify the indications available,
and to note the arguments drawn from them in
support of the respective dates.

(1) Place in the Canon—An argument for a very
early date is based upon the place of the book in the
collection of the “twelve” minor prophets.

It stands, in the Heb Bible, between Hos and Am,


who are usually spoken of as the earliest '‘ writing
prophets.” It is true that, in the LXX. collection, the


order is different, viz. Hos, Am, Mic, Joel, Oh, Jon;
which may indicate that as early as the time of the forma~
tion of the Canon of the Prophets there was uncertainty
as to the place of Joel, Ob, and Jon, which contain no
direct indication of their dates. But, seeing that there
has evidently heen a regard to some chronological order,
the hooks heing arranged according to the Assyr, Bah
and Pers periods, it cannot be without significance that
Joel has found a place so high up in the collection. The
3 indisputahly post-exilian hooks stand together at the
end. If Joel‘is late, it must he as late as the latest of
these, possibly a great deal later. But if that isso, there
was tho greater likelihood of its date heing known to the
collectors. It would be a very hazardous, assumption
that prophetical books were not read or copied from the
time of their first composition till the time they were
gathered into a Canon. And, if they were so read and
copied, surely the people who handled them took some
interest in preserving the knowledge of their origin and
authorship.


In this connection, attention is directed to the
resemblances to the Book of Am before which Joel
stands. These are regarded by Reuss as favoring
the early date. That large and beautiful passage
with which the Book of Am opens dwells upon the
thought that the threatenings, which had formerly
been uttered against the nations, are about to receive
their fulfilment, and that Jeh could not take back
His word. Now it is just such a threatening that
fills the last part of the Book of Joel. Indeed Amos
begins his book with the very phrase in which J.
opens his closing address, “‘Jeh will roar from Zion,
and utter his voice from Jerus’” (Am 1 2; Joel 4
16). At the end of Am also the happy fertility of
Canaan is described in similar terms to those in
Joel (Am 9 13; Joel 3 18). Reuss, moreover,
draws attention to the remarkable expression fonnd
in Joel, and also, though in modified terms, in two
Prophets of the Assyr period: “Beat your plow-
shares into swords, and your pruning-hooks into
spears,” says J. (3 10), whereas we have the oracle
in Isa 2 4 and Mic 4 3, “They shall beat their
swords into plowshares, and their spears into
pruning-hooks’”’; and it 1s suggested that, if these
were current phrases, they were more likely to
have been coined in the form employed by J. in
earlier and less settled times, when sudden alarms
of war called the peaceful husbandman to the de-
fence of his fields and flocks. Further, it is pointed
out that Amos reproaches the people of his day for
impenitence, although Jeh had given them “clean-
ness of teeth” and “want of bread” and had “with-
holden the rain... . when there were yet three
months to the harvest,’’ and smitten them with
blasting and mildew and the palmer worm (Am 4
6-9); and all this is the more striking bedause J.
represents the distress of his day as unprecedented
in magnitude.

To all this, advocates of the late date reply that
we cannot determine the date of a book by its place
in the Canon; for that the collectors were guided
by other considerations. As to the resemblances
to Am, it may have been on the strength of these
very resemblances that the Book of Joel, bearing
no date in itself, was placed beside that of Am.
Moreover, it is maintained, as we shall see presently
that J. has resemblances to other prophets, some of
them confessedly of late date, proving that he was
acquainted with writings of a very late time.

(2) Language and style—Another argument for an
early date is based upon the purity of the language and
character of the style. The book is written In what may
he described as classical Heh, and shows no trace of
decadence of language. It is no doubt true that “the
style is the man,” as is strikingly illustrated in the very
different styles 6f Amos and Hosea, who were practically
contemporaneous; so that arguments of this kind are
precarious. Still, it is to be noted, that though there ls
nothing archaic in the style of Joel, neither is there any-
thing archaic in the style of Amos, who would, by the
eon of Joel, be our earliest example of written

ro i
‘s The pavecates of the very late date reply that the


style of J. is too good to he archaic; and that his ad-
mittedly classic style is to be explained by the supposition


1691


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joel


that, living at a late tlme, he was a diligent student of
corer prophetic lt., and molded his style upon the
ssical.


_ (8) Quotations —Here, therefore, must be men-
tioned an argument much relied on by the advo-
cates of a very late date. It is said that there are
so many resemblances in thought and expression
to other OT books that it is incredible that so many
writers poser to the early date claimed for Joel
should have quoted from this little book or ex-
panded thoughts contained in it. A very elaborate
comparison of J. with late writers has been made by
Holzinger in ZATW, 1889, 89-131; his line of
argument being that, while resemblances to un-
doubtedly early writers may be explained as the
work of a writer in the Renaissance imitating older
models, the resemblances to others known to be
late, such as Jer, Ezk, II Isa, Pss, Neh, Ch, etc,
cannot he so explained if Joel is taken to be early.
The principal passages in question are given in the
Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges, ‘Book
of Joel,” by Professor Driver, who also takes the
view that Joel is late.

The list is not, perhaps, so formidable as its length
would imply. Both writers confess that from
several of the passages no conclusion of any value
can be drawn, and that there is always a difficulty
in determining priority when similarities in diction
are found. Many of the expressions quoted look
as if they might have been commonplaces of the
prophetical lit.; and, if it was possible for a very late
writer to quote from so many antecedent writings,
it was as possible and much easier for-a number of
late writers to go back to the very earliest: prophets,
esp. if their words were memorable and germinal.
We have heard of the man who objected to Shake-
speare because he was full of quotations; and there
is perhaps not a line of Gray’s “Elegy” that has
not been quoted somewhere, while some of his lines
have become household words. But the strongest
objection to this argument is this: if Joel had the
minute acquaintance with antecedent writers and
followed them so closely as is implied, he not only
varies from them in essential particulars, but falls
below them, as we shall see, in his anticipations of
the future.

(4) Sttuation.—We have now to look at features
of a more concrete and tangible character, which
promise to give more positive results. It is main-
tained by the advocates of the late date that the
situation and immediate outlook of the prophet are
not only consistent with the late date but preclude
any preéxilian date altogether. The elements of
the situation are these: Whereas all the prophets
before the downfall of Samaria (722 BC), and even
Jeremiah and Ezekiel, mention the Northern King-
dom, it is not once named or referred to in Joel;
for the occurrence of the name “Israel’’ in 2 27; 3
2.16 cannot support this sense. Judah and Jerus
fill our prophet’s actual horizon (2 1.82; 3 6.16f.
20); no king is mentioned or implied, but the elders
with the priests seem to be the prominent and ruling
class. Further, the temple and its worship are
central (1 14; 2 15f) and so important that the
cutting off of the meal offering and drink offering
is tantamount to national ruin (1 9.18.16; 2 14).
Again, there is no mention of the prevailing sins of
preéxilian times, the high places with their corrupt
worship, or indeed of any specific sin for which the
people were to humble themselves, while fasting
and putting on sackcloth seem to have a special
virtue. All the circumstances, it is held, conform
exactly to the time of the post-exilian temple and
to no other time. The Northern Kingdom was no
more, there was no king in Jerus, the temple was the
center and rallying-point of national life, its ritual
the pledge and guarantee of God’s presence and


favor; the period of legalism had set in. It is
confidently averred that at no period prior to the
régime inaugurated by Ezra and Nehemiah was
there such a conjunction of circumstances.

(a) Political: In reply, it is urged in favor of the
early date that there was a period in preéxilian
time when such a situation existed, viz. the early
years of the reign of Joash, when that prince was
still an infant; for Jehoiada the priest acted prac-
tically as regent after the death of Atbaliah, 836
BC (2 K 11 1-17). This would sufficiently ac-
count for the absence of mention of a king in the
book. At such a time the priesthood must have
held a prominent pono and the temple would
overshadow the pa ace in importance. The omis-
sion of the Northern Kingdom may be accounted
for by the fact that at that time the two kingdoms
were on friendly terms; for the two royal houses
were connected by marriage, and the kingdoms were
in alliance (2 K 3 6 ff; 8 28 ff). Or the omission
may have no more significance than the fact that
J. was concerned with an immediate and near
present distress and had no occasion to mention the
Northern Kingdom. To show how unsafe it is to
draw conclusions from such silence, it may be ob-
served that throughout the first_5 chapters of Isa,
larger in bulk than the whole Book of Joel, only
Judah and Jerus are nientioned; and, even if it
should be maintained that a part or the whole of
these chapters dates from after the deportation of
the ten tribes, still it is noteworthy that, when the
prophet could have made as good use of a reference
to the event as Jeremiah and Ezekiel, he does not
do so.

(b) Religious: The fact that there is no mention of
specific national sins, and particularly of the worship
of the high places, of which -preéxilian prophets have so
much _to say, is made much of by advocates of the late
date, Dr. A. B. Davidson, e.g., declaring it to be '' doubt-
ful whether such a state of things existed at any time
pHoL to the restoration from exile” (Expos, March, 1888);

ut perhaps this argument proves too much. If we
are to deduce the state of religion in J.'s day from what
he does not say on the subject, 1+ may be douhted
whether at any time, either before or after the exile, such
a condition prevailed. The post-exilian prophets cer-
tainly knew of sins in thelr time, sins, too; which restrained
the rain and blasted the wine and oil and corn (Hag 1
11). For all that J. says on the subject, the condition
of things implied is as consistent wlth the time of Je-
hoiada as with that of Nehemiah. And what shall we
say of Isalah's positive description of the condition of
Jerus before his time: ‘the faithful city . ... she
that was full of justice! righteousness lodged in her"
(Isa 1 21)? hen was that? So also his promise:
“T will restore thy judges as at the first, aud thy coun-
sellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt he called
The city of righteousness, a faithful town" (Isa 1 aap
Higher praise cculd scarcely be bestowed, and there is
nothing in the Book of Joel to imply that he assumed
so much.

(c) Ritualistic: Too much has been made of the
references to ritual, as if they necessarily implied
a post-exilian date. It is not legitimate here to
assume that the idea of centralization of worship
originated in Josiah’s days, and that the priestly
legislation is post-exilian. The mention of ‘‘old
men” or “elders” is no such indication. Well-
hausen himself maintains that the expression every-
where in Joel means nothing more than “old men’”’;
and, even if it had an official connotation, the offi-
cial elders are an old tribal institution in Israel. It
may be noted here again that in the first 5 chapters
of Isa elders also are mentioned, and more indubi-
tably in an official sense, although the time was that
of the monarchy (Isa 3 2.14). And as _to the
sanctity of the temple, it will hardly be denied that
in the time of Jehoiada the Jerus temple was a place
of far more importance than any supposed local
shrine, and esp. when there was a call to a united
national supplication (see 2 K 11). In point of
fact the alleged references to ritual are very few
and in most general terms. The “fast’’ is not de-


Joel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1692


noted by the phrases in the legal codes, and was
evidently on the footing of such observances as
are common and instinctive at all times and among
all persons (Jgs 20 26; 18 76; 28112; Jon
3 5 ff). And where in any law-code are priests
enjoined to lie all night in sackeloth (1 13)? Or
what prescription in any code requires young and
old, bridegroom and bride, to press together into
the temple (2 16)? And why should not any or
all of these things have been done in face of a sudden
emergency threatening the ruin of an agricultural
people? Moreover, J., so far from ascribing virtue
to these outward marks of humiliation in a legal-
istic spirit, immediately after mentioning them
says: “Rend your heart, and not your garments,
and turn unto Jeh your God” (2 13).

The only ritual references are to the meal offering
and the drink offering (1 9.13; 2 14), and these
were not characteristically post-exilian. Indeed,
they may be regarded as primitive forms of offering,
the produce of the ground without which, among
an agricultural people, we can hardly imagine a
system of offerings to exist. They are both ancient.
Amos regards the meal offering as well known (5 22.
25), and Isaiah uses the word ‘‘vain oblations’’ in
speaking of its abuse (Isa 1 13). And though the
noun for drink offering is not mentioned in the older
prophets, Hosea knows the related vb. and the act
of pouring out wine to the Lord (Hos 9 4), and
it may be asked whether it is likely that the people
performed the act and had no name for the offering
itself. Moreover, in an undisputed passage (2 K
16 13.15), both offerings are mentioned in the time
of Ahaz. As for the contention that our prophet
regards these offerings of so much importance that
the cessation of them would be fatal, if our inter-
pretation of 1 8f above be correct, the earlier date
would be much more appropriate. It was not
because the offering threatened to cease, but be-
cause the thing offered threatened to be cut off,
that J. was so perturbed. The popular view as to
the relation of Jeh to His land was ancient, and had
a foundation of truth; and in fact Hosea’s teaching
would fitly follow and complete that of Joel. Fi-
nally it is to be said that J.’s fine forecast of the out-
pouring of the Spirit, and of the universal extension
of prophetic activity is as far removed as possible
from the “‘legalistie” tendency that set in after the
exile. And if the argument from silence is of any
force at all, it is surely a very remarkable thing that
in a book of post-exilian times, there should be no
mention of prince or governor, or even of high
priest.

(5) Foreign nations mentioned or omitted.—Allu-
sions to foreign nations, or the absence of allusion,
would obviously promise to afford indications of the
time of the prophet; and yet here also the allusions
have been adduced in support of either of the di-
vergent dates. The facts here are as follows: In
the fizrst two chapters, where the prophet, as is
generally understood, is speaking of his own time
and its pressing distress, there is no mention of any
foreign nation, not even the kingdom of the ten
tribes. The only expression which has been taken
to be significant in this connection is the word tr@
“the northern” army (2 20), which some refer to
the Assyrians, while others explain it of a northern
army in late or apocalyptic time. In ch 3, however,
when the prophet is speaking of ‘those days” and
“that time” in the future, when the Lord “shall
bring back the captivity of Judah and Jerus,” there
is to be a gathering of “all nations” in the valley of
Jehoshaphat (3 1f); and later on “all the nations”
are summoned to appear in the same valley for
judgment (3 11f). ‘Tyre, and Sidon, and all the
regions of Philistia” are specially reproached (ver 4)
because they have carried into their temples the


sacred treasures, and have sold the children of Judah
and Jerus unto the “sons of the Grecians” (ver 6);
in recompense for which their sons and daughters
are to be sold into the hand of the children of Judah,
to be sold by them to “the men of Sheba, to a nation
far off” (ver 8). Finally, at the close (vs 19f),
“Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a
desolate wilderness, for the violence done to the
children of Judah, because they have shed innocent
blood in their land.” ‘

It is acknowledged that, on either hypothesis,
there are difficulties in accounting for the presence
or absence of names of foreign nations in this
presentation. Those who advocate the late date
point with confidence to the silence as to the king-
dom of the ten tribes, or to the kingdom of Damas-
cus, which, on their hypothesis, had passed away,
and the equally significant silence as to Assyria,
which had long ago been superseded by the Bab
and Pers empires of the East. As to the mention
of Tyre and Sidon and the coasts of Philistia (3 4-6),
Driver says: ‘The particular occasion referred to
by J. must remain uncertain: but the Phoenicians
continued to act as slave-dealers long after the age
of Amos: and the notice of Javan (Greece) suits
better a later time, when Syrian slaves were in re-
quest in Greece” (Cambridge Bible, ‘Joel,’ 17). The
same writer says on 8 19: ‘There is so little that
is specific in what is said in this verse with reference
to either Egypt or Edom, that both countries are
probably named (at a time when the Assyrians and
Chaldaeans had alike ceased to be formidable to
Judah) as typical examples of countries hostile to
the Jews.” It is pointed out, moreover, that the
enmity of Edom was particularly manifest at a late
period when Jerus was destroyed by the Chaldaeans,
and that this was remembered and resented long
ae (Ob vs 10-16; Ezk 25 12ff; 35; Ps

3

On the hypothesis of the early date, it is urged
that there was no occasion to refer to the Northern
Kingdom. If it was friendly, the inclusive name
of Israel for the whole people was sufficient to de-
note this, and that it was not hostile in the early
days of Joash has already been pointed out. As
to Damascus, it was not till the last years of the
reign of Joash that Hazael showed hostility to
Jerus (2 K 12 17f); and danger from Assyria
had not yet emerged, and appears only faintly in
Am (3 11; 6 14). Then it is pointed ont that
history records how, in the reign of Jehoram, the
grandfather of Joash, “Edom revolted from under
the hand of Judah, and made a king over them-
selves” (2 K 8 20;2 Ch 21 8), and the historian
adds that the revolt continued ‘‘unto this day.”
It may well have been that in such a revolt the
resident Judaeans in the land of Edom suffered the
violence referred to in 3 19. Moreover, the
Chronicler mentions that, in the same reign, ‘“Jeh
stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philis,
and of the Arabians that are beside the Ethiopians:
and they came up against Judah, and brake into it,
and carried away all the substance that was found
in the king’s house, and his sons also, and his wives,”’
etc (2 Ch 21 16f). This might be what is referred
toin 3 4-6. If the royal family were carried away
there would most probably be a deportation of other
prisoners, who, taken by the seaboard Philis, would,
through the great maritime power of the day, be
sold to the distant Greeks. And here it is pointed
out that Amos singles out the very nations men-
tioned by J.: Philis, Tyre and Sidon and Edom,
and reproaches them with offences such as J.
specifies (Am 1 6-12). And then, it is added, if
the book is as late as Nehemiah, why is nothing
said of Samaritans, Mosbites, and Ammonites,
who showed such marked hostility in his days (Neh


1693


219; 47; 61)? For Ezekiel also, from whom it
issupposed J. derived his reference to the Edomites,
mentions also Moabites and Ammonites as hostile
to Israel (Ezk 25 1-11). And so far were Tyre and
Sidon from being hostile in the days of Nehemiah
that we read of similar arrangements being made
with them, as in the time of Solomon, for the supply
of materials for the rebuilding of the temple (Ezr
3 7). And why is not a word said of the Baby-
Jonians, at whose hands Israel had suffered 80
much? So strongly, indeed, are these objections
felt by Reuss, that he declares that, should the view
of the late origin come to be finally accepted as the
more probable, he would decide for a date after the
Pers domination, i.e. subsequent to 332 BC. For,
he says, the names of peoples introduced at the end
of the book, Phoenicians, Egyptians, Philis, Edom-
ites, must surely in some way have had an actual
significance for the author, who cannot out of caprice
have passed over Syrians, Assyrians, Chaldaeans,
and Persians. Accordingly, if we are to have
nothing to do with the pre-Assyr period, we must
come down to the late Balser and Ptolemean
dynasties, by whose hostile collisions Judaea was
certainly involved in severe trouble. But then,
how are we to account for the position of Joel so
high up in the collection of prophetical writers?
For, on this supposition, we should expect his book
to stand in the third division of the Canon.

(6) Some notable expressions.—There remain to
be noticed some significant expressions which have
a bearing on the question of date and, at first sight,
seem to indicate a late origin. And yet there is a
difficulty. For there is no doubt that our familiarity
with the details of the great downfall of the Jewish
state leads us to think of the destruction of Jerus
when we read of the captivity or scattering of the
people. There is, however, a saying in the Talm
that a greater distress makes a lesser one forgotten;
and the question is whether there may not have
been national experiences at an earlier time to
which such expressions might be applicable: or,
in other words, how early such phrases were coined
and became current.

(a) “Bring back the captivity’: There is, first
of all, uncertainty as to the origin of the phrase
“bring back the captivity.” Some connect the
word “captivity” (MAW, sh*bhath, MAW, shebhith)
with the vb. “to take captive’ (T3WU, shabhah),
while others make it the cognate noun of the vb.
“to return” (350, shubh), with which it stands
connected in the phrase “‘bring back the captivity
of Judah and Jerus” (3 1). In the former case the
reference would be to the return of captives taken
in war, or the return of exiles from captivity; and
that view has led to the trin our VS. On the latter
view, the expression would mean the restoration of
prosperity, of which use we have an undoubted
example in the words: ‘Jeh turned the captivity
of Job’ (Job 42 10). We can conceive either of

- the views to have been the original, and either to
be quite early. A main feature of early warfare
was the carrying away of prisoners, and the return
of such captives was equivalent to a restoration of
prosperity. Or again, the relief from any illness
or trouble might be expressed by saying that there
was a restoration, as e.g. in Scotland a sick person
ig said to have “got the turn.” As to the signifi-
cance of the phrase in Joel, it is pomted out by the
advocates of the early date that, in Nehemiah’s
time, the exile was at an end, and the captivity
“brought back” (Ps 126). On the other side it 13
said that, though the new order was set up at Jerus,
there still remained many Israelites in foreign lands,
and J., not satisfied with the meager community in
Pal, looked forward to a fuller restoration; or other-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joel


wise, that the words are used in the wider and more
general sense of restored prosperity. That the
phrase was in early use, and in the sense of bringing
back captives, is scen in Am 9 14 and Hos 6 11.
And it may be observed that the phraseology used
by Am to denote going into captivity (Am I 5.15;
6 5.27; 7 17) is employed by the Jews to denote
the Bab captivity, and is even used by modern Jews
to express the present dispersion. And yet Amos
speaks of an “entire captivity” of people in his day
(Am 1 6.9m).

(b) “Parted my land”: Then again, the expres-
sion “parted my land” (3 2) does not seem very
applicable to the breaking up of the state, for the
land was not parted but absorbed in the great east-
erm empires; nor does J. single out Assyrians,
Babylonians, and Persians, by whom, if by any, a
post-exilian parting of the land was effected. The
expression would more fitly apply to such move-
ments as the revolt of Edom and Libnah (2 K 8
22), and the successive losses of territory by which
the great dominion of David and Solomon was
reduced. This process, described as “cutting
Israel short” (lit. “cutting off the ends,” 2 K 10
32 AV) is recorded as having begun in the time of
Jehu, before the reign of Joash, when outlying parts
of territory were smitten by Hazael of Damascus;
and J., speaking in God’s name, may have used the
expression “my land” as referring to the whole
country.

(c) “Scattered among the nations’: Whether
the expression “scattered among the nations” (3 2)
would be applicable to the Israelite inhabitants of
such conquered territories or to those sold into
slavery (3 6) may be disputed. The expression
certainly suggests rather the dispersion following
the downfall of the state. And yet it is noteworthy
that, if so, J. is the only prophet who uses in that
sense the vb. here employed, a very strange thing if
he followed and borrowed from them all; for, both
in Jer and Ezk, as well as in Dt, other vbs. are
used. Jer indeed uses the vb. in comparing Israel
to a scattered (or isolated) sheep which the lions
have driven away (50 17); but the only other
passage in which the word is plainly used of Israel
being dispersed among the peoples in all the prov-
inces of Persia is Est 3 8.

(d) ‘“‘Reproach of the nations’: Then there is
the passage: ‘‘Give not thy heritage to reproach,
that the nations should rule over them” (or ‘use
a byword against them”): “wherefore should they
say among the peoples, Where is their God?”
(2 17.19; cf m). Here it is to be noted that the
idea involved is certainly much older than the time
of the exile. In the time of Hezekiah, the ambassa-
dors of Sennacherib delivered their taunting mes-
sage, which is described as reproaching the living
God (2 K 19 4). It was the method of ancient
warfare, as is seen in the boasting of Goliath; for
it is the same word that is used in that narrative,
though rendered in our VS “defy” (1 S 17 10.25f.
36). And, if we read between the lines of the his-
torical books, we shall see how common was this
habit of “defying” or “reproaching,”’ and how sensi-
tive the people were to it (e.g. 1 K 20 21.51.18.
28). All this is anterior to the earliest possible date
of J., and proves that, at an early time, there was
a consciousness in Israel that the fortunes of the
people were bound up with the honor of the national
God. It is not to be overlooked that it is in the
early part of the book, when he is concerned with
the drought and locust, that J. uses this expression.

(e) “Strangers passing through”: Toward the


‘elose of the book it is predicted that, in the time of


final glory, strangers shall no longer pass through
Jerus (3 17). This again would certainly be appli-
cable to a late time, after the land had suffered


Jofanaine Theol, THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1694


many hostile invasions. Yet it can well be under-
stood how a prophet at a very early period, think-
ing of the glorification of Zion, should imagine a
state in which no “stranger” or foreigner should
have a footing on the sacred soil, and Israel should
dwell in solitary and preéminent exclusiveness.
If so, the idea again is of a more primitive kind
than the late date would suggest, esp. if we postulate
a prophet who had deeply studied earlier prophets,
to whom Jerus of the future was the religious me-
tropolis of the world, and Zion the place to which
all nations would flow (Isa 2 3; 56 7).

(f) “Day of Jeh”: A word must be said, in con-
clusion, in regard to the “day of Jeh’”’ which figures
so prominently in the Book of Joel. In whatever
sense it may originally have been employed,
whether betokening weal or woe, the expression
was an ancient one; for Amos refers to it as current
in his day (6 18); and almost all the prophets refer
to it in one way or another (Am 6 18-20; Isa 2
12; 13 6.9; 348; Jer 46 10; Lam 2 22; Ezk
30 3; Ob ver 15; Zeph 1 8.18; 2 2.3; Zec 14 1;
Mal 4 5). So far as it bears upon the date of Joel
the question is: How does his usage compare with
those of the other prophets? We find that he uses
the expression twice in connection with the visita-
tion of the locust (1 15; 2 1), once after speaking of
the outpouring of the Spirit (2 31), and once again
near the close of the book (3 14). Now, in regard
to the earliest occurrences, it will be perceived that
J. ison a lower plane than succeeding prophets. He
associates the approach of the day of the Lord with
a heavy visitation upon material nature, precisely
as the simple Oriental of the present day, on the
occurrence of an eclipse, or at a visitation of locust
or pestilence, begins to talk of the end of the world.
And, though the point of view is shifted, and the
horizon wider, at the close, it is to he remarked that
the highest point attained is the conception of the
day of the Lord as the deliverance and glorification
of Israel: there is not a hint of that day being a
time of testing and sifting of Israel itself, as in Amos
and elsewhere (Am & 18-20; Isa 2 12). In fact,
so far is he from going beyond the other prophets
in his conception, that we may say J. leaves the
matter at the point where Amos takes it up.


In view of all these perplexing questions, Professor
Ad. Merx had some reason for describing the Book
¥ f of ee Pa ee Ai ee ae
. View of zenskind) o exegesis; and he publishe

a fessor in 1879 a work, Die Prophetie des Joel
ores und ihre Ausleger von den aeltesten Zeiten
Merx bis zu den Reformatoren, in which, hesides
giving a history of the interpretation, he

combated the method hitherto employed, and punt forth
a novel view of his own. Concluding, on the grounds
usually maintained by the advocates of the late date,
that Joel ls post-exllian, he makes a comparison of the
book witb preceding prophetical lt., in order to show
that J. derived his ideas from a study of it, and esp.
that he followed step by step the prophecies of Ezekiel.
Now in Ezekiel’s outlook, the overflowing of Judaea by
the northern people, Gog, plays an important part (Ezk
ee re 39 11), and this explalns J.’s reference in


As to the precise date: not only is the second temple
standing, but the city is surrounded by a wall (2 9);
and this brings us down to the government of Nehemiah,
after 445 BC; and the book of Neh shows that other
prophets hesides Malachi lived_and found acceptance
In those days (Neh 6 7.14)._ The circumstances were
these. Not only the exile, but the restoration, is a
thing of the past. We are to think of Jerus and Judah
in the narrowest sense: the elders and all the Inhabitants
of the land are addressed, a sort of senatus populusque
Romanus, and with them are the priests presiding over
an orderly ritual service at the temple. Judah Is un-
affected by political movements; the conflict with the
Samaritans has died down; Judah is leading a quiet life,
of which nothing is recorded hecause there is nothing to
record; and the people of the ten tribes have practically
disappeared, being swallowed up among the heathen.
This undisturbed period is employed in literary labor,
as may be inferred from the well-known notice regarding
Nehemiah’s collection of books (2 Macc 2 13f), and
from the production of such works as Est, Jon, Koheleth,


Mal, Ch, Ezr-Neh, etc. The making of books (Eccl
12_12) had not come to an end. 3 2

But now, if the older prophets were seriously studied
(cf Dn) 9 2), what impression would they make on the
mind of a man like J.?. Was the daily life that followed
the time of Nehemiah in any degree a fulfilment of the
hopes of a Deutero-Isaiah, a Jeremiah, an Ezekiel, a
Zechariah? Could a member of the restored community
coutemplate without painful feelings the lamentable
condition of existence under the Pers government, the
limitation of the people to a narrow territory, the sepa-
ration from those still in the Dispersion, the irritation of
the worship of the half-heathen Samaritans, the mixed
marriages and general low condition, as contrasted with
the glowing pictures of the prophets who had spoken of
the last days? Such a contradiction between prophecy
and event must have disturhed the minds of the more
thoughtful; and so, while some said, ‘‘It is vain to serve
God" (Mal 8 14), ‘They that feared Jeh spake one with
another’’ (Mal 3 16), waiting in hope, believing that
the present restoration could not be the true and final
bringing back of the captivity. 5

To relieve his mind, J. will write a book, the result
of his study; and it must depict the full and final con-
summation. Living as he did, however, in quiet times,
he had not, like earlier prophets, a historical situation to
start from. Here, according to Merx, the genius of J.
comes into play. Seeking for a type of the end of the
world, which was to be the antitype, he found one in the
deliverance of Israel from Egypt in the distant past.
Just_as at that great crisis the people were rescued from
bondage and brought into a wide and fertile land, so in
the end Jeh would suhdue all Israel's enemies and place
them in a_noble land, uncontaminated by strangers,
while He Himself would he enthroned in majesty on
Zion. But just as that deliverance was ushered in hy
plagues, so also will he the “great day of Jen"; and asa
signal type of the wholesale destruction of Israel's ene-
mies, he seizes upon the plague of locusts and models
his introduction upon Ex 10 4ff. J. had, no doubt,
seen many a visitation of locusts; hut what we have
before us In chs ] and 2 is not actual description but
idealized picture, the groundwork of his eschatology.

Accordingly, in the view of Merx, the whole Book of
Joel is one piece. There is no historical transition at
2 10; in fact, there is no historical element in it at all.
The end of the book being apocalyptical, the beginning,
which forms with it a unity, must also relate to no event
in J.'s days, but moves likewise in the period at the close
of time. The people addressed are not the men of J.'s
day, hut those who shall be alive when “that day"' is
imminent: in a word, the reader is at 1 2 lifted into the
air and placed at the beginning of the final judgment, at
the moment when the apocalyptic locusts appear as
heralds of the day. ‘


Merx’s view may be taken as an extreme and
somewhat fanciful statement of the case for a late
post-exilian date; and it does not seem to have
found acceptance by the critics who start from a
historical basis. Merx himself is fully aware that
it is a revival of the allegorical and typical interpre-
tation which had its vogue in earlier stages of
exposition. But he defends himself on the ground
that it was not the ancients who imposed the alle-
gorical interpretation upon Scripture, but the
original writers who were the first typologists and
allegorists, as is notably seen in later books like
Ezk and Dni. Whatever opinion may be held‘ on
that subject, we must at least recognize the strongly
marked eschatology of the book. But this does
not of necessity imply a late date. It is no doubt
true that the fully developed eschatology, as we
see it in the apocalyptic literature of the extra-
canonical hooks, came in after the cessation of
prophecy proper. Yet prophecy, in its earliest
phases, contemplated the distant future, and had
its support in such an outlook. Professor A. B.
Davidson has said: “Isaiah is the creator of the


| eschatology of the OT and of Christianity, and it


comes from his hand in a form go perfect that his
successors can hardly add a sale touch to it”
(Expos T, V, 297). The ancient oracle, found both
in Isa and Mic (Isa 2 2-4; Mic 4 1-5), testifies
to the triumphant and far-reaching hope of the older
seers; and, before Isaiah’s time, both Amos (9 11-15)
and Hosea (14 4-8) have their outlook to the final
future. The remarkable thing about J., which
makes the determination of his date so difficult, is
that he seems now to go beyond and now to fall
short of other prophets. If he is later than Eze-


1695


kiel and Jeremiah, he has nothing to say of the
inclusion of Gentiles in the inheritance of Israel,
bat contemplates the final destruction of all Israel’s
enemies. If he is a contemporary of Malachi or
later, he is less legalistic than that prophet; and
whereas in Mal we see the beginning of the fading
away of prophecy, J. looks for the time when the
Spirit shall be poured out on all flesh, and the sons
and daughters shall prophesy (2 28).
_ It is this last element in the prophecy of J. that
links his book particularly with the NT, for St.
Peter quoted J.’s words in this passage
6. Connec- as fulfilled on the day of Pentecost,
tion with when the Spirit was poured forth on
the NT the assembled multitude (Acts 2 16 ff).
Yet, even as the OT prophets one after
another caught up the idea, unfolding and expand-
ing it, so the NT writers see the approach of the day
of the Lord in their own time (1 Thess 5 2; 2 Pet
3 10); for that day is always coming, always near,
though still in the future. St. Paul saw the whole
creation groaning and travailing in pain, as J. did,
and the pouring out of the Spirit at Pentecost was
part of, and also more than, the effusion seen by
J. What J. said he said truly, though he could not
say all. For “that day” has grown in significance
as the ages have rolled on; men have seen its ap-
proach in the various commotions and upheavals
of the world, depicting its features in the colors of
the changing times, now praying for it, now dread-
ing its approach; and how far from precision are our
thoughts in regard to it still! Yet, early or late,
unerring is the sure word of prophecy in its essential
burden. The concrete historical situations cramble
away and leave the eternal truth as fresh as ever:
“Jeh reigneth; let the earth rejoice’ (Ps 97 1);
it is the hopeful burden of OT prophecy, for “‘right-
eonsness and justice are the foundation of thy
throne” (Ps 89 14).

LirERaturReE (besides that cited above).—Credner, Der
Proph. Joel tibersetzt u. erkldrt (1831); Wuensche, Die
Weissagungen des Proph. Joel tibersetzt u. erkldrt (1872);
the comm. on the Minor Propncteee Pusey, Orelli, Keil,
Wellhausen, G. A. Smith; eyrick in Speaker's Com-
mentary; Nowack, in Handkommentar zum AT; Marti,
in Kurzer Hand-Commentar zum AT.

. JAMES ROBERTSON

JOELAH, jé-é’la (T2NPM, yo'e’lah, perhaps=
mop, yoelah, “may he avail!’): One of David's
recruits at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 7 [Heb 8]); a Benjamite
or perhaps a Judaean (see Cartis, Ch, 195 f).


JOEZER, jé-é'26r (MIP, yo'ezer, “Ieh is help”):
One of David’s Benjamite recruits at Ziklag,
though perhaps a Jaudaean (1 Ch 12 6 [Heb 7]).


JOGBEHAG, jog’bé-bi (71733>, yoghbehah): A
city in Gilead assigned to Gad and fortified by that
tribe (Nu 32 35). It lay on the line along which
Gideon chased the Midianites (Jgs 8 11), and the
indication there leaves no doubt that it is repre-
sented today by Ajbeihat. The name attaches to 3
groups of ruins which date from Rom times. The
position is about.7 miles N.W. of ‘Amman, and about
midway between that city and the town of es-Sall.
It stands 3,468 ft. above the level of the Mediter-
ranean.


Liverature.—Oliphant, Land of Gilead, 232; Baede-
ker-Socin, Pal.


JOGLI, jog’li (227, yoghli, perhaps=“led into
exile”): Father of Bukki, a Danite chief (Nu 34 22).
JOHA, jo/’ha (NM, yoha’, meaning unknown,
but perhaps=M8", yd’Gh, “Joah”’; see HPN, 283,


n. 4):
(1) A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 16).
(2) One of David’s mighty men (i Ch 11 45).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA eh


ohannine Theol.


JOHANAN, jé-ha’nan (j301, ydhanan, “Jeh
has been gracious”; Iwavav, Joandn; cf JEHOHANAN):

(1) Son of Kareah, and one of “‘the captains of
the forces who were in the fields” (i.e. probably
guerilla bands), who allied with Gedaliah, governor
of Judah, after the fall of Jeras, 586 BC (2 K 26 23;
Jer 40 7—48 7). He warned Gedaliah of the plot
of Ishmael ben Nethaniah, who was instigated by
the Ammonite king Baalis, to murder the governor;
but the latter refused to believe him nor would he
grant J. permission to slay Ishmael (40 8-16). After
Ishmael had murdered Gedaliah and also 70 northern
pilgrims, J. went in pursnit. He was joined by the
onwilling followers of Ishmael, but the murderer
escaped. Thereupon J. settled at Geruth-Chimham
near Bethlehem (ch 41). As Ishmael’s plan was to
take the remnant to the land of Ammon, so that of
J. and his fellow-chiefs was to go to Egypt. They
consulted the Divine oracle through Jeremiah, and
received the answer that they should remain in Judah
(ch 42). But the prophet was accused of giving
false connsel and of being influenced by Baruch. The
chiefs then resolved to go to Egypt, and forced Jere-
miah and Barnch to accompany them (ch 43).

(2) The eldest son of King Josiah (1 Ch 3 15),
apparently = ‘‘Jehoahaz” (2 K 23 30-33).

(3) Son of Elioenai, and a Davidic post-exilic
prince (1 Ch 3 24).

(4) Father of the Azariah who was priest in
Solomon’s time (1 Ch 6 9.10 [Heb 5 35.36]).

(5) A Benjamite recruit of David at Ziklag, bat
perhaps a Judaean (1 Ch 12 4 [Heb 5}).

(6) A Gadite recrnit of David at Ziklag (1 Ch
12 12 [Heb 13]).

(7) Heb has “Jehohanan,” an Ephraimite chief
(2 Ch 28 12).

(8) A returned exile (Ezr 8 12) = ‘‘Joannes’’(1 Esd
8 38, AV “Johannes”’).

(9) Neh 12 22.23=JeHonanan, (3).

Daviv Francis Roperts
JOHANNES, jé-han’es, jé-han’éz. See Joannzs.


JOHANNINE, jé-han’in,-in, THEOLOGY, THE:
I. Tus ANTECEDENTS
1. Personality of Writer
2. Earlier NT Writings
3. Christian Experience and Teaching of History
4. Widening Contact with Gentile World
5. The Odes of Solomon
6. Antagonism to Gnostic Speculation
Il. Tas Divine Narvre
1. God Is Spirit
Ged Is Life

3. God Is Light .

4. Ethical Attributes—God Is Righteous

5. God Is Love
(1) The Love of God—

(a) Primarily a Disposition
(6) Embodied in Christ's Self-Sacrifice
(c) Love in Redemption
(2) Love Is God's Nature
III. Tus INcAaRNATION

1. Historical Antecedents of the Logos-Doctrine

2. The Logos-Doctrine in St. John

3. oe Learns ton as Delineated In the Fourth

ospe

4. The Incarnation In the First Epistle

5. Practical Implications of the Incarnation

IV. Tue Hory Spirit .

1. The Work of the Spirit—in the Fourth Gospel
Perpetuates, but also Intensifies the Con-
sciousness of Christ

2. In the First Epistle
(1) A Divine Teacher
(2) Other Aspects 4

3. The Person of the Splrit
His Deity Implied

V. Doctrine oF SIN AND PROPITIATION

1. Sin

2, Propitlation
(1) In the Gospel
(2) In the Epistle
(3) One with NT Teaching

VI. Evernat Lire

1. Ethical Rather than Eschatological

2. Metaphysical Aspect
Reply to Criticism


»


Johannine Theol. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1696


3. Development of Doctrine
(1) Source in God y
(2) Mediated by Christ
(3) Through the Spirit _
(4) The Diviue ‘' Begetting’’
(5) The ‘‘Children of God”
(6) The Divine Abiding
VII. Homan Natocre anp Its REGENERATION
1. The World
2. Two Classes in the Human Race


VIII. Tae Cnurcn ann SackaMENTS
1. The Church
2. The Sacraments
(1) Baptism
(2) The Lord’s Supper
IX. Escuaatoroor
1. Type of Thought Idealistic
. Yet History Not Ignored
. Nor Eschatology
. Eschatological Ideas
(1) Eternal Life
(2) Antichrist
3) Resurrection
{3} Judgment |
(5) The Parousia 4
(a) A ‘'Manifestation”’
(b) Reiation to Believers


Literature
The materials for the following sketch of the
Johannine theology are necessarily drawn from the
Fourth Gospel and the Epp., chiefly the First Ep.,
of St. John. The question of authorship is not here
considered (see articles on the GospEeL and on the
Epp. of St. Jonn). These writings, whether by the
same or by different authors, are equally saturated
with that spiritual and theological atmosphere,
equally characterized by that type of thought which
we call Johannine, and which presents an interpreta-
tion of Christianity scarcely less distinctive and
original than Paulinism. Where there are differences
in the point of view, these will be indicated.
dL. The Antecedents of the Theology.—To attempt
a full account of the historical sources and ante-
cedents of the Johannine theology is
1. Person- beyond the scope of the present article;
ality of but they may be briefly indicated.
Writer Much must be attributed to the per-
sonality of the great anonymous
writer to whom we directly owe this latest develop-
ment of NT thought. Only a thinker of first rank
among the idealists and mystics, a mind of the
Platonic order, moving instinctively in the world
of supersensnous realities, absorbed in the passion
for the infinite, possessing 1n a superlative degree the
gift of spiritual intuition, could under any conditions
have evolved a system of thonght having the special
characteristics of this theology.
Yet with all his originality the builder has raised
his structure upon the foundation already laid in
the teaching represented by the earlier


Rob)


2. Earlier NT writings. The synoptic tradition,
NT though freshly interpreted, is pre-
Writings supposed. At certain points there is


a strong affinity with the Ep. to the
He. In the main, however, the Johannine doctrine
may. be said to be a natural and inevitable devel-
opment of Paulinism—the conclusion to which the
earlier writer’s mind is visibly moving in e.g. the
Ep. to the Col. ‘
Among the influences which have stimulated and
guided this development, the first place belongs to
the natural growth of Christian ex-
3. Christian perience and the teaching of history.
Experience In the closing decades of the 1st cent.,
and Teach- Christianity was compelled by the
ing of force of events to liberate itself more
History completely from the husk of Jewish
Messianism in which its Divine seed
had first been deposited. The faith of the first
Christian generation in the Messiahship of Jesus
and the triumph of His cause had expressed itself
(necessarily so, under the historical conditions) in
vivid expectation of His Second Coming. He was


only waiting behind the clouds, and would speedily
return to the earth for the restitution of all things
(Acts 8 21). Butafter the fall of Jerus this primitive
apocalypticism became, with the passing years, more
and more discredited; and the Christian faith had
either to interpret itself afresh, both to its own con-
sciousness and to the world, or confess itself “such
stuff as dreams are made of.” It would be diffi-
cult to overestimate the service which the Johan-
nine theology must have rendered in this hazard-
ous transition by transferring the emphasis of
Christian faith from the apocalyptic to the spirit-
ual, and leading the church to a profounder reali-
zation of its essential and inalienable resources in
the new spiritual life it possessed through the ever-
living Christ. Eternal life was not merely a future
felicity, but_a present possession; the most real
coming of Christ, His coming in the Spirit. The
Kingdom of God is here: the eternal is now. Such
ue the great message of St. John to his age, and to
all ages, ;
In another direction, the widening contact of
Christianity with the gentile world had stimulated
the development of doctrine. A. dis-
4. Widen- entanglement from Jewish nationalism,
ing Contact more complete than even St. Paul had
with Gentile accomplished, had become a@ necessity.
World lf Christianity was to find a home and
a sphere of conquest in the Gr-Rom
world—to recreate Enropean thought and civili-
zation—the person of Christ must be interpreted
as having a vastly larger significance than that of
the Jewish Messiah. That this necessity hastened
the process of thought which reached its goal in the
Logos-doctrine of St. John cannot well be doubted.
The way had so far been prepared by Philo and the
Jewish-Alexandrian school. And while it is prob-
ably mere coincidence that Ephesus, with which the
activity of St. John’s later years is associated by
universal tradition, was also the city of Heraclitus,
who, 500 years earlier, had used the term Logos to
express the idea of an eternal and universal Reason,
immanent in the world, there is as little room as
there can be motive for questioning that in the
Johannine theology Christian thought has been in-
fluenced and fertilized at certain points by contact
with Hellenism.
On the other hand it is possible that this Influence


has heen overrated. Fresh material for the investlgation
of the sources and connections of the Jo-


5. The eee pueoleey i pyaised at the

recent discovery of the Odes of Solomon
Odes of (J Rendel Harfis, M.A., Odes and Pools
Solomon = of Solomon, Cambridge, 1909; Adolf Har-


nack, Ein jidisch-christliches Psalmbuch

aus dem ersten Jahrhundert, Leipzig, 1910). This col-
lection of religious poems is regarded by its dis-
coverer, Rendel Harris, as the work of a writer who, while
not a Jew, was a member of a community of Chris-
tians who were for the most part of Jewish extraction
and beliefs. But though the Odes in their present form
contain distinctly Christian elements (references, e.g,
to the Son, the Incarnation, the Virgin Birth, the Pas-
sion, the Descensus ad inferos), Harnack's closer analysls
tends to the conclusion that in their original form they
were purely Jewish, and that they have heen adapted to
Christian use by a poe of interpolation. For the
original work Harnack gives as a possihle date the he-
ginning of the Christian era, the Ohristlan redaction fall-
ing within the lst cent. Harnack recognizes a possihlllty
that the redactor may have been acquainted with the
Fourth Gospel. The religious feeling of the writer is
throughoutindividual and mystical, rather than national-
istic and Messianic. The characteristic atmosphere is
strongly Johannine (we may quote in illustration only the
nohle sentence from the 12th ode: “The dwelling-place
of the Word }s man; and its truth is Love"). The Odes
have, in common with the Johannine writings, such lead-
ing conceptions as ‘‘ grace,” ‘' believing,”’ ‘‘knowledge,"’
truth,” “light,” “living water,” ‘life’ (for a full
exhibitlon of the parallelisms, see article by R. H.
Strachan, Expos T, October, 1910). Harnack asserts
deliherately (p. 99) that in the Odes we possess ‘the
presuppositions of the Johannine theology, apart from
the historical Jesus Christ, and without any Messianic
doctrine.” More recent criticism of the Odes, however,


1697


has resuited in great diversity of view regarding their
origin. They have been assigaed to Gnosticism, and on
the contrary to Montanilsm; and again are described
(Bernard) as Christian baptismal hymns. In view of
this division of critical oplnion, ail thatcan be said in the
meantime is that the Odes testify to a collateral mystical
development, the recognition of which necessitates a re-
visioa of the estimates which have been made regarding
the extent to which the Johannine theology is indebted
to Hellenistic philosophy.


One other factor in this theological development
remains to be mentioned—antagonism to gnostic
speculation. In the Gospel this has
6. Antago- left not a few traces, in the way both
nism to of statement and omission; in the lst
Gnostie Ep. scarcely any other danger to the
Speculation faith and life of the church is appre-
_ hended than the spreading influence
of gnostic tenets (see Jonn, Epistu@s oF). St.
John himself has been charged with gnostic tend-
encies; but the truth rather is that to him Gnosti-
cism must have been the more hateful and have
seemed the more dangerous because its conceptions
were at some points the caricature of hisown. In
it he saw the real Antichrist, the “spirit of error,”
giving fatally misleading solutions of those prob-
lems which the human mind can never leave alone,
but regarding which the one true light is the historic
Christ. Gnosticism had lost all historical sense,
all touch with reality. It moved in a world of
sheer mythology and speculation; history became
allegory; the incarnate Christ a phantasm. St.
John took his stand only the more firmly upon his-
torical fact, insisted the more strenuously upon the
verified physical reality of the Incarnation. In
many of its adherents Gnosticism had lost almost
completely the moral sense; St. John the more
vehemently asserts the inviolable moral purity of the
Divine nature and of the regenerate life which is
derived from it. Gnostic dualism had set God
infinitely far from men as transcendent Being; St.
John brings God infinitely near to men as Love;
and sweeps away the whole complicated mythology
of gnostic emanations, aeons and archons, by his
doctrine of the Logos, coeternal and coequal with
the Father, incarnate in Jesus, through whom
humanity is made to participate in the very life of
God—the life of all love, purity and truth.
il. The Divine Nature.—One of the glories of the
Johannine theology is its doctrine of God, its de-
lineation of the Divine nature. This
1. GodIs is given in a series of intuitional
Spirit affirmations which, though the manner
of statement indicates no attempt at
correlation, unite to form a complete organic con-
ception. The first of these affirmations defines what
is the Divine order of being: God is Spirit Wn 4
24). The central significance of this inexhaustible
saying is defined by the context. The old local
worships, whether at Jerus or Samaria, had implied
some special local mode of Divine presence; and
this naturally suggested, if it did not necessitate,
the idea of some kind of materiality in the Divine
nature. But God is spirit; and true worship must
be an intercourse of spirit with spirit, having rela-
tion to no local or material, but only to moral con-
ditions. Thus the concept of the Divine spiritual-
ity is both moral and metaphysical. The religious
relation to God, as it exists for Christian faith, rests
upon the fact that the Supreme Being is essentially
moral, but also omnipresent and omniscient—the
Divine Spirit whose will and percipiency act imme-
diately and simultaneously at every point of exist-
ence. Such a Being we utterly lack the power to
comprehend. But only such a Being can he God,
can satisfy our religious need—a Being of whom we
are assured that nothing that is in us, good or evil,
true or false, and nothing that concerns us, past,
present or future, is hid from His immediate vision


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Johannine Theol.


or barred against the all-pervading operation of His


will. To realize that God is such a Being is to be
assured that He can he worshipped with no mechani-
cal ritual or formal observance: they that worship
Him must worship Him “‘in spirit and in truth.”

God, who is spirit, is further conceived as Life,

Light, Righteousness and Love. Righteousness

and Love are the primary ethical quali-
2. GodIs_ ties of the Divine nature; Life the
Life energy by which they act; Light the
self-revelation in which they are mani-
fested throughout the spiritual universe. God is
Life. He is the ultimate eternal Reality. He was
“in the beginning” (Jn 1 1), or “from the begin-
ning” (1 Jn 11; 213). These statements are
made of the Logos, therefore a fortiori of God. But
the Divine nature is not mere abstract being, infi-
nite and eternal; it is being filled with that inscru-
table elemental energy which we call Life. In
God this energy of life is self-originating and self-
sustaining (“The Father hath life in himeelf,”
Jn & 26), and is the source of all life (Jn 1 3.4, RV
m). For every finite being life is union with God
according to its capacity.

But the lower potencies of the creative Life do
not come within the scope of the Johannine the-
ology. The term is restricted in usage to its high-
est ethical significance, as denoting that life of per-
fect, holy love which is “the eternal life,”? the pos-
session of which in fellowship with God is the chief
end for which every spiritual nature exists. The
elements present in the conception of the Divine
life are these: (1) The ethical: the life God lives
is one of absolute righteousness (1 Jn 2 29), and
perfect love (1 Jn 49). (2) The metaphysical:
the Divine life is nothing else than the Divine
nature itself regarded dynamically, as the ground
and source of all its own activities, the animating
principle or energy which makes Divine righteous-
ness and love to he not mere abstractions hut active
realities. (3) In Johannine thought the Divine
life is esp. an energy of self-reproduction. It is
this by inherent moral necessity. Love cannot
but seek to heget love, and righteousness to heget
righteousness, in all heings capable of them. With
St. John this generative activity of the Divine
nature holds a place of unique prominence. It is
this that constitutes the Fatherhood of God.
Eternally the Father imparts Himself to the Son
(Jn 5 26), the Word whose life from the hegin-
ning consisted in His relation to the Father (1 Jn
1 2). To men eternal life is communicated as the
result of a Divine hegetting (Jn 1 13; 3 5; 1 Jn
2 29; 3 9; 4 7, etc) by which they hecome ‘‘chil-
dren of God” (Jn 112; 1 Jn 31, etc). (4) But
God is not only the transcendent final source, He
is also the immanené source of life. This is clearly
implied in all those passages, too numerous to be
quoted, which speak of God’s abiding in us and our
abiding in Him. Life is maintained only through
a continuous vitalizing union with Him, as of the
branches with the vine (Jn 15 1-6). It must be
observed, however, that St. John nowhere merges the
idea of God in that of life. God is personal; life is
impersonal. Theeternal life is the element common
to the personality of God, of the Logos, and of those
who are the “children of God.’ Any pantheistic
manner of thinking is as foreign to St. John as to
every other Bib. writer.

God is not life only; He is light also (1 Jn 1 5).
That God is life means that He is and is self-impart-
ing; that He is light means that the
Divine nature is by inward necessity
self-revealing. (1) As the essential
property of light is to shine, so God
by His very nature of righteousness and love is
necessitated to reveal Himself as being what He is,


3. God Is
Light


Johannine Theol, THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1698


so as to become the Truth (4 é\7#Gea, hé alétheia),
the object of spiritual perception (yivdexev, gind-
skein), and the source of spiritual illumination to
every being capable of receiving the revelation.
“God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.”’
In God there ig nothing that hides, nothing that is
hidden. The Divine character is utterly trans-
parent—goodness without a shadow of evil. (2)
This self-revelation of God is given in its perfect
form in Jesus, the incarnate Word, who is the light
of men (Jn 1 4), the light of the world (Jn 8 12;
9 5), the true light (Jn 19; 1 Jn 28). (8) Itis
in their illumination by this Divine light that there
exists, even for the sinful, a medium of moral fellow-
ship with God. We can “come to the light” (Jn
3 19-21) and “walk in the light” (1 Jn 1 7). In
the translucent atmosphere of the truelight, we, even
while morally imperfect and impure, may come to
have a common view of aspiritnal facts with God
(1 Jn 1 8-10; 29.10). This is the basis of a
spiritual religion, and distingnishes Christianity from
all irrational superstitions and unethical ritualisms.

In gnostic speculation the Divine nature was
conceived as the ultimate spiritual essence, in eternal

separation from all that is material
4, Ethical and mutable. But while St. John
Attributes also, as we have seen, conceives it in
this way, with him the conception is
primarily and intensely ethical. The Divine nature,
the communication of which is life and the revela-
tion of which is light, has, as its two great attributes,
Righteousness and Love; and with his whole soul
St. John labors to stamp on the minds of men that
only in righteousness and love can they walk in the
light and have fellowship in the life of God. It is
characteristic of St. John’s intuitional fashion of
thought that there is no effort to correlate these two
aspects of the ethical perfection of God; but, broadly,
it may be said that they are respectively the nega-
tive and the positive. Love is the sum of all that
is positively right; righteousness the antithesis of
all that is wrong, in character and conduct.

God is righteous.—(1) That such righteousness—
antagonism to all sin—belongs to, or rather is, the
moral nature of God, and that this lies at the basis
of Christian ethics is categorically affirmed. “If
ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every
one also that doeth righteousness is begotten of
him” (1 Jn 2 29). (2) This righteousness which
belongs to the inward character of God extends
necessarily to all His actions: “If we confess our
sing, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our
sins’ (1 Jn 1.9). Whenon the ground of Christ’s
propitiation God forgives those who by confessing
their sins make forgiveness possible, He acts right-
eously; and because He acts righteously, He acts
also faithfully, that is, self-consistently. He does
not “deny himself” (2 Tim 2 13), but does what
is in accordance with His own unchangeable char-
acter. (3) God’s righteousness is related impera-
tively to the whole moral activity of His creatures,
rendering sin inadmissible in them—inadmissible
de jure in all, de facto in all who are “begotten of
him.” This St. John maintains with unexampled
vigor (cf 1 Jn 2 29; 3 68-10; 6 18). It is true,
however, that in its doctrine of Divine righteous-
ness the Johannine theology makes no notable con-
tribution to the sum of NT thought, but simply
restates in peculiarly forceful fashion the conception
of it which pervades the whole Bib. revelation.

(1) The love of God.—It is far otherwise with
the next of the great affirmations which constitute

its doctrine of God: God is Love.
5. GodIs Here Gospel and Epistle rise to the
Love summit of all revelation, and for the
first time clearly and fully enunciate
that truth which is the innermost secret of existence.


(a) Primarily a disposition: Love is primarily
a disposition, a moral quality of the will. What
this quality is is indicated by the fact that the typi-
cal object of love in human relation is invariably
our “brother.” It is the disposition to act toward
others as it ig natural for those to do who have all
interests in common and who realize that the full
self-existence of each can be attained only in a
larger corporate existence. It is the mysterious
power by which egoism and altruism meet and
coalesce, the power to live not only for another but
in another, to realize one’s own fullest life in the
fulfilment of other lives. It is self-communication
which is also self-assertion. ; :

(b) Embodied in Christ’s self-sacrifice: In history »
love has its one perfect embodiment in the self-
sacrifice of Christ. “Hereby know we love [ie.
perceive what love is], because he laid down his
life for us’ (1 Jn 3 16). The world had never
been without love; but till Jesus Christ came and
laid down Hislife for the men that hated and mocked
and slew him, it had not known what love in its
greatness and purity could be. : :

(c) Love in redemption: But here history is the
invisible translated into the visible. The self-
sacrifice of Christ in laying down His life for us is
the manifestation (1 Jn 4 9), under the conditions
of time and sense, of the love of God, eternal and
invisible. In the closely related || passages (Jn 3
16; 1 Jn 4 9.10) this is declared with matchless
simplicity of statement. The Divine love is mani-
fested in the magnitude of its gift—“‘his Son, his only
begotten” (elsewhere the title is only ‘‘the Son” or
“his Son” or “the Son of God’’). Other gifts are
only tokens of God’s love; in Christ its all is be-
stowed (cf Rom 8 32; Gen 22 12). The love of
God is manifested further in the purpose of its gift—
“that whosoever believeth on him should not perish,
but have eternal life.” It is the self-determination
of God, not only to rescue men from what is the
sum and finality of all evils, but to impart the
supreme and eternal good. But again, the love of
God is manifested in the means by which this pur-
pose is achieved. THis son is sent as ‘‘the propitia-
tion for our sins.” God shrinks not from the utter-
most cost of redemption; but in the person of His
Son humbles Himself and suffers unto blood that
He may take upon Himself the load of human
guilt and shame. And the last element in the full
conception of Divine love is its objects: ‘‘God so
loved the world”; ‘Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us.” Its ineffable
mystery reveals itself in its absolute spontaneity,
its self-origination. Its fires are gelf-kindled; it
shines forth in its purest splendors upon the un-
attractive and unworthy. Such is the conception
St. John sets before us. In_ this entirely sponta-
neous, self-determined devotion of God to sinful
men; this Divine passion to rescue them from sin,
the supreme evil, and to impart to them eternal life,
the supreme good; in this, which is evoked not by
their worthiness but by thcir need, and goes to the
uttermost length of sacrifice in bearing the utter-
most burden of their sin and its inevitable conse-
quences; in this, which is forever revealed in the
mission of Jesus Christ, God’s only begotten Son,
is love.

(2) Love is God’s naturex—And God is love
(1 Jn 4 8.16). (@) God is love essentially. Love
is not one of God’s moral attributes, but that from
which they all proceed, and in which they all unite.
The spring of all His actions islove. (b) Therefore
also His love is universal. In a special sense He
loves those who are spiritually His children (Jn 14
23); but His undivided and essential love is given
also to the whole world (Jn 8 16; 1 Jn 2 2). That
is St. John’s great truth. He does not attempt to


1699


reconcile with it other apparently conflicting truths
in his theological scheme; possibly he was not
conacious of any need to do so. But of this he is
sure—God is love. That fact must, in ways we
cannot yet discern, include all other facts. (c)
The love of God is eternal and unchangeable; for it
does not depend on any merit or reciprocation in
its object, but overflows from its own infinite ful-
ness. We may refuse to it the inlet into our life
which it seeks (Jn 3 19; 5 40); we may so identify
ourselves with evil as to turn it into an antagonistic
force. But as our goodness did not call it forth,
neither can our evil cause it to cease. (d) If love
is an essential, the essential attribute of God, it
follows that we cannot ultimately conceive of God
as a single simple personality. It is at this point
that the fuller Johannine conception of multiple
personality in the Godhead becomes most helpful,
enabling us to think of the Divine life in itself not
as an eternal solitude of self-contemplation and self-
love, but as a life of fellowship (Jn 1 1; 1 Jn 1 2).
The Godhead is filled with love. “The Father
loveth the Son” (Jn 3 35); and the prayer of the
Son for His followers is ‘‘that the love wherewith
thou lovedst me may bein them” (Jn 17 26). The
eternal giving and receiving of Divine love between
the Father and the Son is, in the Johannine theology,
an essential element of the Divine nature.

Hl, The Incarnation.—The 2d great coutribu-
tion of the Johannine writings to the development
of Christian theology is their doctrine of Christ—
the latest and most deliberate effort within NT
times to relate intellectually the church’s faith in
Jesus to its faith in God. In these writings the
superhuman personality of Jesus is expressed by
three titles which are used as practically synony-
mous—“the Christ,” “the Son” (‘Son of God,”
“only begotten Son of God”), the “Word”? (Logos).
The last alone is distinctively Johannine.

Historically, the Logos-doctrine of St. John has
undoubted links of connection with certain_specu-
lative developments both of Gr and
Heb thonght. The Heraclitean use
of the term “Logos” (see above, I) to
express the idea of an eternal and all-
embracing Reason immanent in the
world was continued, while the con-
ception was further elaborated, by the
Stoics. On the other hand, the later developments
of Heb thought show an increasing tendency to
personify the self-revealing activity of God under
such conceptions as the Angel, Glory, or Name of
Jeh, to attach a peculiar significance to the ““Word”’
(m@' mera’) by which He created the heaven and the
earth, and to describe “Wisdom” (Job, Prov) in
something more than a figurative sense as His agent
and eoworker. These approximations of Gr pan-
theism and Heb monotheism were more verbal than
real; and, naturally, Philo’s attempt in his doctrine
of the Logos to combine philosophies so radically
divergent was less successful than 1t was courageous.
How far, and whether directly or indirectly, St.
John is indebted to Philo and his school, are ques-
tions to which widely different answers have been
given; but some obligation, probably indirect,
cannot reasonably be denied. It is evident, indeed,
that both the idea and the term ‘‘Logos” were
current in the Christian circles for which his Gospel
and First Ep. were immediately written; in both
its familiarity is assumed. Yet the _Johannine
doctrine has little in common with Philo’s except
the name; and it is just in its most essential fea-
tures that it is most original and distinct. E

As the OT begins with the affirmation, “In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth,
so the Fourth Gospel begins with the similar affirma-
tion, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word


1. Histor-
ical Ante-
cedents of
the Logos-
Doctrine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Johannine Theol.


was with God, and the Word was God” (Jn 1 1).
The Word was the medium of Divine action in crea-
tion (Jn 1 3). Ia the Word was


2. The life, not merely self-existing but self-
Logos- imparting, so that it became the light
Doctrine in of men (Jn 1 4)—the true light, which,
St. John coming into the world lighteth every

man (Jn 19). And finally it is de-


clared that this Divine Word became flesh and
tabernacled among us, so that ‘‘we beheld his glory,
glory as of the only begotten from the Father, full
of grace and truth” (Jn 1 14). Here faith in Jesus
as Divine has been traced back to, and grounded
in, a duality within the Godhead itself. In the
twofold mode of the Divine existence, it is seen that
there is God who is just God (so to gay), God in
Himself; and there is God-with-God, God who is
God's other self, God going forth from Himself in
thought and action. The first withont the second
would be essence without manifestation, mind
without utterance, light without effulgence, life
without life-giving, fatherhood without sonship.
It is seen that within the Divine Being there is one
through whom, as there is also one from whom, all
Divine energy goesforth. Above all it is seen that
there is a Divine mode of existence in which it is
inherently possible and natural for God to be imme-
diately related to created being and even to become
incarnate in humanity, as there is also a mode of
Divine existence which cannot be immediately
communicated or revealed to created life. Thus
the Johannine doctrine is: first, that the Logos is
personal and Divine, having a ground of personal
being within the Divine nature (prés tén theén, “‘in
relation to God”); and, second, that the Logos
peosine flesh, was and is incarnate in the historical
esus.

In the Gospel the term “Logos” does not recur after
the opening verses; yet the thesis of the Prologue,
so far from being irrelevant, domi-


3. The In- nates the entire biographical presen-
carnation tation. The creative and cosmic sig-
as Delin- nificance of the Logos-Christ is natu-


eated in the rally in the background; but it may


Fourth be said of the Gospel that “the Word
Gospel became flesh’ is ita text, and all the

rest—miracle, incident, discourse—is
comment. On the one hand, the reality of the


“becoming flesh”’ is emphasized (e.g. Jn_ 4 6; 11 35;
19 1.2.3.17.28.34.38-40; 20 20.27). On the other
hand, the human vesture only reveals the Divine
glory within. On earth, Jesus isstill ‘‘the Son of man,
who is in heaven” (3 13); the perfect revelation of
the Father (14 9); the light of the world (8 12);
the way, the truth and the life (14 6); the resur-
rection (11 26); the final judge (5 22) and Saviour
(4 42; 6 40) of men; the supreme moral author-
ity (13 34; 14 15.21); the hearer of prayer (14
13.14); the giver of the Spirit (7 38.39; 16 7; 20
22); endowed with all the prerogatives of God (8 23;
10 30.36-38).
In the First Ep. the central thesis is the complete,
personal, and permanent identity of the historical
Jesus with the Divine Being who is
4. The the Word of Life (1 1), the Christ
Incarnation (4 2), the Son of God (5 5). This
in the First is maintained in a vigorous polemic
Epistle against certain heretical teachers whom
the writer calls “antichrists,’? who in
docetic fashion denied that Jesus is the Christ
(2 22), or, more definitely, the ‘Christ. come in the
flesh” (4 3), and who asserted that He “came” by
water only and not by blood also (5 6; see Jonn,
EristLes oF). Against this doctrine of a merely
apparent or temporary association of Jesus with
the Christ St. John bears vehement testimony.
“Who is the liar but he that denieth that Jesus is


Johannine Theol. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


the Christ?” (2 22). ‘Every spirit that confesseth
Jesus as Christ come in the flesh is of God: and
every spirit that confesseth not Jesus is not of God’
(4 2.3). ‘‘Who is he that overcometh the world,
but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus
Christ; not with the water only, but with the water
and with the blood” (5 5.6). These passages all
promulgate the same truth in substantially the
same way. Without ceasing to be what He is, the
Christ, the Son of God, has become Jesus; and
Jesus, without ceasing to be truly human, is the Son
of God. As to the manner of the incarnation—by
what process of self-emptying or by what con-
junction of Divine-human attributes the eternal
Son became Jesus—the Johannine writings, like the
NT everywhere, are silent. They proclaim Jesus
Christ as human and Divine; but the distinguish-
ing of what in Him was human and what Divine,
or whether the one is distinct from the other, this
they do not even consider. Gnosticism drew such
a distinction; St. John does not. His one truth is
that Jesus is the Son of God and the Son of God is
Jesus, and that in Him the life of God was mani-
fested (1 2) and is given (6 11) to men.
In this truth, viewed in its practical consequences,
St. John sees the core of the church’s faith and the
root and safeguard of its life. (a)
6. Practical This alone secures and guarazitees the
Implications Christian revelation of God; with its
of the In- denial that revelation is canceled.
carnation ‘‘Whosoever denieth the Son, the same
hath not the Father’ (2 23). (6)
Above all, it is only in the life and death of Jesus,
the incarnate Son, that we possess a valid revelation
of God’s self-sacrificing love. ‘Herein was the love
of God manifested in us, that God hath sent his
. . .. Son into the world that we might live through
him” (4 9). With the denial of this the Christian
ethic is drained of its very life-blood. There was
no merely external and accidental connection be-
tween Docetism and the moral indifferentism of
the Gnostic. The natural result of making man’s
salvation easy, so to say, for God, was to make it
easy for man also—salvation by creed without con-
duct (2 4.6; 3 7), knowledge without love (4 8),
or love that paid its debts with goodly phrases and
empty words (3 17.18). A docetic Christ meant
docetic Christianity. (c) Finally, St. John sees in
the incarnation the only possibility of a Divine
redemption. It was not for a word or a formula he
was concerned, but for the raising of humanity to
Divine life through the God-man. The ultimate
significance of the incarnation of the Son is that in
Him the eternal life of God has flowed into our
humanity and become a fountain of regenerative
power to as many as receive Him (Jn 112). “He
that hath the Son hath the life; he that hath not the
Son of God hath not the life’ (1 Jn 5 12). This
is the center of the Johannine Gospel—a Divine-
human Christ, who stands in a unique, vital rela-
tion to men, reproducing in them His own character
and experiences as the vine reproduces itsclf in the
branches, doing that, the mysterious reality of which
is only expressed, not explained, when it is said
that He is our “life” (Jn 14 19.20; 16 5).
IV. The Holy Spirit.—In one direction the doc-
trine of the Holy Spirit is uniquely developed in
the Johannine writings. The concep-
1. The tion of the Spirit as the agent of
Work of the Christ’s presence with and_ activity
Spirit—in_ in the church is presented with a ful-
the Fourth ness and clearness unequaled in the
Gospel NT. The departing Christ promises
to His friends a new presence, different
from His own in that it was to be not a bodily but
a spiritual presence, and yet really His own—a


1700


presence in which all and more than all the effects
of His bodily presence would be perpetuated (Jn
14 18; 16 22). In truth, it was expedient for
them that He should go away, in order that this
other Paraclete should come (16 7). In the body
His presence with His followers had been local and
intermittent; in the Spirit He would come to take
up His abode with them forever (14 16). Formerly
He had been still external to them, but now was
not only to dwell with them, but to be in them (14
17). Instead of the external voice of their Teacher
addressing to them the words of eternal life, the
should possess the very Spirit of truth (14 17), a well-
spring of illumination from within, giving them an
“understanding” to know Him that is true (1 Jn
6 20); and instead of His visible example before
their eyes, an inward community of life with Him
like that of the vine and the branches. The com-
plete, vital, permanent union of Christ and His
people, which had been prevented by the necessary
limitations of a local, corporeal state of existence,
would be attained, when for this there was sub-
stituted the direct action of spirit upon spirit.

Perpetuates, but also intensifies the consciousness
of Christ—Thus the function of the Spirit which is
chiefly emphasized in the Johannine writings is that
by which He perpetuates but also intensifies, en-
lightens, and educates the consciousness of Christ
in the church and in the Christian life. In this
respect His nature is the opposite of that of the
Logos, the self-revealing God. The Holy Spirit
never reveals Himself to human consciousness; He
reveals the Son and the Father through the Son.
His operations are wholly secret. and inscrutable,
known only by their result (Jn 3 8). He is the
silent inward monitor and remembrancer of the
disciples (Jn 14 20); the illuminator, the revealer
of Christ (16 14); aspirit of witness who both Him-
self bears witness concerning Christ to His people
and makes of them ready and joyful witness-bearers
(15 26.27); a guide by whom a steady growth in
knowledge is secured, leading gradually on to the
full truth of Christ (16 12.13); a spirit of con-
viction working in men an immediate certainty of
the truth regarding sin and righteousness, and the
Divine judgment which marks their eternal antag-
onism (16 8-11).

In the Ep. we find the promise of the Gospel
accomplished iu actual experience. There is no

reference to the manifold charismata of


2. Inthe the first age, the prophetic afflatus
First excepted (1 Jn 41). But whether
Epistle through the prophetic ‘‘medium’” or


the normal Christian consciousness,
the function of the Spirit is always to “teach” or
to ‘‘witness” concerning Christ. This is finely
brought out in the parallelism of 1 Jn 5 6: ‘This
[Jesus Christ] is he that came’ (once for all fulfilling
the Messiah’s mission); “It is the Spirit that
beareth witness” (ever authenticating its Divine
origin, interpreting its purpose and applying its
results). The specific testimony the Spirit bears
to Christ is defined (1 Jn 4 2.3). “Hereby know
ye the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesseth
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is af God:
and every spirit that confesseth not Jesus is not
of God.”

(1) A Divine Teacher.—The gift of the Spirit is
an “anointing from the Holy One” (1 Jn 2 20);
and the result of this “anointing” is that “ye
know all things” (or that “ye all have knowledge”;
the reading is doubtful), and ‘need not that any
one teach you” (2 27). The apostle's comfort
concerning his readers, encompassed as they are by
the snares of Antichrist, is that they have a Divine
Teacher, who continually enlightens their under-
standing, strengthens their convictions and minis-


1701


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Johannine Theol.


ters to them an invincible assurance of the truth of
the Gospel. ‘The anointing abideth in you... .
and teacheth you concerning all things.’ The
spirit is not a source of independent revelation, but
makes the revelation of Christ effectual. The
truth is placed beyond all reach of controversy and
passes into absolute knowledge: “Ye know all
things.” It may be added that the history of Chris-
tianity furnishes an always growing verification of
this Johannine doctrine of a living power of witness
and enlightenment present in the church, by which,
notwithstanding the constant hindrance of human
imperfection, the development of the Christian
faith has been steadily advanced, its forgotten
or neglected factors brought to, remembrance.
Old truths have been presented in new aspects
and filled with fresh life, and all has been brought
to pass with marvelous adaptation to the church’s
needs and in proportion to its receptivity.

(2) Other Gipert te other directions the doctrine
of the Spirit is less developed. The agency of the Spirit
in regeneration is repeatedly and emphatically declared
in a single passage (Jn 3 ae but is nowhere else re-
ferred to either in the Gospel or the First Ep. More
remarkable still, neither in Gospel nor Ep. is the Holy
Spirit once spoken of as the Divine agent in sanctification.
There is no passage resembling that in which St. Paul
speaks of the ethical ‘‘fruit of the Spirit’ (Gal 5 22.23).
The Spirit is the Spirit of truth, the revealer, the inspirer
of faith, hut is never spoken of as the Spirit of love or
holiness. If those who are begotten of God cannot sin,
it is not hecause God's Spirit, but because ‘‘his seed,"’
ahideth in them (1 Jn 3 9). The explanation of this
peculierly (which has been little, observed) in the Jo-

annine theology may be that the Spirit's work of reveal-
ing Christ is regarded as all-inclusive. Thus enabling
Christ's disciples to abide in Him as the branch in the
vine, He secures also their bringing forth ‘‘much fruit"
in all Christlikeness of character and conduct.


Passing now from the work to the Person, we
observe that in the Fourth Gospel the attribution
of personality to the Spirit reaches


3. The the acme of distinctness. He is
Person of “another Paraclete’”’ (Jn 14 16m), per-
the Spirit sonal as Christ Himself is personal;


and all the functions ascribed to Him—
to remind, to teach, to testify, to guide, to convict—
are such as are possible only to a personal agent.
Nor is it otherwise in the First Ep. The expressions
in it which have been alleged (Pfleiderer and others)
as inconsistent with personality (the “anointing,”
2 20; ‘‘He hath given us of his Spirit,” 4 13) require
no such interpretation. The ‘‘anointing’’ denotes
the Spirit, not in His essence or agency, but as the
gift of the Holy One with which He anoints believers
(ef Jn 7 38.39); and the expression ‘‘He hath given
us of his Spirit”’ (as if the Spirit were a divisible
entity) is no more incompatible with personality
than is the saying ‘‘to Him whom he hath sent
....y God giveth not the Spirit by measure”
(Jn 3 34), or than our speaking of Christians as
having more or less of the Spirit. _ ;

His Deity implied.—The essential Deity of the
Spirit is nowhere explicitly asserted, but is neces-
sarily implied in His relation both to Christ and
to the church as the “other Paraclete.”’ There is
not, however, the same theological development as
is achieved regarding the Logos. The Divinity of
Christ is grounded in an essential duality of being
witbin the Godhead itself; but there is no similar
effort to trace back the threefoldness in the revela-
tion of God, as Father, Son and Spirit, to an essen-
tial threefoldness in the Divine nature. The fact
is that both historically and logically the doctrine
of the Spirit as the third person in the Godhead
depends upon that of the Divine Son as the second.
It was through its living experience of the Divine
in Christ that the church first developed its thought
of God beyond the simple monotheism of the OT;
but having advanced to the conception of a twofold
Godhead, in which there is Fatherhood and Sonship,


i Sin


it was bound to enlarge it still further to that of a
threefold Godhead—Father, Son and Spirit. The
Son and the Spirit were equally manifestations of
God in redemption, and must equally stand in
essential relation to the Divine existence.

V. Doctrine of Sin and Propitiation.—This theme
is not elaborated. It is characteristic of the Johan-
nine writings that salvation is looked at from the
terminus ad quem rather than from the terminus
a quo. The infinite good, eternal life, is more in
view than the infinite evil, sin. It seems safe to
say that the author of these writings at no time had
that intense experience of bondage to the law of
sin and of death which so colors St. Paul’s presen-
tation of the gospel. It was, moreover, no part of
his plan to expound the doctrine of propitiation;
nor had he any original contribution to make on this
head to the sum of NT thought. But it is a quite
unwarrantable criticism which denies that the saving
work of Christ, in the Johannine conception, con-
sists in deliverance from sin.

It is true that Christ not only takes away the sin
of the world (Jn 1 29), but also draws it forth in
its utmost intensity and guilt. All sin
culminates in the rejection of Christ
(15 22); the Spirit convicts men of
sin because they “believe not’? on Him (16 9).
“Every one that committeth sin is the bondservant
of sin” (8 34); but what reveals the true character
of this bondage is that in the presence of the light,
men “loved the darkness” (3 19). That the malign
quality and power of evil are fully revealed only in
the presence of perfect goodness, that the brighter is
the light, the darker is the shade of guilt created by
its rejection—all this St: John teaches; but such
teaching is by no means peculiar to him, and to
infer from it that “to his mind sin in itself involves
no moral culpability” is nothing more than a way-
ward paradox.

In the Ep. the guilt of sin as constituting an ob-
jective disability to fellowship with God is strongly
emphasized. “If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves” (1 Jn 1 8). The phrase “to
have sin’’ is peculiar to St. John, and specifically
denotes the culpability of the agent (cf Jn 9 41;
15 22.24; 19 11). Sin is essentially that which
needs God’s forgiveness (1 Jn 1 9; 2 1.2); and to
this end an intercessor and a propitiation have been
provided. Such culpability is universal: ‘If we say
that we have not sinned, we’’—not only deceive our-
selves—“we make him a liar” (1 Jn 1 10).

A second passage (1 Jn 3 4-9) emphasizes the
ethical quality of sin—its antagonism to the nature
of God and of the children of God. The word
which defines the constitutive principle of sin is
“lawlessness” (1 Jn 3 4). Sin is fundamentally
the denial of the absoluteness of moral obligation,
the repudiation of the eternal law upon which all
moral life is based. In other words, to sin is to
assert one’s own will as the rule of action against
the absolutely good will of God. But again, the
Ep. gives the warning that “all unrighteousness is
sin” (6 17). Everything that is not right is wrong,
Every morally inferior course of action, however
venial it may appear, is sin and contains the ele-
ments of positive guilt. The perplexing topic of
“sin unto death” demands too special treatment to
be dealt with here.

(1) In the Gospel—The paucity of reference in
the Fourth Gospel to the propitiating aspect of
Christ’s redemptive work has been
seized upon as proof that, though the
writer did not consciously reject the
orthodox doctrine, it was really alien
to his system. But such a criticism might be di-
rected with almost equal force against the Synop-
tics. It was no part of St. John’s plan, as has been


2. Propi-
tiation


Johannine Theol. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1702


said, to expound a doctrine of propitiation; yet his
frontispiece to the ministry of Jesus is ‘‘the Lamb of
God that taketh away the sin of the world’; and,
as Dr. Inge has pointed out, the same type of the
Paschal Lamb underlies the whole narrative of the
Passion. In the high-priestly prayer Our Lord
expressly represents Himself as the covenant-sac-
rifice which consecrates His disciples as the people
of God (17 19); while the Synoptic ‘ransom for
many” is paralleled by the interpretation of Christ’s
death as effectual “for the nation; and not for the
nation only, but that he might also gather together
into one the children of God that are scattered
abroad” (11 51.52; cf 1 Jn 2 2).

(2) In the Epistle—In the Ep. the doctrinal

statement is much more explicit. The fact of pro-
Pitiation is placed in the forefront. The passage
which immediately follows the Prologue (1 6—2 2)
introduces a group of ideas—propitiation, blood,
forgiveness, cleansing—which are taken directly
from the sacrificial system of the OT, and are ex-
pressed, indeed, in technical Levitical terms. The
mode of action by which Christ accomplished and
still accomplishes His mission as the Saviour of the
world is: ‘He is the propitiation for our sins; and
not for ours only, but also for the whole world”
(2 2). Propitiation has its ultimate source in the
moral nature of God. It is no device for inducing
areluctant Deity to forgive; it is the way by which
the Father brings back His sinning children to Him-
self. In St. John’s conception it is the supreme
act of God’s supreme attribute, love. ‘Herein is
love” (4 10). Yet it is a real work of propitiation
in which this love goes forth for man’s salvation—
a work, that is, which expiates the guilt of sin,
which restores sinful offenders to God by rendering
their sin null and inoperative as a barrier to fellow-
ship with Him. This propitiatory virtue is regarded
as concentrated in the “blood of Jesus his Son”
(1 7), that is to say, in the Divine-human life
offered to God in the sacrifice of the cross. This,
if we walk in the light as He is in the light, “cleanseth
us from all sin’’—removes from us the stain of our
guilt, and makes us clean in God’s sight. In virtue
of this, Christ is the penitent sinner’s advocate
(paraclete-helper) with the Father (21). The
words ‘with the Father” are highly significant.
Even the Father’s love can urge nothing in apology
for sin, nothing that avails to absolve from its guilt.
But there is one who can urge on our behalf what is
at once the strongest condemnation of our sin and
‘plea for its remission—Himself, ‘Jesus Christ the
righteous” (2 1). ‘And he [Himself] is the pro-
pitiation for our sins.” St. John does not speak of
Christ as “making propitiation’”; He, Himself, in
virtue of all He is—Jesns Christ, in whom the Divine
ideal of humanity is consummated, in whom the
Father sees His own essential righteousness re-
vealed, Jesus Christ the Righteons—is both pro-
pitiation and intercession. The two acts are not
only united in one person, bunt constitute the one
reconciling work by which there is abiding fellow-
ship between God and His sinning people.

(8) One with NT teaching.—In this statement of
the doctrine of propitiation, memorable as it is,
there is nothing notably original. It tacitly pre-
supposes, as NT teaching everywhere does, that
God, in bestowing the sovereign grace of pardon and
sonship, must deal truthfully and adequately with
sin as a violation of the moral order; and with St.
John, as with other NT writers, the necessity and
efficacy of sacrifice as the means by which this is
accomplished are simply axiomatic. His great
contribution to Christian thought is the vision of
the cross in the heart of the eternal love. How
suggestive are these two statements when placed
side by side! ‘Herein islove .... that he loved


us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins” (1 Jn 4 10); and ‘‘Hereby know we love
[recognize what it is], because he laid down his life
for us” (8 16). God’s sending His Son and Christ’s
laying down His life are moral equivalents. The
sacrifice of Christ is the sacrificeof God. St. John’s
doctrine of propitiation follows as a moral neces-
sity from his doctrine of God. If God is love,
nothing is more inevitably true than that He suffers
on account of human sin; and to deny Him the
power to help and save men by bearing their burden
would be to deny to Him love’s highest prerogative.
VI. Eternal Life.—The development of the con-
ception of eternal life must be set along with the
doctrine of the moral nature of God and the doc-
trine of the incarnation as one of the greatest con-
tributions of the Johannine theology to NT thought.
With this conception the Gospel begins (1 4) and
ends (20 31); and, in like manner, the Ep. (1 2; &
20). The designation most frequently employed
is simply “the life” (hé 206); 17 tn the Gospel and
6 t in the First Ep. it is described qualitatively as
“eternal”; but the adj. brings out only what is
implicit in the noun. In harmony with the uni-
versal Bib. conception, St. John regards life as the
summum bonum, In which the reality of fellowship
with God consists, which therefore fulfils the highest
idea of being—‘“‘perfect truth in perfect action”
(Westcott). Christ Himself is “the life’ (Jn 14 6),
its only bestower and unfailing source (14 19). He
came that we might have it abundantly (10 10).
But this conception is uniquely developed in two


directions. While the eschatological element is not
lost, it is absorbed in the ethical. The
1. Ethical ideas of duration and futurity, which


Rather than are properly and originally expressed
Eschato- by the adj. “‘eternal’’ (aiénios=be-
logical longing to an aeon—specifically to
“the coming aeon”’), become secondary

to that of timeless moral quality. Always life is
regarded as a present possession rather than as
future felicity (e.g. Jn 3 36; 20 31; 1 Jn 3 14.
15; 6 12). For St. John the question whether it
is possible to make the best of both worlds is mean-
ingless. Eternal life is the best, the Divine, kind
of life, whether in this world or another. It is the
kind of life that has its perfect: manifestation in
Christ (1 Jn 1 2; 6 11). To possess that nature
which produces thoughts and motives and desires,
words and deeds like His, is to have eternal life.
Metaphysically the conception undergoes a develop-


ment which is equally remarkable, though in the judg-
ment of many, of more questionable value.


2. Meta- It has already been seen (see above, II)

hysical that life is conceived as the animating
pay: principle or essence of the Divine nature,
Aspect the inward energy of which all its activities


are the manifold outgoing. And this
conception is carried through with strict consistency.
The spiritual life in men, which is ‘‘begotten of God,”
is the vital essence, the mystic principle which is
manifested in all the capacities and activities of Chris-
tian personality. It does not consist in, and still less
is it a result following, repentance, faith, ohedience or
love; itis that of which they are the fruits and the evi-
dences. Thus instead of ‘'This do, and thou shalt live’’
(Lk 10 2%), St. John says, conversely, ‘Every one also
that doeth righteousness is Nati heen] begotten of’’
God (1 Jn 2 29); iustead_ of ‘‘The just shall live by
faith’' (Rom 1 17 AV), ‘‘' Whosoever believeth that Jesus
is the Christ is [=has been] hegotten of God’? (1 Jn
§ 1). The human activity 1s the result and proof
of Divine life already imparted, not the condition or
means of its attainment. In the Johannine concep-
tion life is cause, not effect; not phenomenon, but
essence; not the complex whole of the qualities, actlvi-
ties and experiences of the spiritual man, hut that which
makes them possihle—the inscrutable, Divinely com-
municated principle (Jn $ 8) in which tho capacity
for them is given and by which also it is realized.
_. Reply to criticism.—This Johannine conception of lite
is vigorously criticized as importing into the interpreta-
tion of Christian experience principles and modes of
thought borrowed from Gr philosophy. But the tend-
ency to infer causes from effects and to reason from


1703


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Johannine Theol.


phenomena to essence is not pecullar to Gr philosophy;
it ls native to the human intellect. The Johannine
conception of spiritnal life is closely analogous to the
common conception of physical life. We do not con-
ceive that a man lives because he breathes end feels
and acts; we think and we say that he does these things
because he lives, because there is in him that mystic

rinciple we call life. Only to the thinker trained in the
logic of empiricism is it possible to define life solely by
its phenomena, as e.g. “the continuous adjustment of
internal to external relatlons’’ (Spencer). The ordinary
mind instinctively passes hehind the phenomena to an
entity of which they are the manifestation. The Jo-
hannine conception, moreover, lies_in the natural line
of development for NT thought. It is implicit in that
whole strain of Our Lord's synoptic teaching which
regards doing as only the outcome of being, and which
is emphasized in such utterances as “Either make the
tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree corrupt,
and its fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by its fruit"
(Mt 12 33); as aiso in the whole Pauline doctrine of
the new creation and the mystical indweliing of Christ
in the memhers of His hody. And while it is no doubt
true that the Johannine conception of life was Imme-
diately influenced by contact with Hellenism, it is one
ee was sure, sooner or later, to emerge in Christlan

eology.


(1) Source in God.—In the development of the
doctrine we note the following points. (a) The sole
and absolute source of life is God, the
3. Develop- Father, revealed in Christ. “The
ment of Father hath life in himself” (Jn 5 26).
Doctrine He is the “living Father” by whom
the Son lives (Jn 6 57); _ the “true
God, and eternal life” (1 Jn & 20). Eternal life
is nothing else than the immanence of God in moral
beings created after His likeness; the Divine nature
reproducing itself in human nature; the energy of
the Spirit of God in the spiritual nature of man.
This is its ultimate definition.

(2) Mediated by Christ.—Of this life Christ is the
sole mediator (Jn 6 33.57; 11 25; 146). The
witness is that “‘God gave unto us eternal life, and
this life isin hisSon’” (1 Jn 6 11). This mediation
is grounded in the relation, eternally subsisting
within the Godhead, of the Logos to the Father.
The life manifested and seen in the historic Christ
(i Jn 1 1) is “‘the life, the eternal life,” which
existed in relation to the Father (1 Jn 1 2). By
the incarnation of the Son the eternal life in its
Divine fulness has become incorporate with human-
ity, @ permanent source of regenerative power to
“ag many as received him” (Jn 1 12). It is His
own relation to the Father that He reproduces in
men (Jn 17 23). ne’:

(3) Through the Spirit—In the communication
of this life the Spirit is the one direct agent (Jn 3
5-8; see above, under IV).

(4) The Divine “‘begetting.”—The act of Divine
self-communication is constantly and exclusively
expressed by the word “beget” (gennén—Jn 1 13;
3 3.5-8; 1 Jn 2 29; 39, etc). The word is of
far-reaching significance. It implies not only that
life has its ultimate origin in God, but that its com-
munication is directly and solely His act. In how
literal a sense the Divine begetting is to be under-
stood appears very strikingly in 1 Jn 3 9: “Who-
soever is begotten of God doeth no sin; because
his seed abideth in him.” The unique expression
“hig seed” signifies the new life-principle which is
the formative element of the “children of God.”
This abides in him who has received it. It stamps
its own character upon his life and determines its
whole development.

(5) The “children of God.”—Those who_are
“begotten of God” are ipso facto “children of God”
(iékna theo, In 1 12; 11 52; 1 Jn 3 1.2.10; 6 2).
The term connotes primarily the direct, communi-
cation of the Father’s own nature; and secondarily
the fact that the nature thus communicated has
not as yet reached its full stature, but contains the
promise of a future glorious development. We are
now children of God, but what it fully is to be


children of God is not yet made manifest (1 Jn 3
2). Participation in this life creates a family fel-
lowship (koindnia) at once human and Divine.
Those who are begotten of God and walk in the
light have “fellowship one with another” (1 Jn 1
7). They are “brethren” and are knit together
by the instincts (1 Jn 5 1) and the duties of mu-
tual love (Jn 13 34; 15 12; 1 Jn 3 16; 4 11) and
of mutual watchfulness and intercession (1 Jn 5 16).

On the Divine side they have fellowship “with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ”’ (1 Jn 1 3).
In this Divine fellowship the life “begotten” 1s
nourished and sustained; and no term is more
characteristic of the Johannine vocabulary, alike
in Gospel and Epp., than the word “abide” (ménein),
by which this is expressed. There is, however, a
noticeable difference in the modesof statement. In
the Ep., the formulae almost exclusively employed
are these: “God abides in us,” ‘‘We abide in God,”
“God abides in us and we in him.” In the Gospel
the reciprocal indwelling is that of Christ and His
disciples (Jn 15 4-10), which has its Divine coun-
terpart in that of the Father and theSon (Jn 14 10;
17 23; 15 10). This diversity is consistent with
the different points of view occupied in the two
documents. The Gospel is christocentric; the
Ep., theocentric. In the one is given the concrete
presentment, of the incarnate Son; in the other the
immediate intuition of the Divine nature.revealed
in Him. While the theme common to both is the
‘Word of life,’ the special theme of the Gospel is
the Word who reveals and imparts the life; in the
Ep. it is the life revealed and imparted by the
Word, and the thought of the indwelling Christ
is naturally carried up to the ultimate truth of the
indwelling God.

(6) The Divine abiding —The vitalizing union by
which the Divine life is sustained in those who are
begotten of God consists in two reciprocal activities,
not separable and not identical—God’s (or Christ’s)
abiding in us and our abiding in Him. As in the
similitude of the vine and the branches (Jn 15
1-10), the life imparted is dependent for its suste-
nance and growth upon a continuous influx from
the parent source: as it is the sap of the vine that
vitalizes the branches, producing leaf and blossom
and fruit, so does the lifeof God support and foster
in His children its own energies of love and truth
and purity. But to this end the abiding of God in
us has as its necessary counterpart our abiding in
Him. We can respond to the Divine influence or
reject it; open or obstruct the channels through
which the Divine life flows into ours (Jn 15 6.7.10;
8 31). Hence abiding in God is a subject of in-
struction and exhortation (Jn 16 4; 1 Jn 2 27f);
and here the idea of persistent and stedfast pur-
pose which belongs to the word menein comes
clearly into view. As the abiding of God in us is
the persistent and purposeful action by which the
Divine nature influences ours, so our abiding in God
is the persistent and purposeful submission of our-
selves to that influence. The means of doing this
are stedfast loyalty to the truth as it is revealed in
Christ and announced in the apostolic Gospel (Jn
8 31; 15 7; 1 Jn 2 27), keeping God’s ecommand-
ments (Jn 14 23; 15 10; 1 Jn 8 24), and loving
one another (1 Jn 4 12.16). Thus only is the
channel of communication kept clear between the
source and the receptacle of life. .

VI, Human Nature and Its Regeneration.—The
necessity of regeneration is fundamental to the
whole theological scheme (Jn 3 3.5.7). Life which
consists in union with God does not belong to
man as he is naturally constituted: those who
know that they have eternal life know that it is
theirs because they have ‘‘passed out of death into
life’ (1 Jn 3 14; Jn 6 24).


Johannine Theol. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1704


The unregenerate state of human nature is
specially connected with the Johannine conception
of the “world” (késmos). This term
has a peculiar elasticity of application;
and Westcott’s definition—‘‘the order
of finite being, regarded as apart from
God’’—may be taken as expressing the widest idea
that underlies St. John’s use of the word. When
the kosmos is material, it signifies (1) the existing
terrestrial creation (Jn 1 10; 18 1; 16 28), esp. as
contrasted with the sphereof the heavenly and eter-
nal. When it refers to humanity, it is either (2) the
totality of mankind as needing redemption and as
the object of God’s redeeming love (Jn 3 16; 1 Jn
22; 4 14), or (8) the mass of unbelieving men,
hostile to Christ and resisting salvation (e.g. Jn 15
18). Of the world in this sense it is said that it has
no perception of the true nature of God and the
Divine glory of Christ (Jn 1 10; 17 25; 1 Jn 3 1);
that it hates the children of God (Jn 16 18.19; 17
14;1 Jn 3 13); that the spirit of Antichrist dwells
init (1 Jn 4 3.4); that toit belong the false proph-
etsand their adherents (1 Jn 4 1.5); that it is under
the dominion of the wicked one (Jn 12 31; 14 30;
1611; 1 Jn 5 19); thatthe constituents of its life
are “‘the lust of the flesh and the lust of the eyes
and the vainglory of life’ (1 Jn 2 16); that it pass-
eth away (1 Jn 2 17); that Christ has conquered
it (Jn 16 33), and that “‘whatsoever is begotten of
God” conquers it (1 Jn & 4) by the power of faith
in Him (i Jn 6 5). Thus the ‘world’ (in this
darker significance) is composed of those who still
love the darkness rather than the light (Jn 3 19),
who, when Christ is presented to them, obstinately
retain their blindness and enmity. Nevertheless,
the “world” is not beyond the possibility of salva-
tion. The Holy Spirit, acting in the Christian
community, will convince the world with regard
to sin and righteousness and judgment (Jn 16 8);
and the evidence of the unity of Divine fellowship
among Christ’s disciples will lead it to believe in
His Divine mission (Jn 17 23).

Thus it is true that St. John teaches “a distinc-
tion of two great classes in the human race—those

who are from above and those who are


1. The
World


2. Two from beneath—children of light and
Classes in children of darkness.” But that he
the Human teaches this in any gnostic or semi-
Race gnostic fashion is an assertion for


which there is no real basis. He dis-
tinguishes between those who love the light and
those who love the darkness rather than the light,
between those who “receive’’ Christ and those who
‘“will not” come unto Him that they may have life.
This distinction, however, he traces to nothing in
the natural constitution of the two classes, but
solely to the regenerating act of God (Jn 1 13; 6
44), His doctrine of regeneration is, in fact, his
solution of the problem created by the actual
existence of those two classes among men—a
problem which is forced upon every thoughtful
Christian mind by the diverse and opposite results
of evangelism. It is this that lies behind such
utterances as these: ‘Every one that is of the truth
heareth my voice” (Jn 18 37); ‘‘Ye believe not,
because ye arenotof my sheep. My sheep hear my
voice .... and they follow me” (Jn 10 26.27);
“Every one that hath heard from the Father,
cometh unto me. Noman can come unto me except
it be given unto him of the Father” (Jn 6 45.65).
In these and all similar passages, belief or unbelief
in Christ, when He is presented, depends upon ante-
cedent spiritual predisposition (St. John’s equiva~
lent to the Pauline predestination). There exists in
certain persons what is lacking in others, a power of
spiritual vision by which Christ is recognized, a
capacity and a predisposition to receive Him. But


this predisposition is not (any more than St. Paul’s
predestination) theirs by gift of nature. St. John
refuses to find its source in human personality (Jn
113; 1 Jn 61). The children of God are not a
superior species of the genus home. They are men
who have passed from death into life, and who have
done so because they are begotten of God. St.
John’s doctrine is thus the antithesis of Gnosticism.
The gnostic distinction of two classes in the human
race glorified men; its.proper and inevitable fruit
was spiritual pride. The effect of St. John’s doc-
trine is to humble man and glorify God, to satisfy
the innermost Christian consciousness that not
even for their appropriation of God’s gift in Christ
can believers take credit to themselves; that in
nothing can the human spirit do more than respond
to the Divine, and that, in the last analysis, this
power itself is of God. Regeneration in the Johan-
nine sense is not to be identified with conversion.
It is the communication of that vision of truth and
that capacity for new moral activity which issue
in conversion. The doctrine of regeneration con-
tained in the Johannine writings is the fullest recog-
nition in the NT that all the conscious experiences
and activities of the Christian life are the result of
God’s own inscrutable work of begetting in the
depths of human personality, and of renewing and
replenishing there, the energies of the Divine.

VI. The Church and Sacraments.—While the word


“‘church" is not found, the idea les near the base of the
Johannine theology. The Divine life


1. The communicated to men creates a Divine
Church brotherhood, a ‘‘fellowship’’ which is
Ure. with the Father and “with his Son Jesus


Christ’’ (1 Jn 1 3) and also “one with
another’’ (1 Jn 1 7)—a fellowship which is consecrated
by the self-consecration of Jesus (Jn 17 19), in whlch
men are cleansed from all sin by His blood (1 Jn 1 7),
and which is maintained hy His intercessory action as
the Paraclete with the Father (1 Jn 2 1). This fellow-
ship is realized in the actual Christian community and
there only; but it is essentially inward and spiritual, not
mechanically ecclesiastical, In the visible community
spurious elements may intrude themselves, as is proved
when schism unmasks those who, though they have be-
longed to the external organization, have never heen
partakers of its real life (1 J 2 19). Only among those
who walk in the light of God does true fellowship exist
(i Jn 1 7).

From the doctrine of the Divine nature as llfe and
light one might a priori infer the possibilities of a Jo-
hannine view of the sacraments. It is


2. The evident that there is room in the Johan-
Sacra- nine system of thought for a genuinely

sacramental mode of Divine action—the
ments employment of definite external acts, not


’ as symbols only, but as real media of
Divine communication. On the other hand, the truth
that God is not life only but light also—self-revealing as
well as self-imparting—would_ necessarily exclude any
magical ex opere operato theory hy which spiritual efficacy
is attributed eitherto the paysicel elements in themselves
or to the physical act of participation. And (though
there is little or no explicit statement) such is the type
of doctrine we actually find. With regard to all sacra-
mental rites the universal principle applies: ‘It is the
ae that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing’ (Jn


(1) Baptism.—Yet baptlsm is the physical counter-
part of the Spirit's work in regeneration, and great Im-
portance is attached to it as the means of admission to
the new lifeof the kingdom (Jn 3 5).

(2) The Lord's Supper.—The omisslon of all reference
to the Institution of the Lord's Supper (the incldent of
the feet-washing and the proclamation of the new com-
mandment taking its place in the Gospel-narrative) is
thought to indicate that St. John was conscious of a
tendency to attach a superstitious value to the outward
observance, and desired emphatically to subordinate
this to what was spiritual and essential. ‘The omisslon,
to whatever motive it may have been due, is counter-
balanced by the sacramental discourse (Jn 6). While
the language of this discourse is not to be interpreted
in a technically eucharistic sense, its purpose, or one of
its purposes, undoubtedly, is to set forth the signifi-
cance of the Lord's Supper in the largest light. Christ
glves to men the bread of life, which is His own flesh
and of, which men must eat that they may live (Jn 6 50-
55). He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood
abideth in me and Tin him.” This eating and drinkIng
is essentially of the Spirit. It signifies a derivation of
life analogous to that of the Son Himself from the Father,


1705


“‘As the living Father sent me, and J live because of
the Father; so he that eateth me, he also shall live be-
cause of me” (ver 57). To ‘‘eat the flesh” of the Son of
Man is to rece!ve spirltual nourishment from Him, to
live by Hls life. Yet there is nothing In St. John's way
of thinking to exclude a real sacramental efficiency.
“The act which is nothing when it is performed igno-
rantly and mechanically is of sovereign value to thosa
who have apprehended its true meaning. The material
elements represent the flesh and blood of Christ—His
Divine Person given for the life of the world. He is
present in them, not merely by way of symbol, but
actually; but there must be something iu the recipient
corresponding to the spiritual reality which is conveyed
through the gift. The outward act of participation must
be accompanied with belief in Christ and a true insight
into the nature of His work and a will to know and
serve Him. The sacrament becomes operative as the
bread of life through this receptive spirit on the part of
those who observe it"’ (Scott, The Fourth Gospel, 127-28),
_ IX. Eschatology.—The type of mind revealed
in the Johannine writings is one that instinctively
leans to the ideal and the spiritual in
1. Type of its contemplation of life, graspin
Thought what is of universal significance an
Idealistic dwelling upon events only as they are
the embodiment of eternal principles.
Where this fashion of thought is so strongly devel-
oped, the eschatological, like the historical, becomes
secondary.
In St. John there is but one life—the eternal;
and there is but one world—the world of the ideal,
which is also the only real. Yet he
2. Yet is not an idealist, pure and simple.
History Not For him events are not merely sym-
Ignored . bols; history is not allegory. The
incarnation is a historical fact, the
Parousia a future event. His thought does not
move in a world of mere abstractions, a world in
which nothing ever happens. His true distinction
as a thinker lies in the success with which he unites
the two strains of thought, the historical and
the ideal. The word which may be said to express
his conception of history is ‘manifestation’ (cf
Jn 211; 98; but esp. 1 Jn 12; 2 19.28; 3
2.5.8; 49). The incarnation is only the mani-
festation of ‘what was from the beginning’ (1 Jn
1 1.2); the mission of Christ, the manifestation of
the love eternally latent in the depths of the Divine
nature (1 Jn 4 9). The successive events of his-
tory are the emergence into visibility of what already
exists. In them the potential becomes actual.
Thus St. John has an eschatology, as well as a
history. He profoundly spiritualizes. He reaches
down through the pictorial represen-
3. Nor Es- tations of the traditional apocalyptic,
chatology and inquires what essential principle
- each of these embodies. Then he
discovers that this principle is already universally
and inevitably in operation; and this, the present
spiritual reality, becomes for him the primary
thought. Judgment means essentially the sifting
and separation, the classification of men according
to their spiritual affinities. But every day men
are thus classifying themselves by their attitude
toward Christ; this, the true judgment of the world,
is already present fact. So also the coming and
presence of Christ must always be essentially a
spiritual fact, and as such it is already a present
fact. There is, in the deepest significance of the
word, a perpetual coming of Christ in Christian
experience. This, however, does not prevent St.
John from firmly holding the certainty of a fuller
manifestation of these facts in the future, when
tendencies shall have reached a final culmination,
and principles which are now apprehended only by
faith will be revealed in all the visible magnitude of
their consequences.
We shall now briefly survey the Johannine pres-
entation of the chief eschatological ideas.
(1) Eternal life—It has already been said that


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Johannine Theol.


the most distinctive feature in the conception of
eternal life is that it is not a future immortal
felicity so much as a present spiritual


4. Escha- state. The category of duration re-
tological cedes before that of moral quality.
Ideas Yet it has its own stupendous impor-


tance. In triumphant contrast with
the poor ephemeralities of the worldly life, he that
doeth the will of God ‘‘abideth for ever” (1 Jn 2
17); and the complete realization of the life eternal
is still in the future (Jn 4 36; 6 27; 12 25).

(2) Antichrist—The view of Antichrist is strik-
ingly characteristic. Tacitly setting aside the
lurid figure of popular traditions, St. John grasps
the essential fact that is expressed by the name and
idea of Antichrist (=one who in the guise of Christ
opposes Christ), and finds its fulfilment in the false
teaching which substituted for the Christ of the

ospel the fantastic product of gnostic imagination
“i Jn 4 3). But in this he reads the sign that the
world’s day has reached its last hour (1 Jn 2 18).

(8) Resurrection.—While the Fourth Gospel so
carefully records the proofs of Christ’s resurrection,
noticeably little (in the Ep., nothing) is made of the
thought of a future resurrection from the dead.
For the Christian, the death of the body is a mere
incident. ‘Whosoever liveth and believeth on me
shall never die” (Jn 11 26; cf 8 51). Regenera-
tion—union with Christ—is the true resurrection
(Jn 6 50.51.58). And yet, again, the eschatolog-
ical idea is not lost. Side by side with the easen-
tial truth the supplementary and interpretative
truth is given its right place. ‘‘Whoso eateth my
flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal life; and
I will raise him up at the last day” (Jn 6 54 AV).
If Christ says “I am the life: whosoever liveth and
believeth on me shall never die,” He also says ‘I
am the resurrection: he that believeth on me,
though he die, yet shall he live” (Jn 11 25).

(4) Judgment.—As has already been said, St.
John regards judgment as essentially a present fact
of life. Christ does not pass judgment upon men—
that is not the purpose of His coming (Jn 3 17;
12 47). Yet Christ is always of necessity judging
men—compelling them to pass judgment upon
themselves. For judgment He is come into the
world (Ju 9 89). By their attitude toward Him
men involuntarily but inevitably classify them-
selves, reveal what spirit they are of, and auto-
matically register themselves as being or as not
being ‘‘of the truth” (Jn 18 37). Judgment is not
the assigning of a character from without, but the
revelation of a character from within. And this is
not future, but present. ‘He that believeth not
hath been judged... . because he hath not
believed on the name of the only begotten Son of
of God” (Jn 3 18). Yet the apostle indubitably
looks forward to a future Day of Judgment (Jn
12 48; 1 Jn 417). Nor is this simply an “
conscious concession to orthodoxy.’ The judg-
ment to come will be the full manifestation of
the judgment that now is, that is to say, of the
principles according to which men are in reality ap-
proved or condemned already. What this present
judgment, the classification of men by their rela-
tion to Christ, ultimately signifies, is not at all
realized by the “world,” is not fully realized even
in Christian faith. There must be a day when all
self-deception shall cease and all reality shall be
manifested.

(5) The Parousia.—In like manner the concep-
tion of the Parousia is primarily spiritual. The
substitution in the Fourth Gospel of the Supper
Discourse (Jn 14-16) for the apocalyptic chapters
in the Synopties is of the utmost significance. It is
not a Christ coming ou the clouds of heaven that
is presented, but a Christ who has come and is


eee apesug THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1706


ever coming to dwell in closest fellowship with His
people (see above under IV). Yet St. John by no
means discards belief in the Parousia as a historical
event of the future. Jf Christ’s abiding-place is
in those that love Him and keep His word, there is
also a Father’s House in which there are many
abiding-places, whither He goes to prepare a place
for them and whence He will come again to receive
them unto Himself (Jn 14 2.3). Still more is this
emphasized in the Ep. The command “Love not
the world” is sharpened by the assurance that the
world is on the verge, aye, in the process of dissolu-
tion (1 Jn 217). The exhortation to “abide in
him” is enforced by the dread of being put to shame
at His impending advent (2 28). The hope of
being made partakers in His manifested glory is the
consummation of all that is implied in our being
now children of God (1 Jn 8 2.3).

(a) A “manifestation”: But this future crisis will
be only the manifestation of the existing reality (3 2).
The Parousia will, no more than the incarnation, be
the advent of a strange Presence in the world. It
will be, as on the Mount of Transfiguration, the
outshining of a latent glory; not the arrival of one
who is absent, but the self-revealing of one who is
present. As to the manner of Christ’s appearing,
the Ep. is silent. As to its significance, we are left
in no doubt. It is a historical event; occurring
once for all; the consummation of all Divine pur-
pose that has governed human existence; the final
crisis in the history of the church, of the world, and
of every man.

(b) Relation to believers: Especially for the chil-
dren of God, it will be a coming unto salvation.
“Beloved, now are we children of God, and it is not
yet made manifest what we shallbe. Weknowthat,
if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him; for
we shall see him as he is” (1 Jn 3 2). Here the
Johannine idea of “manifestation” is strikingly
employed. ‘What we shall be” will be essentially
what we are—children of God. No new element
will be added to the regenerate nature. Allis there
that ever will be there. But the epoch of full
development is not yet. Only when Christ—the
Christ who is already in the world—shall be mani-
fested, then also the children of God who are in the
world will be manifested as being what they are.
They also will have come to their Mount of Trans-
figuration. As eternal life here is mediated through
this first manifestation (1 Jn 1 2), so eternal life
hereafter will be mediated through this second and
final manifestation. ‘We know that we shall be like
him, because we shall see him as he is.’”’ It is true
that here according to our capacity we behold Him
as He is (Jn 1 14); but perception, now dim and
wavering, will then be intense and vivid. The
vision of the future is In some sense corporeal as well
as spiritual. Sense and faith will coincide. It will
then have ceased to be expedient that Christ should
go away in order that the Spirit of truth may come.
We shall possess in the same experience the privi-
lege of the original eyewitnesses of the incarnate
life and the inward ministry of the Spirit. And
seeing Him as He is, we shall belike Him. Vision
will beget likeness, and likeness again give clearness
to vision. And as the vision is In some unconjec-
turable fashion corporeal as well as spiritual, so also
is the assimilation (cf Phil 8 21). The very idea
of the spiritual body is that it perfectly corresponds
to the character to which it belongs. The outward
man will take the mold of the inward man, and
will share with it its perfected likeness to the glori-
fied manhood of Jesus Christ. Such is the farthest
view opened to our hope by the Johannine escha-
tology; and it is that which, of all others, has been
most entrancing to the imagination and stimulating
to the aspiration of the children of God.


_ Literature.—The. following works may be men-
tioned as treating specially of the Theology: B. Weiss,
Der Johannische Lehrbegrif, Berlin, 1862; O, Holtz-
mann, Das Johannes-Evangelium untersucht und erkldrt,
Darmstadt, 1887; Beyschlag, Neutestameniliche Theo-
logie, Halle, 1896: ‘“Pfleiderer, Das Urchristentum,
Berlin, 1902, ET, Williams and Norgate, London;
E. Haupt, Der erste Brief des Johannes, Colberg, 1869,
ET, T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh; Grill, Untersuchungen
uber die_Entstehung des vierten Fvangeliums, Tiibingen,
1902; G. B. Stevens, The Johannine Theology, New
York, 1894: id, The Theology of the NT, 1899, also The
Christian Doctrine of Salvation, 1905, _T. & T. Clark,
Edinburgh; O. Cone, The Gospel and Its Earliest Inter-
pretations, New York, 1893; Scott, The Fourth Gospel,
Its Purpose and Theology, T. & T. Clark, 1906; Law,
The Tests of Life: A Study of the First Ep. of St. John
(dealing specially with the Theology), Edinburgh and
New York, 1909; Denney, Jesus and the Gospel, New
oe 1909; Judge, Cambridge Bib. Essays, Macmillan,


R. Law

JOHN, jon (Iwdvvns, Jédnnés): The name of
several persons mentioned in the Apoc:

(1) Father of Mattathias, grandfather of Judas
Maccabaeus and his brothers (1 Macc 2 1).

(2) Eldest son of Mattathias, surnamed Gappis
q.v.).

(3) Father of Eupolemus, one of the envoys sent
to Rome by Judas Maccabaeus (1 Mace 8 17;
2 Mace 4 11).

(4) John Hyrcanus, “a valiant man,” son of
Simon, and nephew of Judas Maccabaeus (1 Mace
13 53; 16 1). See Asmonrans; MaccaBEEs.


(5) One of the envoys sent to treat with Lysias
(2 Mace 11 17). J. Hurcuison


JOHN (Iwdvvys, Jadnnés): The name of 4 per-
sons:

(1) Joun THE Baptist (q.v.).

(2) The apostle, the son of Zebedee, and brother
of James (see JoHN, THE APOSTLE).

(3) A relative of Annas the high priest, who sat
in the Sanhedrin when Peter and John were tried
(Acts 4 6). Lightfoot supposes bim to be the
Jochanan ben Zacchai of the Talm, who, however,
did not belong to the family of the high priest.
Nothing is really known of him.

(4) Joun Mark (q.v.).

(5) Father of Simon Peter (Jn 1 42; 21 15.17,
m “Gr Joanes: called in Mt 16 17, Jonah’).

8S. F. Huntsr

_ JOHN, THE APOSTLE: The sources for the
life of the apostle John are of various kinds, and of

different degrees of trustworthiness.
Sources of There are the references in the Synop-
the Life of tic Gospels, which may be used simply
St. John and easily without any preliminary

critical inquiry into their worth as
sources; for these Gospels contain the common
tradition of the early church, and for the present
purpose may be accepted as trustworthy. Further,
there are the statements in Acts and in Gal, which
we may use without discussion as a source for the
life of St. John. There is next the universal tradi-
tion of the 2d cent., which we may use, if we can
show that the John of Ephesus, who bulks so largely
in the Christian literature of the 2d and 3d cents.,
is identical with the son of Zebedee. Further, on
the supposition that the son of Zebedee is the author
of the Johannine writings of the NT, there is another
source of unequaled value for the estimate of the
life and character of the son of Zebedee in these
writings. Finally, there is the considerable volume
of tradition which gathered around the name of
John of Ephesus, of which, picturesque and inter-
esting though the traditions be, only sparing use
can be made.

I. Witness of the NT.—Addressing ourselves
first to the Synoptic Gospels, to Acts and to Gal,
we ask, What, from these sources, can we know
of the apostle Jobn? A glance only need be taken


1707


hannine Theol.
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA eae the Apostle


at the Johannine writings, more fully discussed

elsewhere in relation to their author.
That John was one of the two sons of Zebedee,
that he became one of the disciples of Jesus, that
at His call he forsook all and followed


1, The Jesus, and was thereafter continuously
Synoptic with Jesus to the end, are facts familiar
Gospels to every reader of the Synoptic Gospels.


The call was given to John and to his
brother James at the Sea of Galilee, while in a boat
with their father Zebedee, “mending their nets”
(Mt 4 21.22, and || passages). “Come ye after
me,” said Jesus, “and I will make you to become
fishers of men” (Mk 1 17; on the earlier call in
Judaea, Jn 1 35 ff, see below). That Zebedee was
a man of considerable wealth may be inferred from
the fact that he had “‘hired servants” with him
(Mk 1 20), and that his wife was one of those
women who ministered of their substance to Jesus
and His disciples (Mt 27 55.56). Comparison of
the latter passage with Mk 15 40.41 identifies the
wife of Zebedee, John’s mother, with Salome, and
it seems a fair inference from Jn 19 25, though all
do not accept it, that Mary, the mother of Jesus,
and Salome, the wife of Zebedee, were sisters. On
this view, James and John were cousins of Jesus, and
were also related to the family of John the Baptist.
The name of John appears in all the lists of the apos-
tles given in the Synoptic Gospels (Mt 10 2 and |/s).
While his name appears rarely in a position by itself,
he is still one of the most prominent of the disciples.
With Peter and James he is present at the raising
of the daughter of Jairus (Mk 5 37; Lk 8 51 ff).
These three were also present at the transfiguration
(Mt 17; Mk 9; Lk 9). They were nearest to
the Lord at the agony of Gethsemane. In all
these cases nothing characteristic of John is to be
noted. He is smply piecnt as one of the three,
and therefore one of the most intimate of the dis-
ciples. But there is something characteristic in an
incident recorded by Luke (9 54), in which James
and John are represented as wishing to call down fire
on a Sam village, which had refused them hospital-
ity. From this can be inferred something of the
earnestness, zeal, and enthusiasm of the brothers,
and of their high sense of what was due to their
Master. Peter, James, John, and Andrew are the
four who asked Jesus about the prophecies He had
uttered: ‘Tell us, when shall these things be? and
what shall be the sign when these things are all
about to be accomplished?” (Mk 13 4). Then
there is the request of their mother as to the place
she desired for her sons in the coming kingdom (Mk
10 35 ff). To Peter and John was entrusted the
task of preparation for the keeping of the Passover
(Lk 22 8). Once John stands alone, and asks
what we may consider a characteristic question:
“Teacher, we saw one casting out demons in thy
name; and we forbade him, because he followed not
us” (Mk 9 38; Lk 9 49). From these notices
we see that John was in the front rank of the dis-
ciples, and we see also that he was so far conscious
of the position he held, and of the intimate connec-
tion he had with the Master. We note further that
John was a young man of fiery zeal, and of a tend-
ency toward intolerance and exclusiveness. The
zeal and the intolerance are in evidence in the desire
to call down fire upon the Sam village, and the
tendency toward exclusiveness is manifested in the
request of his mother as to the place her sons were
to occupy in the kingdom. ‘They desire to have the
highest positions. These tendencies were not
encouraged by Jesus. They were rebuked by Him
once and again, but the tendencies reveal the men.
In harmony with these notices of character and
temperament is the name given to the brothers by
Jesus, ‘‘Boanerges,”’ ‘Sons of thunder” (Mk 3 17),


which, whatever else may be meant by it, means
strength, unexpectedness, and zeal approaching to
methods of violence.
John isfound in company with Peter in the opening
scenes in Acts. He is with Peter while the man at
the gate was healed (8 1ff). He is
2. Acts and with Peter on the mission to Samaria
Gal (8 14ff). He is with Peter and James,
the Lord’s brother, at the interview
with St. Paul recorded in Gal 2, and the three are
described by St. Paul as the pillar apostles (2 9).
This interview is of importance because it proves
that John had survived his brother James, whose
death is recorded in Acts 12; at all events that
John and James were not killed by the Jews at the
same time, as some now contend that they were.
This contention is considered bclow.
Much is to be learned of the apostle John from
the Fourth Gospel, sesuming tbe Gospel to have
been written by him. We learn from


3. The it that he was a disciple of John the
Johannine Baptist (1 35), that he was one of the
Writings: _first six disciples called by Jesus in His
Gospel early ministry in Judaea (vs 37-51),
and Rev’ and that he was present at all the


scenes which he descrihes in the Gospel.
We find later that he had a home in Jerus, and was
acquainted with many there. To that home he
took Mary, the mother of Jesus, whom the dying
Saviour entrusted to his care (19 26.27). Much
more also we learn of him and of his history, for
the Gospel is a spiritual biography, a record of the
growth of faith on the part of the writer, and of the
way in which his eyes were opened to see the glory
of the Lord, until faith seems to have become vision.
He was in the inner circle of the disciples, indeed,
nearest of all to Jesus, “the disciple whom Jesus
loved” (13 23; 19 26; 20 2; 21 7.20), and, be-
cause of that love, became the apostle of love (see,
further, Joon, GosPEL oF; JoHN, EPIsTLEs oF;
JOHANNINE THEOLOGY).

The Book of Rev, likewise traditionally ascribed
to John, bears important witness to the apostle’s
banishment in later life to the isle of Patmos in the
Aegean (1 9). There he received the visions re-
corded in the book. The banishment probably
took place in the reign of Domitian (see Paveie:
TION), with whose practice it was entirely in con-
sonance (on the severity of such exile, cf Sir W. M.
Ramsay, Letters to the Seven Churches of Asia, ch
viii). The testimony is of high importance in its
bearing on the disputed question of John’s residence
in Asia, a point now to be discussed.

Hil. Alleged Early Martyrdom of John: Criticism
of Evidence.—The consentient testimony of the

church of the 2d cent. is that the later


1. Recent years of St. John were spent at Ephe-
Denial of | sus, where he wrote his Gospel, and
St. John’s gathered round him many disciples
Residence (see the evidence drawn out in detail
in Ephesus in Godet, Comm. on Gospel of St. John,


43 ff; ef also Lightfoot, ‘The School
of Ephesus,” in Essays on the Work Entitled ‘‘Super-
natural Religion’). Before, however, we can use
the traditions connected with this residence at
Ephesus, it is needful to inquire into the statement
alleged to be made by Papias that John, the son of
Zebedee, was killed by the Jews at an early date.
It is plain, that, if this statement is correct, the
apostle could not be the author of the Johannine
writings in the NT, universally dated near the end
of the 1st cent.

The evidence for the statement that St. John
was early killed by the Jews is thus summed up
by Dr. Moffatt: ‘The evidence for the early
martyrdom of John the son of Zebedee is, in
fact, threefold: (a) a prophecy of Jesus pre-


John, the Apostle
John the Baptist


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1708


served in Mk 10 39=Mt 20 23, (b) the witness
of Papias, and (c) the calendars of the church”
(Intro to Lit. of NT, 602). Our lim-
2. Grounds its do not admit of an exhaustive
of Denial examination of this so-called evi-
dence, ,but, happily, an exhaustive
examination is not needed.


(a) The first head proceeds on an assumption which is
not warranted, viz. that a prophecy of Jesus would not
be allowed to stand, if it were not evidently fulfilled. In
the present instance, a literal fulfilment of the prophecy
(The cup that I drink ye shal! drink,"' etc) is out of the
question, for there is no hint that either James or John
was crucified. We must therefore fall back on the
primary meaning of martyrdom, and recognize a ful-
filment of the prophecy in the sufferings John endured
and the testimony he bore for the Master's sake (thus
Origen, etc).

(b) Dr. Moffatt lays great stress on what he calls the
testimony of Papias. But the alleged testimony of
Papias is not found in any early authority, and then
occurs in writers not of any great value from the point
of view of critical investigation. Itis found in a passage
of Georgius Hamartolus (9th cent.), and is held to be
corroborated by a fragment of an epitome (7th or 8th
cent.) of the Chronicle of Philip Sidetes (5th cent.), a
thoroughly untrustworthy writer. The passage from
Georgius may be seen in convenieut form in Lightfoot's
Apostolic Fathers, 513-19. It tells that John survived
to the time of Nerva, quotes 2 saying of Papias that he
was killed by the Jews, states that this was in fulfilment
of the prophecy of Jesus above referred to, and goes on
to say, ‘‘So the learned Origen affirms in his interpreta~
tion of St. Matthew's Gospel, that John was martyred,
declaring that he had learnt the last from the successors
of the apostles” (Lightfoot, op. cit., 531). Fortunately,
the statement of Origen can be tested, and it by no
means, as Moffatt admits (op. cit., 604), bears out the
meaning attached to it. Origeu is of opinion that the
prophecy of Jesus was sufficiently fulfilled by the fact
of John's banishment to Patmos and his sufferings there.
This, according to him, is what tradition taught and
what the prophecy meant. From the whole statement
of Georgius, which expressly declares that John survived
till the time of Nerva, nothing can be inferred in support
of the so-called quotation from Papias. It is to be
remembered that the writings of Papias were known to
Trenaeus and to Eusebius, and it is inconceivahle that,
if such_a statement was to be found in these, they
would have ignored it, and have given currency to a
statement contradictory toit. No stress, therefore, can
be laid on the alleged quotation. We do not know its
context, nor is there anything in the lit. of the first 3
centuries confirmatory of it. Iu the citation iu the
epitome of Philip, Papias is made to speak of ‘‘John the
divine”’ (ho theolégos). This title is not applied to John
till the close of the 4th cent.

(c) As regards the 3d line of evidence instanced by
Dr. Moffatt—church calendars, in which James and
John are commemorated together as martyrs—it is even
more worthless than the other two. _On the nature and
origin of these martyrologies, Dr. J. Drummond may be
quoted: ‘‘'They were constructed in_ process of time
out of local calendars. At some period in the 2d half of
the 5th cent., a martyrology was formed by welding
together a number of provincial calendars, Rom, Italian,
Spanish, and Gallic, Into what was in effect a general
martyrology of Western Europe. At Nicomedia, about
the year 360, a similar eastern martyrology was formed
out of the local calendars, and this was tr¢ with curtail-
ments into Syr at Edessa about the year 400. It is a
copy of this, made in 411, which is now in the British
Museum” (Inguiry into Character and Authorship of the
Fourth Gospel, 232). If this is a true account of the rise
and origin of martyrologies we need not be surprised
that Sir W. M. Ramsay speaks as follows: ‘‘That James
and John, who were not slain at the same time, should
be commemorated together, is the flimsiest_conceivable
evidence that John was killed early in Jerns. The
bracketing together of the memory of apostles who had
some historical connection in life, but none in death,
must be regarded as the worst side, historically speaking,
of oe martyrologies"' (The First Christian Century, 49,
note).

Ill, The Ephesian Traditions.—Thus the early tra-
ditions of the churches are available for the life of John

the son or Zebedee: But ea Female
many blank spaces in at life. ter
1, John the tie reterence to the pillar apostles in Gal,
Apostle, and silence falls on the life of John, and we


John the know nothing of his life and activity until
Presbyter We read of his banishment to Patmos, and
Y mect with those references to the old man


at Ephesus, which occur In the Christian
lit. of the 2d cent. One point of interest relates to the
(genuine) qnotation from Papias, preserved by Eus.
(HE, III, 39), regarding a “ Presbyter John,” @ disciple
of the Lord, who was one of his living authoritles. Were
there two Johns at Ephesus? Or was there only one?


Or, if there was only one, was he John the Evangelist,
or only John the Presbyter? Here there is every pos-
sible variety of opinion. Many hold that there were
two, and many that there was only one. Many who
hold that there was only one, hold that the one was
John the son of Zebedee; others hold, with equal assur-
ance, that he was a distinct person. Obviously, it jis
impossible to discuss the question adequately here.
After dune consideration, we lean to the conclusion that
there was only one John at Ephesus, and he the son of
Zehedee. For the proof of this, impossible within our
limits, we refer to the learned argument of John Chap-
man, O.S.B., in his work John the Presbyter and the
Fourth Gospel (1911).

Into the traditions which cluster round John in Ephe-
sus it is not necessary to enter in detail (cf Godet, op. cit.,


57 ff). meroralng ues dare uur:

q . versally accepted in the churc °. -
pai vived till the time of Trajan’ (98 AD).
18 uC Striking and characteristic things are
Traditions told of him in harmony with the touches


we find in the Synoptic Gospels, The
story of his rushing forth from the bath when Cerinthus,
the heretic, entered it (Iren., Adv. Haer., iii.3, 4) recalls
the characteristics of him whom Jesus called ‘‘son of
thunder.” The same tone of exclusiveness, modified by
larger experience, is found in the 1st Ep., which so fre-
quently and so decisively discriminates between those
who believe in Jesus and those who do not.


IV. The Character of St. John. —The general
character of this great apostle is already sufficiently
apparent. While we recall the illustrative facts
found in the Synoptics, that James and John were
the two who wished to call down fire from heaven
on the inhospitable village, that John was one of
those who desired one of the chief places in the
kingdom, that he it was who forbade the man to
cast out demons in the name of Jesus because he
followed not with them, we do not forget that on
each of these occasions he was corrected and rebuked
by the Master, and he was not the kind of man who
could not profit by the rebuke of Jesus. So that
vehemence of disposition was held in check, and,
while still in existence, was under control, and
allowed to have vent only on occasions when it was
permissible, and even necessary. So in his writings,
and in the reflections in the Gospel, we note the
vehemence displayed, but now directed only against
those who refused to believe in, and to acknowledge,
Jesus.

“A quiet and thoughtful temperament is by no means

inconsistent with a certain vehemence, when, on occa-
sions, the pent-up fire flashes forth; indeed, the very
violence of feeling may help to foster an habitual quie-
tude, lest word or deed should betray too deep an emo-
tion. Then it is not without significance that, in the
three narratives which are cited from the Gospels to
prove the overbearing temper of John, we are expressly
told that Jesus corrected him. Are we to suppose that
these rebukes made no impression? Is it not more
likely that they sank deep into his heart, and that the
agony of beholding his Master's orucifixion made them
ineffaceahle? Then, if not before, began that long
development which changed the youthful son of thunder
into the aged apostle of love’ (Drummond, op. cit.,
410, 411).
_ But love itself has its side of vehemence, and the
intensity of love toward a person or a cause may be
measured by the intensity of aversion and of hatred
toward their contradictories. There are many re-
flections in the Gospel and in the Epp. which dis-
play this energy of hatred toward the work of the
devil, and toward those dispositions which are under
the influence of the father of lies. We simply
notice these, for they poe that the fervent youth
who was devoted to his Master carried with him
to the end the same disposition which was charac-
teristic of him from the beginning.

Lrrerature.—In addition to books mentioned in art.,
see the listof worksappended to art.on Joan, GOSPEL OF,

JAMES IvERACH


JOHN THE BAPTIST (‘Iwdvys, Jadnés):


I. Sources
II. Parenrags
TII, Eanuy Lira
IV, Ministry
1. The Scene
2. His First Appearance


1709


3. His Dress and Manner
4. His Message
5. His Severity
Baptism
1. Significance
(1) Lustrations Required by the Levitical Law
(2) Anticipation of Messianic Lustrations
Foretoid by the Prophets
(3) Proselyte Baptism
a 2. Baptism of Jcsus
VI. Imprisonment anno DeEatu
1. The Time
2. The Occasion


VII. Jown anv His Discrpies
1, The Inner Circie
2. Their Training
3. Their Fideiity

VIII, Joann anv Jesus


1. John's Reiation to Jesus
2. Jesus’ Estimate of John
Lireratura

I, Sources.—The sources of first-hand information
concerning the life and work of John the Baptist
are limited to the NT and Jos. Lk and Mt give
the fuller notices, and these are in substantial
agreement. The Fourth Gospel deals chiefly with
the witness after the baptism. In his single notice
(Ant, XVIII, v, 2), Jos makes an interesting ref-
erence to the cause of John’s imprisonment. See
VI, 2, below.

II, Parentage.—John was of priestly descent.
His mother, Elisabeth, was of the daughters of
Aaron, while his father, Zacharias, was a priest of
the course of Abija, and did service in the temple at
Jerus. It is said of them that ‘they were both
righteous before God, walking in all the command-
ments and ordinances of the Lord blameless’ (Lk
16). This priestly ancestry is in interesting con-
trast with his prophetic mission.

Il. Early Life.—We infer from Luke’s account
that John was born about six months before the
birth of Jesus. Of the place we know only that it
was a city of the hill country of Judah. Our defi-
nite information concerning his youth is summed
up in the angelic prophecy, “Many shall rejoice
athisbirth. For he shall be great in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall drink no wine nor strong drink;
and he shall be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from
his mother’s womb” (Lk 1 14-16), and in Luke’s
brief statement, ‘And the child grew, and waxed
strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day
of his showing unto Israel” (1 80). The character
and spiritual insight of the parents shown in the
incidents recorded are ample evidence that his train-
ing was a fitting preparation for his great mission.

IV. Ministry.—The scene of the Baptist’s min-
istry was partly in the wilderness of Southern Judaea

and partly in the Jordan valley. Two
1. The locations are mentioned, Bethany or
Scene Bethabara (Jn 1 28), and Aenon near
Salim (Jn 3 23). Neither of these
places can be positively identified. We may infer
from Jn 3 2 that he also spent some time in Peraea
beyond the Jordan. : i

The unusual array of dates with which Luke marks

the beginning of John’s ministry (Lk 3 1.2) reveals

ig sense of the importance of the event
2. His First as at once the beginning of his pro-
Appearance phetic work and of the new dispen-

sation. His first public appearance
is assigned to the 15th year of Tiberius, probably
26 or 27 AD, for the first Passover attended by
Jesus can hardly have been later than 27 AD (Jn
2 20). :

John’s dress and habits were strikingly suggestive

of Elijah, the old prophet of national judgment.
His desert habits have led some to

3. His Dress connect him with that strange com-
and Manner pany of Jews known as the Essenes.
; There is, however, little foundation

for such a connection other than his ascetic habits
and the fact that the chief settlement of this sect


; hn, the Apostle
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA jenn lea Baptist


was near the home of his youth. It was natural
that he should continue the manner of his youthful
life in the desert, and it is not improbable that he
intentionally copied his great prophetic model. It
was fitting that the one who called men to repentance
and the beginning of a self-denying life should show
renunciation and self-denial in his own life. But
there is no evidence in his teaching that he required
such asceticism of those who accepted his baptism.

The fundamental note in the message of John
was the announcement of the near approach of the

Messianic age. But while he an-
4. His nounced himself as the herald voice
Message preparing the way of the Lord, and
because of this the expectant multi-
tudes crowded to hear his word, his view of the na-
ture of the kingdom was probably quite at variance
with that of his hearers. Instead of the expected
day of deliverance from the foreign oppressor, it was
to be a day of judgment for Israel. It meant good
for the penitent, but destruction for the ungodly.
“He will gather his wheat into the garner, but the
chaff he will burn up with ... . fire” (Mt 3 12).
“The axe also lieth at the root of the trees: every
tree therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit is
hewn down, and cast into the fire’ (Lk 3 9). Yet
this idea was perhaps not entirely unfamiliar. That
the delay in the Messiah’s coming was due to the
sinfulness of the people and their lack of repentance,
was a commonplace in the message of their teachers
eaters Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, I,

9),

The call to repentance was then a natural message
of preparation for such a time of judgment. But
to John repentance was a very real and radical
thing. It meant a complete change of heart and
life. “Bring forth... . fruits worthy of repent-
ance” (Lk 8 8). What these fruits were he made
clear in his answers to the inquiring multitudes and
the publicans and soldiers (3 10-14). Itis notice-
able that there is no reference to the usual cere-
monies of the law or to achange of occupation. Do
good; be honest; refrain from extortion; be con-
tent with wages.

John used such violence in addressing the Phari-
sees and Sadducees doubtless to startle them from

their self-complacency. How hope-
5. His lessly they were blinded by their sense
Severity of security as the children of Abraham,

and by their confidence in the merits
of the law, is attested by the fact that these par-
ties resisted the teachings of both John and Jesus
to the very end.

With what vigor and fearlessness the Baptist

ressed his demand for righteousness is shown by
is stern reproof of the sin of Herod and Herodias,
pee led to his imprisonment and finally to his
death.

V. Baptism.—The symbolic rite of baptism was
such an essential part of the work of John that it

not only gave him his distinctive title
1. Signifi- of “the Baptist” (6 Bamrrtirys, ho
cance baptistés), but also caused his message
to be styled “preaching the baptism
of repentance.” That a special virtue was ascribed
to this rite, and that it was regarded as a neces-
sary part of the preparation for the coming of the
Messiah, are shown by its important place in John’s
preaching, and by the eagerness with which it was
sought by the multitudes. Its significance may best
be understood by giving attention to its historical
antecedents, for while John gave the rite new sig-
nificance, it certainly appealed to ideas already
familiar to the Jews.

(1) Lustrations required by the Levitical law.—
The divers washings required by the law (Lev 11-
15) have, without doubt, areligiousimport, Thisis


John the Baptist


John, Egistlec ot THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1710


shown by the requirement of sacrifices in connec-
tion with the cleansing, esp. the sin offering (Lev
14 8.9.19.20; ef Mk 1 44; Lk 2 22). The desig-
nation of John’s baptism by the word famritey,
baptizein, which by NT times was used of cere-
monial purification, also indicates some historical
connection (cf Sir 34 25).

(2) Anticipation of Messianic lustrations foretold
by prophets —John understood that his baptism was
a preparation for the Messianic baptism antici-
pated by the prophets, who saw that for a true
cleansing the nation mnst wait until God should
open in Israel a fountain for cleansing (Zec 13 1),
and should sprinkle His people with clean water
and give them a new heart and a new spirit (Ezk
36 25.26; Jer 33 8). His baptism was at once
a preparation and a promise of the spiritual cleans-
ing which the Messiah would bestow. “I indeed
baptize you with water unto repentance: but he
that cometh after me ... . shall baptize you with
the Holy Spirit and with fire’ (Mt 3 11m).

(3) Proselyte baptism.—According to the teaching
of later Judaism, a stranger who desired to be
adopted into the family of Israel was required, along
with circumcision, to receive the rite of baptism as
a means of cleansing from the ceremonial unclean-
ness attributed to him as a Gentile. While it is
not possible to prove the priority of this practice
of proselyte baptism to the baptism of John, there
can be no doubt of the fact, for it is inconceivable,
in view of Jewish prejudice, that it would be bor-
rowed from John or after this time.

While it seems clear that in the use of the rite of
baptism John was influenced by the Jewish customs
of ceremonial washings and proselyte baptism, his
baptism differed very essentially from these. The
Levitical washings restored an unclean person to
his former condition, but baptism was a preparation
for a new condition. On the other hand, proselyte
baptism was administered only to Gentiles, while
John required baptism of all Jews. At the same
time his baptism was very different from Christian
baptism, as he himself declared (Lk 3 16). His was
a baptism of water only; a preparation for the bap-
tism ‘in the Spirit” which was to follow. It is also to
be observed that it was a rite complete in itself, and
that it was offered to the nation as a preparation
for a specific event, the advent of the Messiah.

We may say, then, that as a “baptism of repent-
ance” it meant a renunciation of the past life; as a
cleansing it symbolized the forgiveness of sins (Mk 1
4), and as preparation it implied a promise of loyalty
to the kingdom of the Messiah. We have no reason
to believe that Jesus experienced any sense of sin or
felt any need of repentance or forgiveness; but as a
Divinely appointed preparation for the Messianic
kingdom His submission to it was appropriate.

While the multitudes flocked to the Jordan, Jesus
came also to be baptized with the rest. ‘John

would have hindered him, saying, I
2. Baptism have need to be baptized of thee, and
of Jesus comest thou to me? But Jesus

answering said unto him, Suffer it now:
for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness”
(Mt 3 13-15). Wherein was this act a fulfilment
of righteousness? We cannot believe that Jesus felt
any need of repentance or change of life. May we
not regard it rather as an identification of Himself
with His people in the formal consecration of His
life to the work of the kingdom?

VI. Imprisonment and Death.—Neither the exact
time of John’s imprisonment nor the period of time

between his imprisonment and _ his
1. The death can be determined. On the
Time occasion of the unnamed feast of Jn
6 1, Jesus refers to John’s witness as
already past. At least, then, his arrest, if not his


death, must have taken place prior to that inci-
dent, i.e. before the second Passover of Jesus’ min-
istry. ‘
According to the Gospel accounts, John was im~-
prisoned because of his reproof of Herod’s marriage
with Herodias, the wife of his brother
2. The Philip (Lk 3 19.20; ef Mt 14 3.4;
Occasion Mk 6 17.18). Jos says (Ant, XVIII,
vy, 2) that Herod was influenced to put
John to death by the “fear lest his great influence
over the people might put it in his power or inclina-
tion to raise a rebellion. Accordingly, he was sent
a prisoner, out of Herod’s suspicious temper, to
Machaerus, and was there put to death.” This
account of Jos does not necessarily conflict with the
tragic story of the Gospels. If Herod desired to
punish or destroy him for the reasons assigned by
the evangelists, he would doubtless wish to offer as
the public reason some political charge, and the one
named by Jos would be near at hand.
VII. John and His Disciples.—Frequent refer-
ence is made in the Gospel narrative to the disciples


of John. As the multitudes crowded
1. The to his baptism, it was natural that he
Inner should gather about him an inner circle
Circle of men who should receive special


instruction in the meaning of his work,
and should aid him in the work of baptism, which
must have soon increased beyond his power to per-
form alone. It was in the formation of this inner
circle of immediate followers that he prepared a
sure foundation for the work of the Messiah; for
it was from this inner group that the disciples of
Jesus were mainly drawn, and that with his consent
and through his witness to the superior worth of the
latter, and the temporary character of his own
mission (Jn 1 29-44). ; ro
Concerning the substance of their training, we
know from the disciples of Jesus (Lk 11 1) that it
included forms of prayer, and from his
own disciples (Mt 9 14) we learn that
frequent fastings were observed. We
may be sure also that he taught them
much concerning the Messiah and His work.
There is abundant evidence of the great fidelity
of these disciples to their master. This may be
observed in their concern at the over-
3. Their shadowing popularity of Jesus (Jn 3
Fidelity 26); in their loyalty to him in his im-
prisonment and in their reverent treat-
ment of his body after his death (Mk 6 29). That
John’s work was extensive and his influence lastin
is shown by the fact that 20 years afterward Pau
found in far-off Ephesus certain disciples, including
Apollos, the learned Alexandrian Jew, who knew
no other baptism than that of John (Acts 19 1-7).
VHI. John and Jesus.—John assumed from the
first the réle of a herald preparing the way for the
‘approaching Messianic age. He clear-


2. Their
Training


1. John’s ly regarded his work as Divinely ap-
Relation pointed (Jn 1 33), but was well aware
to Jesus of his subordinate relation to the Mes-


siah (Mk 1 7) and of the temporary

character of his mission (Jn 3 30). The Baptist’s
work was twofold. In his preaching he warned the
nation of the true character of the new kingdom as
a reign of righteousness, and by his call to repent-
ance and baptism he prepared at least a few hearts
for a sympathetic response to the call and teaching
of Jesus. He also formally announced and bore
frequent personal testimony to Jesus as the Messiah.
There is no necessary discrepancy between the
synoptic account and that of the Fourth Gospel
in reference to the progress of John’s knowledge of
the Messianic character of Jesus. According to
Mt 3 14, John is represented as declining at first
to baptize Jesus because he was conscious of His


1711


superiority, while in Jn 1 29-34 he is represented
as claiming not to have known Jesus until He was
manifested by the heavenly sign. The latter may
mean only that, He was not known to him definitely
as the Messiah until the promised sign was given.
The message which John sent to Jesus from prison
seems strange to some in view of the signal testi-
monies which he had previously borne to His charac-
ter. This need not indicate that he had lost faith in
the Messiahship of Jesus, but rather a perplexity at
the course of events. The inquiry may have been in
the interest, of the faith of his disciples or his own re-
lief from misgivings due to Jesus’ delay in assuming
the expected Messianic authority. John evidently
held the prophetic view of a temporal Messianic king-
dom, and some readjustment of view was necessary.
Jesus was no less frank in His appreciation of


John. If praise may be measured by the worth

of the one by whose lips it is spoken,
2..Jesus’ then no man ever received such praise
Estimate as he who was called by Jesus a shining
of John light (Jn 5 35), more than a prophet


Mt 11 9), and of whom He said,
“Among them that are born of women there hath
not arisen a greater than John the Baptist” (Mt 11
11). If, on the other hand, He rated him as less than
the least m the kingdom of heaven, this was a
limitation of circumstances, not of worth.

Jesus paid high tribute to the Divine character
and worth of John’s baptism; first, by submitting
to it Himself as a step in the fulfilment of all right-
eousness; later, by repeated utterance, esp. in asso-
ciating it with the birth of the Spirit as a necessary
condition of inheriting eternal life (Jn 3 5); and,
finally, in adopting baptism as a symbol of Chris-
tian discipleship.

Lirrexnature.—The relative sections in the Gospel
Comm., in the Lives of Christ, and the arts. on John the
Baptist in the several Bible dicts. There are a number
of monographs which treat more minutely of details: W.
C. Duncan, The Life, Character and Acts of John the
Baptist, New York, 1853; Erich Haupt, Johannss der
Téufer, Giitersloh, 1874; H. Kohler, Johannes der
Tdufer, Halle, 1884; R. C. Houghton, John the Baptist:
His Life and Work, New York, 1889; H. R. Reynolds,
John the Baptist, London, 1890; J. Feather, John the
Baptist, Edinburgh, 1894; George Matheson in Repre-
sentative Men of the NT, 24-66, Edinburgh, 1905; T.
Innitzer, Johannes der Tdaufer, Vienna, 1908; A. T.
Robertson, John the Loyal, New York, 1911.

Russet, BensamMin MILLER

JOHN, THE EPISTLES OF:


‘I. Genera, CHARACTER
: 1. A True Letter
2. Subject-Matter t
3. Characteristlcs of the Writer
4. Style and Diction
Poxremicat Aim
. Gnosticism
. Docetism
. Antinomianism
. Cerinthus
TRUCTURE AND SuMMARY
. The Prologue, 1 1-4
. First Cycle, 1 5—2 28
The Christian Life as Fellowshlp with God
(Walking in the Light) Tested by Righteous-
ness, Love and Belief
(a) Paragraph A, 1 8—2 6
(b) Pareprepe B, 2 7-17
{2 ositively
di) Negatively
(c) Male Se h C, 2 18-28
3. Second Cycle,2 29-4 6
Divine Sonship Tested by Righteousness, Love
and Belief
a Paragraph A, 2 29—3 10a


II.


1
2.
3
4
III. 8
1
2


(6) Paragraph B, 3 100-246
(c) Paragraph C, 3_24b—4 6
4, Third Cycle, 4 7 21
Clore Correlation of Righteousness, Love and
Belie
(a) Section I, 4 7—§ 3a
(i) Paragraph A, 4 7-12
fi Paragraph B, 4 13-16
iii
(6) Section I


Verepren C, 4 17—§ 3a
a) oe 7;

i) Paragrap 5

BB Paragraph B, 5


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


| 41), dangers (2 26; 3 7;


John the Baptist
John, Epistles of


Canonicity 4ND AUTHORSHIP
1. Traditionai View
2. Critical Views
3. Internal Evidence
V. ReuatTionsHip To THE FourtH GosPren
. Common Characteristics
. Coincidences of Vocabulary
. Divergences of Vocabulary
. Arguments agalnst Unity of Authorship
. Conclusion
6. Question of Priority
LiveERATURE


Among the 7 NT epp. which from ancient times
have been called “catholic,” there is a smaller group
of three in which the style alike of thought and lan-
guage points to a common authorship, and which are
traditionally associated with the name of the
apostle John. Of these, again, the first differs
widely from the other two in respect not only of
intrinsic importance, but of its early reception in the
church and unquestioned canonicity.


Iv.


uP ON


Tus First Epistus


I. General Character.—Not only is the Ep. an
anonymous writing; one of its unique features
among the books of the NT is that it

1. ATrue does not contain a single proper
Letter name (except Our Lord’s), or a single
definite allusion, personal, historical,
or geographical. It is a composition, however,
which a person calling himself ‘‘I” sends to certain
other persons whom he calls “‘you,”’ and is, in form
at least, a letter. The criticism which has denied
that it is more than formally so is unwarranted. It
does not fall under either of Deissmann’s categories
—the true letter, intended only for the perusal of
the person or persons to whom it is addressed, and
the ep., written with literary art and with an eye
to the public. But it does possess that character
of the NT epp. in general which is well described by
Sir William Ramsay (Letters to the Seven Churches
of Asia, 24): ‘They spring from the heart of the
writer and speak direct to the heart of the readers.
They were often called forth by some special crisis
in the history of the persons addressed, so that they
rise out of the actual situation in which the writer
conceives the readers to be placed; they express the
writer’s keen and living sympathy with and partici-
pation in the fortunes of the whole class addressed,
and are not affected by any thought of a wider
public. .... On the other hand, the letters of
this class express general principles of life and con-
duct, religion and ethics, applicable to a wider range
of circumstances than those which called them
forth; and they appeal as emphatically and inti-
mately to all Christians in all time as they did to
those addressed in the first mstance.” The Ist
Ep. of St. John could not be more exactly character-
ized than by these words. Though its main features
are didactic and controversial, the personal note is
frequently struck, and with much tenderness and
depth of feeling. Under special stress of emotion,
the writer’s paternal love, sympathy and solicitude
break out in the affectionate appellation, “little
children,” or, yet more endearingly, ‘“‘my little
children.” Elsewhere the prefatory ‘‘beloved”
shows how deeply he is stirred by the sublimity of
his theme and the sense of its supreme importance
to his readers. He shows himself intimately ac-
quainted with their religious environment (2 19;
6 21), attainments
(2 12-14.21), achievements (4 4) and needs (3 19;
6 13). Further, the Ep. is addressed primarily
to the circle of those among whom the author has
habitually exercised his ministry as evangelist and
teacher. He has been wont to announce to them
the things concerning the Word of Life (1 1.2),
that they might have fellowship with him (1 3),
and now, that his (or their) joy may be full, he


John, Epistles of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1712


writes these things unto them (1 4). He writes as
light shines. Love makes the task a necessity, but
also a delight.
There is no NT writing which is throughout more
vigorously controversial: for the satisfactory in-
terpretation of the Ep. as a whole,
2. Subject- recognition of the polemical aim that
Matter pervades it is indispensable. But it is
true also that there is no such writing
in which the presentation of the truth more widely
overfiows the limits of the immediate occasion.
The writer so constantly lifts up against the error
he combats, the simple, sublime and satisfying
facts and principles of the Christian revelation, so
lifts up every question at issue into the light of
eternal truth, that the Ep. pursues its course through
the ages, bringing to the church of God the vision
and the inspiration of the Divine. The influence
of the immediate polemical purpose, however, is
manifest, not only in the contents of the Ep., but
in its limitations as well. In a sense it may be said
that the field of thought is a narrow one. God is
seen exclusively as the Father of Spirits, the Light
and Life of the universe of souls. His creatorship
aud government of the world, the providential
aspects and agencies of salvation, the joys and
sorrows, hopes and fears that spring from the ter-
restrial conditions and changes of human life, their
disciplinary purpose and effect—to all this the
Ep. contains no reference. The themes are exclu-
sively theological and ethical. The writer’s imme-
diate interest is confined to that region in which the
Divine and human vitally and directly meet—to
that in God which is communicable to man, to that
in man by which he is capar Dei. The Divine
nature as life and light, and love and righteousness;
the Incarnation of this Divine nature in Jesus, with
its presuppositions and consequences, metaphysical
and ethical; the imparting of this Divine nature
to men by regeneration; the antithesis to it—sin—
and its removal by propitiation; the work of the
Holy Spirit; the Christian life, the mutual indwell-
ing of God and man, as tested by its beliefs, its
antagonism to sin, its inevitable debt of love—
such are the fundamental themes to which every
idea in the Ep. is directly related. The topics, if
few, are supremely great; and the limitations of the
field of vision are more than compensated by the
profundity and intensity of spiritual perception.
The Ep. is in a sense impersonal to the last de-
gree, offering a strange contrast to that frankness
of self-revelation which gives such


3. Charac- charm to St. Paul’s letters; yet few
teristics of writings so clearly reveal the deepest
the Writer characteristics of the writer. We feel


in it the high serenity of a mind that
lives in constant fellowship with the greatest
thoughts and is nourished at the eternal fountain-
head; but also the fervent indignation and vehe-
ment recoil of such a mind in contact with what is
false and evil. It has been truly called ‘‘the most
passionate” book in the NT. Popular instinct has
not erred in giving to its author the title, ‘“Apostle
of Love.’ Of the various themes which are so
wonderfully intertwined in it, that to which it most
of all owes its unfading charm and imperishable
value is love. Itrises to its sublimest height, to the
apex of al] revelation, in those passages in which
its author is so divinely inspired to write of the
eternal life, in God and man, as love.

But it is an inveterate misconception which re-
gards him solely as the exponent of love. Equally
he reveals himself as one whose mind is dominated
by the sense of truth. There are no words more
characteristic of him than “true” (aléhinds, de-
noting that which both ideally and really corre-
sponds to the name it bears) and “the truth”


(alétheia, the reality of things sub specie aelernitatis).
To him Christianity is not only a principle of ethics,
or even a way of salvation; it is both of them, be-
cause it is primarily the truth, the one true dis-
closure of the realities of the spiritual and eternal
world. ‘Thus it is that his thought so constantly
develops itself by antithesis. Each conception has
its fundamental opposite: light, darkness; life,
death; love, hate; truth, falsehood; the Father,
the world; God, the devil. There is no shading,
no gradation in the picture. No sentence 1s more
characteristic of the writer than this: “Ye know
that no lie is of the truth” (2 21m). But again,
his sense of these radical antagonisms is essentially
moral, rather than intellectual. It seems impos-
sible that any writing could display a more impas-
sioned sense, than this Ep. does, of the tremendous
imperative of righteousness, a more rigorous intol-
erance of all sin (2 4; 3 4.8.9.10). The absolute
antagonism and incompatibility between the Chris-
tian life and sin of whatsoever kind or degree is
maintained with a vehemence of utterance that
verges at times upon the paradoxical (8 9; 5 18).
So Iong as the church lays up this Ep. in its heart,
it can never lack a moral tonic of wholesome
severity. :

The style is closely, though perhaps unconscious-
ly, molded upon the Heb model, and esp. upon the

parallelistic forms of the Wisdom lit.
4, Style and One has only to read the Ep. with an
Diction attentive ear to-perceive that, though

using another language, the writer
had in his own ear, all the time, the swing and ca-
dences of Heb verse. The diction is inartificial
and unadorned. Not a simile, not a metaphor
(except the most fundamental, like ‘walking in the
light”) occurs. The limitations in the range of
ideas are matched by those of vocabulary and_by
the unvarying simplicity of syntactical form. Yet
limited and austere as the literary medium is, the
writer handles its resources often with consummate
skill. The crystalline simplicity of the style per-
fectly expresses the simple profundity of the thought.
Great spiritual intuitions shine like stars in sen-
tences of clear-cut gnomic terseness. Historical
(1 1) and theological (1 2; 4 2) statements are
made with exquisite precision. The frequent
reiteration of nearly the same thoughts in nearly the
same language, though always with variation and
enrichment, gives a cumulative effect which is
singularly impressive. Such passages as 2 14-17,
with its calm challenge to the arrogant materialism
of the world—‘‘And the world passeth away, and
the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God
abideth for ever’’—or the closing vs of the Ep., with
their thrice-repeated triumphant ‘we know” and
their last word of tender, urgent admonition, have
a solemn magnificence of effect which nothing but
such simplicity of language, carrying such weight
of thought, could produce. If it has been true of
any writer that “le style est ’homme,”’ it is true of
the author of this Ep.

If. Polemical Aim.—The polemical intention of
the Ep. has been universally recognized; but there
has been diversity of opinion as to its actual object.
By the older commentators, generally, this was
found in the perilous state of the church or churches


. addressed, which had left their first love and lapsed


into Laodicean lukewarmness. But the Ep. gives
no sign of this, and it contains many passages that
are Inconsistent with it (2 13.14.20.21.27; 4 4;
5 18-20). The danger which immediately threat-
ens the church is from without, not from within.
There is a “spirit of error’ (4 6) abroad: in the world.
From the church itself (2 18), many “false prophets”
have gone forth (4 1), corrupters of the gospel,
veritable antichrists (2 18). And it may be as-


1713


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA John, Epistles of


serted as beyond question that the peril against
which the Ep. was intended to arm the church was
the spreading influence of some form of Gnosticism.

The pretensions of Gnosticism to a higher esoteric
knowledge of Divine things seems to- be clearly


referred to in several passages. In
2 4.6.9, e.g. one might suppose that
they are almost verbally quoted (‘He
: that saith’; “I know Him”; “I
abide in Him”; “I am in the light’). When we
observe, moreover, the prominence given through-
out to the idea of knowledge and the special sig-
nificance of some of these passages, the conviction
grows that the writer’s purpose is not only to refute
the false, but to exhibit apostolic Christianity, be-
lieved and lived, as the true Gnosis—the Divine
reality of which Gnosticism was but a fantastic
caricature. The confidence he has concerning his
readers is that they “know him who is from the be-
ginning,” that they “know the Father” (2 18).
“Every one that loveth is begotten of God, and
knoweth God” (4 7); and the final note upon which
the Ep. closes is: ‘We know him that is true, and we
are in him that is true” (5 20). The knowledge of
the ultimate Reality, the Being who is the eternal
life, is for Christian and Gnostic alike the goal of
aspiration.

But it is against two closely related developments
of gnostic tendency, a docetic view of the incarna-
tion, and an antinomian view of morals, that the Ep.
is specifically directed. Both of these sprang nat-
urally from the dualism which was the fundamental
and formative principle of Gnosticism in all its
many forms. According to the dualistic conception
of existence, the moral schism of which we are
conscious in experience is original, eternal, inherent
in the nature of beings. There are two independent
and antagonistic principles of being from which
severally come all the good and all the evil that
exist. The source and the seat of evil were found
in the materia] element, in the body with its senses
and appetites, and in its sensuous earthly environ-
ment; and it was held inconceivable that the Di-
vine nature should have immediate contact with the
material side of existence, or influence upon it.

To such a view.of the universe Christianity could
be adjusted only by a docetic interpretation of the

Person of Christ. A real incarnation

2. Docetism was unthinkable. The Divine could
enter into no actual union with a cor-

poreal organism. The human nature of Christ
and the incidents of His earthly career were more
or less an illusion. And it is with this docetic sub-
version of the truth of the incarnation that the
“antichrists” are specially identified (2 22.23; 4 2.3),
and against it that St. John directs with whole-
hearted fervor his central thesis—the complete, per-
manent, personal identification of the historical Jesus
with the Divine Being whois the Word of Life (1 1),
the Christ (4 2) and the Son of God (6 5): ‘Jesus is
the Christ come in the flesh.” In Jn 6 6 there isa
still more definite reference to the special form which
ostic Christology assumed in the teaching of
Cernthius and his school. According to Irenaeus
(Adv. Haer., i.26, 1) this Cerinthus, who was St.
John’s prime antagonist in Ephesus, taught that
Jesus was the son of Joseph and Mary, and was dis-
tinguished from other men only by superiority in
justice, prudence and wisdom; that at His baptism
the heavenly Christ descended upon Him in the
form of a dove; that on the eve of His Passion, the
Christ again left Jesus, so that Jesus died and rose
again, but the Christ, being spiritual, did not suffer.
That is to say, that, in the language of the Ep., the
Christ ‘“‘came by water,” but not, as St. John
strenuously affirms, “by water and blood....
not with the water only, but with the water and


1. Gnosti-
cism


with the blood” (6 6). He who was baptized of
John in Jordan, and He whose life-blood was shed
on Calvary, is the same Jesus and the same Christ,
the same Son of God eternally.

A further consequence of the dualistic interpre-
tation of existence is that sin, in the Christian mean-

ing of sin, disappears. It is no longer
3. Anti- a moral opposition (anemia), in the
nomianism human personality, to good; it is a

physical principle inherent in all non-
spiritual being. Not the soul, but the flesh is its
organ; and redemption consists, not in the renewal
of the moral nature, but in its emancipation from
the flesh. Thus it is no mere general contingency,
but a definite tendency that is contemplated in the
repeated warning: “If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
.... If we say that we have not sinned, we make
him a liar, and his word is not in us” (1 8.10).

With the nobler and more earnest spirits the prac-
tical corollary of this irreconcilable dualism in
human nature was the ascetic life; but to others
the same principle readily suggested an opposite
method of achieving the sou]’s deliverance from the
yoke of the material—an attitude of moral indiffer-
ence toward the deeds of the body. Let the duality
of nature be boldly reduced to practice. Let body
and spirit be regarded as separate entities, each
obeying its own laws and acting according to its
own nature, without mutual interference; the
spiritual nature could not be involved in, nor affected
by, the deeds of the flesh. Vehement opposition
to this deadly doctrine is prominent in the Ep.—
in such utterances as ‘Sin is lawlessness” (3 4)
and its converse ‘‘All unrighteousness is sin’ (6 17),
but esp. in the stringent emphasis laid upon actual
conduct, “doing” righteousness or “doing” sin.
The false spiritualism which regards the contempla-
tion of heavenly things as of far superior importance
to the requirements of commonplace morality is
sternly reprobated: ‘Little children, let no man
lead you astray: he that doeth righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous” (3 7); and the
converse application of the same doctrine, that the
mere “‘doing” of sin is of little or no moment to the
“spiritual” man, is met with the trenchant declara-
tion, “He that doeth sin is of the devil” (3 8). The
whole passage (2 29—3 10) presupposes, as familiar
to its readers, a doctrine of moral indifferentism
according to which the status of the spiritual man is
not to be tested by the commonplace facts of moral
conduct. It is only as a passionate contradiction
of this hateful tenet that the paradoxical language of
3 6.9 and 6 18 can be understood.

To the same polemical necessity is due the unique-
ly reiterated emphasis which the Ep. lays upon
brotherly love, and the almost fierce tone in which
the new commandment is promulgated. To the
Gnostic, knowledge was the sum of attainment.
“They give no heed to love,” says Ignatius, ‘‘caring
not for the widow, the orphan or the afflicted,
neither for those who are in bonds nor. for those
who are released from bonds, neither for the hungry
nor the thirsty.” That a religion which banished
or neglected love should call itself Christian or
claim affinity with Christianity excites St. John’s
hottest indignation; against it he lifts up his su-
preme truth, God is love, with its immediate conse-
quence that to be without love is to be without
capacity for knowing God (4 7.8). The assumption
of a lofty mystical piety apart from dutiful conduct
in the ordinary relations of life is ruthlessly under-
lined as the vaunt of a self-deceiver (4 20); and
the crucial test by which we may assure our self-
accusing hearts that we are “of the truth” is love
“not in word, neither with the tongue; but in deed
and truth” (3 18).


John, Epistles of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1714


The question is raised whether the polemic of the
Ep. is directed against the same persons throughout
or whether in its two branches, the Christological
and the ethical, it has different objects of attack.
The latter view is maintained on the ground that
no charge of libertine teaching or conduct is brought
against the “antichrists,’ and there is no proof
that docetism in Asia Minor lay open to such a
charge. But the other view has greater probability.
The Ep. suggests nothing else than that the same
spirit of error which is assailing the faith of the
church (4 6) is also a peril to the moral integrity
of its life (3 7). And if there is no proof that
docetism in Asia Minor was also antinomian, there
is no proof that it was not. The probability is that
it was. Docetism and the emancipation of . the
Gober both natural fruits of the dualistic theory
of life.

The name which unvarying tradition associates
with the Ep., as St. John’s chief antagonist in

Ephesus, is that-of Cerinthus. Un-
4. Cerinthus fortunately the accounts which have

come down to us of Cerinthus and his
teaching are fragmentary and confused, and those
of his character, though unambiguous, come only
from his opponents. But it is certain that he held
a docetic view of the incarnation, and, according to
the only accounts we possess, his character was that


of a voluptuary. So far as they go, the historical |


data harmonize with the internal evidence of the
Ep. itself in giving the impression that the different
tendencies it combats are such as would be naturally
evolved in the thought and practice of those who
held, as Cerinthus did, that the material creation,
and even the moral law, had its origin, not in the
Supreme God, but in an inferior power.

Wf, Stracture and Summary.—In the judgment
of many critics, the Ep. possesses nothing that can
be called an articulate structure of thought, its
aphoristic method admitting of no logical develop-
ment; and this estimate has a large measure of
support in the fact that there isno NT writing regard-
ing the plan of which there has been greater variety
of opinion. The present writer believes, neverthe-
less, that it is erroneous, and that, in its own unique
way, the Ep. is a finely articulated composition.
The word that best describes the author’s mode of
thinking is “spiral.” The course of thought does
not move from point to point in a straight line. It
is like a winding staircase—always revolving around
the same center, always recurring to the same topics,
but at a higher level.

Carefully following the topical order, one finds,
e.g., a paragraph (2 3-6) insisting upon practical
righteousness as a guaranty of the Christian life;
then one finds this treated a second time in 2 29—
3 10a; and yet again in 6 3 and 5 18. Similarly,
we find a paragraph on the necessity of love in 2
7-11, and again in 3 105-20, and yet again in 4 7-13,
and also in 4 17—5 2. So also, a paragraph con-
cerning the necessity of holding the true belief in
the incarnate Son of God in 2 18-28, in 4 1-6, and
the same subject recurring in 4 13-16 and 5 4-12.
And we shall observe that everywhere these indis-
pensable characteristics of the Christian life are
applied as tests; that in effect the Ep. is an ap-

aratus of tests, Its definite object being to furnish
its readers with the necessary criteria by which they
may sift the false from the true, and satisfy them-
selves of their being “begotten of God.” ‘These
things have I written unto you, that ye may
know that ye have eternal life’ (5 13). These
fundamental tests of the Christian life—doing right-
eousness, loving one another, believing that Jesus
is the Christ come in the fiesh—are the connecting
themes that bind together the whole structure of
the Ep, Thus if we divide the Ep. into 3 main


sections, the first ending at 2 28, the second at 4 6,
the result is that in the first and second of these sec-
tions we find precisely the same topics coming in
precisely the same order; while in the third section
(4 7—6 21), though the sequence is somewhat
different, the thought-material is exactly the same.
The leading themes, the tests of righteousness, love,
and belief, are all present; and they alone are
present. There is, therefore, a natural division of
the Ep. into these three main sections, or, as they
might be descriptively called, ‘cycles,’ in each of
which the same fundamental themes appear. On
this basis we shall now give a brief analysis of its
structure and summary of its contents.

The writer announces the source of the Christian reve-


lation—the historical manifestation of the eternal Di-
vine life in Jesus Christ—and declares


1. The himself a personal witness of the facts in
Prologue which this manifestation has been given.

gue, Here, at the outset, he hoists the flag
1:14 under which he fights. The incarnation


is not seeming or temporary, but real.
That which was from the beginning—''the eternal
life, which was with the Father'’—is identical with
‘‘that which we have heard, that which we have seen
with our eyes, that which we bebeld, and our hands
handled."’
Phe Christian life, as fellowship with God (walking inthe
Light) tested by righteousness, love and belief. —The basis of
the whole section is the announcement:


2. First “God is light, and in him is no darkness at-
Cyel ail'' (ver 5). What God is at once deter-

ycle, mines the condition of fellowship with
1:6—2:28 Him; and this, therefore, isset forth: first,


negatively (1 6): ‘if wesay that we have

fellowship with him and walk in the darkness''; then,

ositively (1 7): ‘if we walk in the light, as he isiu the

ight.’" What, then, is it to walk in the light, and what

to walk in darkness? The answer is given in what
foilows.

(a) Paragraph A,1 8—2 6 (walking in the Light tested
by righteousness): First, in confession of sin (1 8—2 2),
then in actual obedience (2 3-6). The first fact upon
which the fight of God impinges in human life is sin;
and the first test of walking in the light is the recognition
and confession of this fact. Such confession is the first
step into fellowship with God, becanse it brings us under
the cieansing power of the blood of Jesus, His Son
(1 7), and makes His intercession available for us (2 1).
But the light not only reveals sin; its greater function
is toreveal duty; and to walk in the light is to keep God's
commandments (2 3), His word (2 5), and to walk
even as Christ walked (2 6).

(o) Paragraph B, 2 7-17 (walking in the Light tested
by love): @) Positively: The old-new commandment
(2 7-11). Love is the commandment which is “old,”
because familiar to the readers of the Ep. from their first
acquaintance with the rudiments of Christianity (2 7);
but also *‘new,’’ because ever fresh and living to those
who have fellowship with Christ in the true light which is
now shining for them (2 8). On the contrary, ‘‘He that
salth he is In the light and hateth his brother, is in the
darkness" (2 9). The antithesis is then repeated with
variation and enrichment of thought (vs 10.11). (Then
follows a parenthetical address to the readers [vs 12-14].
This being treated as a parenthesis, the unity of the
paragraph at once becomes apparent.)

(il), Negatively: If walking in_the iight has its guar-
anty in loving one's “brother,” it is tested no less by
not loving ‘the world.'’ One cannot at the same time

articipate in the life of God and in a moral life which
8 governed by the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the valn-glory of the worid.

(c) Paragraph C, 2 18-28 (walking in the Light
tested hy belief): The iight of God not only reveals
sin and duty, the children of God (our ‘‘brother") and
“the world” in their true character; it aiso reveals
Jesus In His true character, as the Christ, the incarnate
Son of God. And ali that cails itself Christianity is to
be tested by its reception or rejection of that ‘truth.
In this paragraph light and darkness are not Sx presaly
referred to; but the continuity of thought with the pre-
ceding paragraphs is unmistakable. Throughout this
first division of the Ep. the point of view is that of
fellowship with God, through receiving and acting accord-
pe the light which His self-revelation sheds upon all
things in the spirituai realm. Unreal Christianity in
every form is comprehensively a “lie.” It may be the
antinomian ‘‘iie"’ of him who says he has nosin (1 8) yet
Is indifferent to pooping God's commandments (2 4), the
jie of lovelessness (2 9), or the lie of Antichrist, who,
clean spirituai enlightenment, yet denies that Jesus
is the Christ (2 22).

Divine sonship tested by righteousness, love and belief.
—The first main division of the Ep. began with the
assertion of what God is as seif-reveaiing—light. He


1715


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA John, Epistles of


becomes to us the light in which we behold our sin,
our duty, our brother, the world, Jesus the Christ; and
only in acknowledging and loyally acting


3. Second out the truth thus revealed can we have
Cycle fellowship with God. This second division,

ycle, on the other hand, begins with the asser-
2:29—4:6 tion of what the Divine nature is in Itself,


and thence deduces the essential char-
acteristics of those who are ‘‘ hegotten of God."

(a) Paragraph A, 2 293 10a (Divine sonship tested
by righteousness): This test is inevitable, ‘If ye
know that he is righteous, ye know that every one aiso
that doeth righteousness is begotten of him" (2 29).
But this new idea, ‘' begotten of God."' arrests for a time
its orderly development. The writer is carried away
by wonder and thanksgiving at the thought that sinful
man should be brought into such a relation as this to God.
“Behold what manner of love!" he exclaims. This

‘leads him to contemplate, further, the present conceai-
ment of the glory of God's chiidren, and the splendor
of its future manifestation (8 1.2). Then the thought
that the fulfilment of this hope is necessarily conditioned
by present endeavor after moral likeness to Christ (ver
3) leads back to the main theme, that the life of Divine
sonship Js by necessity of nature one of absolute antago-
nism to all sin. This necessity is exhibited (1) in the
light of the moral authority of God—sin is lawlessness
(ver 4); (2) in the light of Christ's character, in which
there is no sin, and of the purpose of His mission, which
is to take away sin (vs 5-7); (3) in the light of the
diabolic origin of sin (ver 8); (4) in the light of the God-
begotten quality of the Christian life (ver 9). Finally,
in this is declared to_be the manifest distinction be-
vacen ae children of God and the children of the devll

ver >

(b) Paragraph B, 3 10b-24a (Divine sonship tested by
love): This test is inevitable (vs 106.11). The thought
is then developed pictorially instead of_ dialectica ly.
Cain is the prototype of hate (ver Aa) Cain's spirit ig
reproduced in the world (ver ae ove is the sign of
having passed from death into life (ver 14a); the ab-
sence of it, the sign of abiding in death (vs 145.15).
In glorious contrast to the sinister figure of Cain, who
sacrifices his brother's life to his morbid self-love, is the
figure of Christ, who sacrificed His own life in love to us
His brethren (ver 16a); whence the inevitable inference
that our life, if one with His, must obey the same law

(ver 166). Genuine love consists not in words, but In
deeds (vs 17.18); and from the evidence of such love
alone can we rightly possess confidence toward God
(vs 19.20) in prayer (ver 22). Then follows recapitu-
lation (vs 23.24), combining, under the category of
“‘commandment,”’ love and also belief on His Son Jesus
Christ. Thus a transition is made fo Paragraph Cc.

(c) Paragraph C, 3 24b—4 6 (Divine sonship tested
by belief): This test is inevitable (3 24b).. ** We know
that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he gave us'';
and the Spirit ‘which he gave us” is the Spirit that
“confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh”

42). On the contrary, the Spirit that confesseth not

esus is the spirit of Antichrist (ver 3). Then follows
a characterization of those who receive the true and of
those who receive the faise teaching (vs 4—6).

Closer correlation of righteousness, love and belief.—
In this closing part, the Hp. rises to its loftiest heights;

but the logical analysis of it is more diffl-

4, Third cult, It may be divided into two main
Cycle, 4:7— cesta dealing respectively with love and

Sie elief.

6:21 (a) Szcrion I, 4 7—5 3a, on love.—
Gi) Paragraph A, 4 7-12: This paragraph

ounds more deeply than before the test of love. Love
is indispensable, because God is love (vs7.8). The proof
that God is love is the mission of Christ (ver 9); which
is also the absolute revelation of what love, truly so
calied, is (ver 10). But this love of God imposes upon us

an unescapable obligation to love one another (ver 11);

and only from the fulfilment of this can we obtain the

assurance that ‘God abideth in us" (ver 12).

Gi) Paragraph B, 4 13-16: This paragraph strives
to show the inner relation between Christian belief and
Christian love. The true belief is indispensable as a

uaranty of Christian life, because the Spirit of God is
ts author (ver 13). The true helief is that ‘‘ Jesus is
the Son of God" (vg 14.15). In this is found the vital
ground of Christian love (ver 16). zy

Gii) Paragraph C, 4 17—5 3a: Here the subject is
the effect, motives and manifestations of brotherly love.
The effect is confidence toward God (vs 17.18); the mo-
tives: (1) God's love to us (ver 19); (2) that the only
possible response to this is to love our brother (ver 20);
(3) that this is Christ’s commandment (ver 21); (4) that
it is the natural instinct of spiritual kinship (5 1).
But true love is inseparable from righteousness. We
truly love the children of God only when_we love God,
and we love God only when we keep His command-
ments (vs 2.3a).

(b) pee lap re II, § 36-21, on belief.—(i) Paragraph A,
5 36-12: Righteousness is possible only through belief.
Tt is our faith that makes the commandments ‘not
grievous” because it overcomes the world (vs 36.4).
Then follows a restatement of the contents of the true


bellef, specially directed against the Cerinthian heresy
(vs 5.6); then an expositlon of the " witness '' upon which
thls belief rests (vs 7-10); then a reiterated declaration
of its being the test and guaranty of possessing eternal
IMfe (vs 11.12).


(il) Paragraph B, § 13-21: This closing paragraph
sets forth the great triumphant certainties of Christian
belief: its certainty of eternal lite (ver 13), and of pre-
valling In prayer ts 14.15). Then the writer guards
himself by citing an instance in which such certainty
is unattainabie—prayer for those that sin unto death—
and reminds his readers that all unrighteousness, though
not sin unto death, is sin (vs 16.17). He then resumes
the great certainties of Christian hellet: the certainty
that the Christian life stands always and everywhere
for righteousness, absolute antagonism to all sin (ver 18);
the certainty of the moral gulf between it and the lIlfe
of the world (ver 19); its certainty of ltself, of the facts
on which 1t rests, and the supernatural power which has
given perception of these facts (ver 20). With an
abrupt, affectionate call to those who know the true God
to beware of yielding thelr trust and dependence to
“idois,"’ the Ep. ends.


IV. Canonicity and Authorship.—As to the
reception of the Ep. in the church, it is needless to
cite any later witness than Eusebius
1. Tradi- (¢ 325), who classes it among the books
tional View (homolegoumena) whose canonical rank
was undisputed. It is quoted by
Dionysius, bishop of Alexandria (247-65), by the
Muratorian Canon, Cyprian, Origen, Tertullian,
Clement of Alexandria, and Irenaeus. Papias (who
is described by Irenaeus as a “hearer of John and a
companion of Polycarp”) is stated by Eusebius to
have “used some testimonies from John’s former
ep.”’; and Polycarp’s Ep. to the Philippians (e 115)
contains an almost verbal reproduction of 1 Jn 4
8. Reminiscences of it are traced in Athenagoras
(c 180), the Ep. to Diognetus, the Ep. of Barnabas,
more distinctly in Justin (Dial. 123) and in the
Didache; but it is possible that the earliest of these
indicate the currency of Johannine expressions in
certain Christian circles rather than acquaintance
with the Ep. itself. The evidence, however, is
indisputable that this Ep., one of the latest of the
NT books, took immediately and permanently an
unchallenged position as a writing of inspired author-
ity. It is no material qualification of this state-
ment to add that, in common with the other Jo-
hannine writings, it was rejected, for dogmatic
reasons, by Marcion and the so-called Alogi; and
that, like all the catholic epp., it was unknown to
the Canon of the ancient Syrian church, and is
stated to have been ‘abrogated’? by Theodore
(bishop of Mopsuestia, 8393-428 AD).
The verdict of tradition_is equally unanimous that


the Fourth Gospel and the First Ep. are both the legacy
of the apostle John in his old age to the


2. Critical church. All the Fathers already men-
a tioned as quoting the Ep. (excepting Poly-
Views carp, but including Irenaeus) quote it as


the work of St. John; and, until the end
of the 16th cent., this opinion was held as unquestion-
able. The first of modern scholars to chalienge it was
Joseph Scaliger (1540-1609), who rejected the entire trio
of Johannine Epp. as unapostolic; and In later times a
dual authorship of the Gospel and the First Ep. has been
maintained by Baur, H. J. Holtzmann, Pfieiderer, von
Soden, and others; although on this particular point
other adherents of the critical school, like Jiilicher,
Wrede and Wernle, accept the traditional view.


Thus two questions are raised: first, what light
does the Ep. shed upon the personality of its own
author? And second, whether or not

3. Internal the Gospel and the Ep. are from the
Evidence same hand. Now, while the Ep.
furnishes no clue by which we ean
identify the writer, it enables us very distinctly to
class him. His relation to his readers, as we have
seen, is intimate. The absence of explicit reference
to either writer or readers only shows how intimate
it was. For the writer to declare his identity was
superfluous. Thought, language, tone—all were
too familiar to be mistaken. The Ep. bore its
author’s signature in every line. His position


John, Epistles ofp THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1716


toward his readers was, moreover, authoritative. As
has already been said, the natural interpretation of
1 2.3 is that the relation between them was that of
teacher and taught. (By this fact we may account
for the enigmatic brevity of such a passage as that
on the “three witnesses.” The writer intended
only to recall fuller oral expositions formerly given
of the same topics.) The writer is at any rate a
person of so distinctive eminence and recognized
authority that it is not necessary to remind the
readers either who he is or by what circumstances
he is compelled now to address them through the
medium of writing; their knowledge of both facts is
taken for granted. And all this agrees with the
traditional account of St. John’s relation to the
churches of Asia Minor in the last decades of the
Ist cent.

Further, the writer claims to be one of the original
witnesses of the facts of the incarnate life: “That
which was from the beginning, that which we have
heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that
which we beheld, and our hands handled, concerning
the Word of life (and the life was manifested, and
we have seen, and bear witness, and declare unto
you the life, the eternal life, which was with the
Father, and was manifested unto us); that which
we have seen and heard declare we unto you also,
that ye also may have fellowship with us” (1 1-3).
To understand the ‘“Word of life’’ here as the gospel
(Westcott, Rothe, Haupt) seems to the present
writer frankly impossible; and not less so the
theories by which the words “what we have heard,
what we have seen with our eyes,” etc, are regarded
as utterances of the “faith-mysticism”’ or the ‘‘col-
lective testimony” of the early church. It is diffi-
cult to imagine words more studiously adapted to
convey the impression that the writer is one of the
original, first-hand witnesses of Christ’s life and res-
urrection (‘that what we beheld, and our hands
handled”; ef Lk 24 39). At furthest, the use of
such language is otherwise compatible with veracity
only on the supposition that the writer was recog-
nized by the church as so closely identified with
the original witnesses that he could speak of their
testimony as virtually his own. But, apart from
the presumption that he cannot have been one of
the actual disciples of Jesus, there is really nothing
to besaid for thissupposition. So far as theinternal
evidence is concerned, the ancient and unbroken
tradition which assigns it to the apostle John must
be regarded as holding the field, unless, indeed, the
traditional authorship is disproved by arguments
of the most convincing kind. Whether the argu-
ments brought against the apostolic authorship of
the Johannine writings as a whole possess this
character.is too large a question to be investigated
here. Yet the kernel of it lies in small compass.
It is whether room can be found within the 1st cent.
for so advanced a stage of theological development
as is reached in the Johannine writings, and whether
this development can be conceivably attributed to
one of Our Lord’s original] disciples. To neither
of these questions, as it appears to the present writer,
is a dogmatically negative answer warranted. If
within a period comparatively so brief, Christian
thought had already passed through the earlier and
later Pauline developments, and through such a
development as we find in the Ep. to the He, there
is no obvious reason why it may not have attained
to the Johannine, within the lifetime of the last
survivor of the apostles. Nor, when we consider
the nature of the intellectual influences, within and
without the church, by which the apostle John was
surrounded, if, as tradition says, he lived on to a
green old age in Ephesus, is there any obvious
reason why he may not have been the chief instru-
ment of that development.


V. Relationship to the Fourth Gospel.—The
further question remains as to the internal evidence
the Ep. supplies regarding its relation
1. Common to the Fourth Gospel. Prima facie,
Character- the case for identity of authorship is
istics overwhelmingly strong. The two
writings are equally saturated with
that spiritual and theological atmosphere; they are
equally characterized by that type of thought
which we call Johannine and which presents an
interpretation of Christianity not less original and
distinctive than Paulinism. Both exhibit the same
mental and moral habit of viewing every subject
with an eye that stedfastly beholds radical antago-
nisms and is blind to approximations. There isin
both the same strongly Heb style of composition;
the same development of ideas by parallelism or
antithesis; the same repetition of keywords like
“begotten of God,” “abiding,” “keeping his com-
mandments”; the same monotonous simplicity in
the construction of sentences, with avoidance of
relative clauses and singular parsimony in the use
of connecting particles; the same apparently tauto-
logical habit of resuming consideration of a subject
from a slightly different point of view; the same
restricted range of vocabulary, which, moreover, is
identical to an extent unparalleled in two independ-
ent writings.
The evidence for these statements cannot be pre-
sented here in full; but the following are some of the
words and phrases characteristic of
2. Coinci- both and not found elsewhere in the
dences of NT—the Word, joy fulfilled, to see
Vocabulary (or behold) and bear witness, to do
the truth, to havesin, Paraclete, to keep
the word (of God or Christ), to abide (in God or
in Christ), the true light, new commandment, little
children (feknia), children (paidia), to abide for
ever, begotten of God, to purify one’s self, to do sin,
to take away sins, works of the devil, to pass from
death into life, murderer, to lay down one’s life, to
be of the truth, to give commandment, to hear
(=to hear approvingly), no man hath beheld God
at any time, knowing and believing, Saviour of the
world, water and blood, to overcome the world, to
receive witness, to give eternal life, to have eternal
life (in present sense), to believe in the name.
The following are some of the terms common to both,
which are found very rarely elsewhere in the NT:
Beginning (=past eternity), to be manifested (9 t
in each), to bear witness (6 t in the Ep., 33 t in the
Gospel, once only in Mt, once in Lk, not at all in
Mk), light (metaphorical), walk (metaphorical), to
lead astray, to know (God, Christ, or Spirit, 8 t in
the Ep., 10t in the Gospel), true (aléthinés), to confess
Jesus (elsewhere only in Rom 10 9), children of God,
to destroy (léein, elsewhere only in 2 Pet), the
spirit of truth, to send (apostéllein, of mission of
Christ), only begotten son, to have the witness (else-
where only in Apoc), to hear (=to answer prayer).
On the other hand, the divergences of vocabulary
are not More numerous than might be expected in
two writings by the same author but
3. Diver- of different literary form. The rather
gences of notable difference in the choice and
Vocabulary use of particles is accounted for by
: the fact that dialogue and narrative,
of which the Gospel is largely composed, are foreign
to the Ep. The discrepancy, when closely exam-
ined, sometimes turns out to be a point of real simi-
larity. Thus the particle ogn occurs nearly 200 t
in the Gospel, not at all in the Ep. But in the
Gospel it is used only in narrative, no occurrence of
it being found, e.g. in chs 14-16.
Of the words and phrases contained in the Ep.,
but not in the Gospel, the great majority are ac-
counted for by the fact that they are used in con-


1717


nection with topics which are not dealt with in the


Gospel. Apart from these, the following may be
noted, the most important being italicized: Word
of life, fellowship, to confess sins (nowhere else in
the NT), to cleanse from sin, propitiation (hilasmés,
nowhere else in the NT), perfected or perfect love,
last hour, Antichrist, anointing, to give of the spirit,
to have (Father, Son) boldness (Godward), Pa-
rousia, lawlessness, seed (of God), come in the flesh,
God is love, Day of Judgment, belief (pistis), to
make God a liar, understanding. As regards style
and diction, therefore, it seems impossible to con-
ceive of two independent literary productions having
a more intimate affinity. The relation between
them in this respect is far closer than that between
the Acts of the Apostles and the Third Gospel, or
even any two of St. Paul’s Epp., except those to the

Eph and the Col.
Arguments for a dual authorship are based
chiefly on certain theological emphasis and develop-
ments in the Ep., which are absent


4. Argu- from the Gospel; and invariably these
ments arguments have been pressed with
against complete disregard of the fact that the
Unity of one writing purports, at least, to be a
Authorship Gospel, the other, an utterance of the


writer in propria persona. If, for
example, it is urged that the words ‘He is faithful
and righteous to forgive us our sins” have a more
Pauline ring than any utterance of the Fourth
Gospel, or that the conceptions in the Ep. of pro-
pitiation, intercession, and cleansing, are presented
in a more explicit and technical form than _in the
Gospel, it is a fair reply to ask, Why not? Is it to
be accepted as a canon of criticism that the writer
of that Gospel must necessarily have put all his own
theological expressions into the mouth of Him whose
teaching he proposed to report? Much is made
of the assertion that in the matter of the last
things the Ep. recedes from the idealism of the
Gospel, placing itself more nearly in line with
the traditional apocalyptic eschatology. Whereas
the Gospel speaks of Christ’s bodily departure as the
necessary condition of His coming again in the
Spirit to make His permanent abode with His dis-
ciples (Jn 16 7), the writer of the Ep. thinks of a
visible Parousia as nigh at hand (2 28); and where-
as the Gospel conceives of judgment as a present
spiritual fact. (Jn 3 18.19), the Ep. clings to the
“popular” idea of a Judgment Day. But it ought
to be noted that in the Ep., as compared with the
Gospel, the eschatological perspective is foreshort-
ened. The author writes under the conviction that
“the world is passing away” and that the ‘ast
hour” of its day has come (2 17.18). And it is an
unwarrantable assumption that he must, if he wrote
the Gospel, have been guilty of the manifest
anachronism of importing this conviction into it
also. Apart from this the fundamental similarities
between the eschatology of the Ep. and that of the
Gospel are far more striking than the differences.
In both, eternal life is conceived of as a present and
not merely a future possession. In both, Christ’s
presence is an abiding reality—‘‘Our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ”
(1 3). If the Gospel speaks of the revelation of
Christ as bringing present and inevitable “judg-
ment” into the world, the Ep. is saturated with the
same thought. If, on the other band, the Ep.
speaks of a visible future Parousia, this is plainly
implied in Jn 5 28.29. If the Ep. makes a single
reference to the Day of Judgment (4 17),the Gospel
has 6 passages which speak of the “last day,” and
in these the “last day” is explicitly the day of
resurrection (11 24) and of judgment (12 48). In
the two writings different features of the escha-
tological picture may be made more or less con-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA John, Epistles of


spicuous; but there is no such diversity as to war-
rant the hypothesis of a separate authorship.
Again, it is urged that in the Ep. the conception of
the Logos is modified in the direction of conformity
to traditional doctrine. The conception of the
personal, preéxistent Logos, who “in the beginnin

was,” and ‘‘was with God,” and ‘‘was God” (1 1

was new, it is said, and, because of its gnostic tinge,
suspect; and was therefore avoided and becomes
in the Ep. the depersonalized ‘‘Word of life’ (1 1).
But why should the “Word of life” necessarily
signify anything less personal than the phraseology
of the Gospel? The phraseology in both cases is
exactly adapted to its purpose. In the Gospel, ‘‘in
the beginning was the Word . . . . and the Word
became flesh” is right, because it sums up the con-


- tents of the Gospel, announces its subject, the his-


tory of the Incarnate Logos. In the Ep., the ‘‘Word
of life” is right, because the theme is to be the life,
not as to its historical manifestation in Jesus, but
as to its essential characteristics, whetber in God
or in man.

Other arguments of a similar kind which have
been put forward need not be considered. On the
whole, it seems clear that, while there
are between the Gospel and the Ep.
differences of emphasis, perspective
and point of view, these cannot be
held as at all counterbalancing, on the question of
authorship, the unique similarity of the two writings
in style and vocabulary and in the whole matter
and manner of thought, together with the testi-
mony of a tradition which is ancient, unanimous
and unbroken.

Regarding the question of priorlty as between the
two writings, the only certainty is that the Ep. presup-

poses its readers’ acquaintance with the


* substance of the Gospel (otherwise such
6. Question expressions as ‘Word of life,” ‘new
of Priority


6. Conelu-
sion


commandment” would have been unin-
telligible); but that does not imply its
posterior uy to the composition of the Gospel in literary
orm. By Lightfoot and others it is supposed to have
heen written simultaneously with the Gospel. and dis-
patched along with it as a covering letter to its original
readers. In view, however, of the independence and first-
rate importance of the Ep., it is difficult to think of it as
having originated in this way; and by the majority of
scholars it is regarded as later than the Gospel and sep-
arated from it by an appreciable interval. hat it was
written with a ‘’mediating’’ purpose (Pfieiderer), to
“popularize’’ the ideas of the Gospel (Weizsacker), or
to correct and tone down what in it was obnoxious to
the feeling of the church, and at the same time to add
certain links of connection (such as propitiation, Para-
clete, Parousia) with the traditional type of doctrine, or
to emphasize these where they existed (Holtzmann), is a
theory which rests on an extremely slender hasis; the
theory that it was written as a protest agalnst gnostic
appropriation of the Fourth Gospel itself (Jiilicher) has
no tangible basis at all.

That there was an appreciable interval between the
two writings is probable enough. Gnostic tendencies
have meanwhile hardened into more definite form.
Many false prophets have gone out into the world.
The ‘“‘antichrists'’ have declared themselves. The
time has come for the evangelist to focns the rays of his
Gospel upon the malignant growth which Is acutely
endangering the life of the church.


LITERATURE.—Commentaries are numerous and ex-
cellent. The most important are those by Calvin,
Licke, Ebrard, Haupt (of fine insight but grievous
verbosity), Huther (speclally valuable for its conspectus
of all earlier exegesis), Westcott (a magazine of materials
for the student of the Ep.), Alexander (in the Speaker's
Comm.), Rothe (original, beautiful, profound), B. Weiss,
H, J. Holtzmann, Plummer (in Cambridge _Gr NT—
scholarly and very serviceable); Brooke (in ICC, excel-
lent). Among the numerous expositions of the Ep. are
those by Neander, Candllsh, aurice, Alexander (Ezx-

ositor's Bible), Watson, J. M. Gibbon (Eternal Life),
Findlay (Fellowship in the Life Eternal), Law (The Tests
of Life—combined exposition and commentary); among
pooks on Introduction, those hy Weiss. Bleek, Hilgenfeld,
Holtzmann, Jiilicher, Zahn, Salmon, Gloag, Peake; and,
among books of other kinds, the relevant sections in Bey-
schlag, NT Theology; Pfleiderer, Urchristenthum; Har-
nack, Geschichte der altchristl. Litteratur; Farrar, Early
Days of Christianity; McGiffert, History of Christianit
in the Apostolic Age; Stevens, Johannine Theology and


John, Epistles of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1718


Theology of the NT; articles by Salmond in HDB; by
Schmiedel in ZB, and by Hiring in Theologische Ab-
handlungen, Carl von Wetzsdcker .... gewidmet. In
German, the fullest investigation of the relationship of
the Ep. to the Fourth Gospel will be found in a series
of arts. by H. J. Holtzmann in the Jahrbiicher fir pro-
destantische Theologie (1882-83); in English, in Brooke's
comm., in Law, Tests of Life, 339-63. See also Drum-
mond, Character and Authorship of the Fourth Gospel,
Tse Seconp aNp Turrp Episties

It is not surprising that these brief and fugitive

Epp. are among the NT writings which have had

the hardest struggle for canonical rec-
1. Canon- ognition. One is probably, the other
icity and certainly, a private letter; and neither
Authorship the same reason nor the same oppor-

tunity for their circulation existed,
as in the case of church letters. ‘The 2d Ep. con-
tains little that isdistinctive; the 3d Ep. is occupied
with a vexatious episode in the internal history of a
single congregation. Both are written by a person
who designates himself simply as “the Preshyter’’;
and the names of the person (or church) to which
the one is addressed and of the church with whose
affairs the other is concerned are alike unknown.
The fact, therefore, that, in spite of such obstacles,
these letters did become widely known and event-
ually attained to canonical rank is proof of a gen-
eral conviction of the soundness of the tradition
which assigned them to the apostle John.

Like all the catholic epp., they were unknown
to the early Syrian church; when 1 Jn, 1 Pet and
Jas were received into its Canon, they were still
excluded, nor are they found even in printed edi-
tions of the Syr NT till 1630. They were not
acknowledged by the school of Antioch. Jerome
distinguishes their authorship from that of the 1st
Ep. They are classed among the disputed books
by Eusebius, who indicates that it was questioned
whether they belonged to the evangelist or ‘‘possi-
bly to another of the same name as he.” Origen
remarks that “not all affirm them to he genuine”;
and, as late as the middle of the 4th cent., the effort
to introduce them in the Latin church met with
Opposition in Africa (Zahn).

On the other hand, we find recognition of their
Johannine authorship at an early date, in Gaul
(Irenaeus); Rome (Muratorian Canon, where,
however, the reading is corrupt, and it is doubtful
whether their authorship is ascribed or denied to
the apostle John); Alexandria (Clement, who is
reputed by Eusebius to have commented upon
them, and who in his extant works speaks of John’s
“larger epistle,” implying the existence of one or
more minor epp.); Africa (Cyprian reports that
2 Jn was appealed to at the Synod of Carthage,
256 AD). DSionsaian: Origen’s disciple and suc-
cessor, speaks of John’s calling himself in them
“the Presbyter.”” Eusebius, though conscientiously
placing them among the anttlegomena, elsewhere
writes in a way which indicates that he himself did
not share the doubt of their authenticity.

The internal evidence confirms the ultimate
decision of the early church regarding these letters.
Quite evidently the 2d Ep. must have been written
by the author of the Ist, or was an arrant and
apparently purposeless piece of plagiarism. The
3d Ep. is inevitably associated with the 2d by the
superscription, “the Preshyter,’ and by other
links of thought and phraseology.

The mention of this title opens up a wide ques-
tion. The famous extract from Papias (Euseb.,

HE, II, 39) vouches for the existence,
2. The among those who were or had been his
Presbyter contemporaries, of a certain ‘‘Preshy-
ter” John (see JoHN, Gosprn or, IT,
5). Jerome, moreover, speaks of the two smaller
Epp. as, in contrast with the Ist, ascribed to the


Presbyter (De Vir. Illusir., ix); Eusebius inclines
to ascribe to him the Book of Rev; and modern
critics, like Weizsacker and Harnack, have improved
upon the hint by finding in this shadowy personage
the author of the Fourth Gospel. Into this far-
reaching controversy, we cannot here enter. Itmay
be noted, however, that whether, in the confusedly
written passage referred to, Papias really intends
to distinguish between John the Apostle and John
the Presbyter is a point still in debate; and that
Eusebius (Hvangelica. Demonstratio, III, 5) does not
regard the title “‘Presbyter” as inapplicable to St.
John, but observes that in his Epp. he “either makes
no mention of himself or calls himself presbyter,
nowhere apostle or evangelist.” Dionysius, too,
remarks that “in the 2d and 3d Epp. ascrihed to
him, he writes anonymously, as the Presbyter.”
These Fathers, both exceptionally learned men and
presumably well acquainted with primitive usage,
saw nothing anomalous, although they did see
something characteristic, in the fact, or supposed
fact, that an apostle should designate himself by
the lowlier and vaguer title. In the very sentence
from Papias already referred to, the apostles are
called “preshyters”; not to say that in the NT it-
self we have an instance of an apostle’s so styling
himself (1 Pet 6 1). .

To sum up, it is evident that no one desiring
falsely to secure apostolic prestige for his produc-
tions would have written under so indistinctive a
title; also, that these brief and very occasional
letters could never have won their way to general
recognition and canonical rank unless through
general conviction of their Johannine authorship—
the very history of these Epp. proving that the
early church did not arrive at a decision upon such
matters without satisfying itself of the trustworthi-
ness of the tradition upon which a claim to canon-
icity was founded; finally, the internal evidence
testifies to an authorship identical with that of the
Ist Ep., so that the evidence cited regarding this
is available also for those. These letters, along with
St. Paul’s to Philemon, are the only extant remains
of a private apostolic correspondence which must
have included many such, and for this reason, apart
from their intrinsic worth, possess an interest,
material and biographical, peculiar to themselves.
We proceed to consider the two Epp. separately,
and since an interesting question arises as to
whether the 2d is that referred to in ver 9 of the 3d,
it will be convenient to reverse the canonical order
in dealing with them.

The Third Episile.—This brief note gives a
uniquely authentic and intimate glimpse of some
aspects of church life as it existed in Asia Minor
(this may be taken as certain) somewhere ahout the
end of the Ist cent. It concerns a certain episode
in the history of one of the churches under the
writer’s supervision, and incidentally furnishes
character-sketches of two of its members, the large-
hearted and hospitable Gaius, to whom it is written
(and whom it is merely. fanciful to identify with
any other Gaius mentioned in the NT), and the
loquacious, overbearing Diotrephes; also of the
faithful Demetrius, by whose hand probably the
letter is sent. The story which may be gathered
from the Ep. seems to be as follows. A band of
itinerant teachers had been sent out, by the Pres-
byter’s authority, no doubt, and furnished by him
with letters of commendation to the various churches,
and among others to that of which Gaius and
Diotrephes were members. Diotrephes, however,
whether through jealousy for the rights of the local
community or for some personal reason, not only
declined to receive the itinerant teachers, but
exerted his authority to impose the same course of
action upon the church as a whole, even to the


1719


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA John, Epistles of


length of threatening with excommunication (ver
10) those who took a different view of their duty.
Gaius alone had not been intimidated, but had wel-
comed to his home the repulsed and disheartened
teachers, who when they returned (to Ephesus,
probably) had testified to the church of his cour-
ageous and large-hearted behavior (ver 6). A 2d
time, apparently, the teachers are now sent forth
(ver 6), with Demetrius as their leader, who brings
this letter to Gaius, commending his past conduct
(ver 5) and encouraging him to persevere in it
(ver6). The Presbyter adds that he has dispatched
a letter to the church also (ver 9); but evidently
he has little hope that it will be effectual in over-
coming the headstrong opposition of Diotrephes;
for he promises that he will speedily pay a personal
visit to the church, when he will depose Diotrephes
from his pride of place and bring him to account for
his scornful ‘“‘prating’ and overbearing conduct
(ver 10). So far as appears, the cause of friction
was purely personal or administrative. There is
no hint of heretical tendency in Diotrephes and his
party. Pride of place is his sin, an inflated sense
of his own importance and a violent jealousy for
what he regarded as his own prerogative, which no
sees identified with the autonomy of the local
church.

The Second Epistle—The letter is addressed to
“the elect lady” (better, to “the lady Electa’’).
Its tone throughout is peculiarly affectionate; there
is a warmer rush of emotion, esp. in the opening
verses, than is characteristic of St. John’s usual
reserve. But in these verses the keynote of the
Ep. is struck—truth. The writer testifies his love
for his correspondent and her children “in truth” j
this love is shared by all who “know the truth’
(ver 1), and it is ‘for the truth’s sake which abideth
in_us, and it shall be with us for ever” (ver 2).
. What follows (vs 4-9) is in effect an epitome of the
Ist Ep. After declaring his joy at finding certain
of her children ‘“‘walking in truth,’”’ he proceeds to
expound, quite in the style of the lst Ep., what
“walking in truth” is. It is to love one another
(ver 5; ef 1 Jn 2 7-11); but this love is mani-
fested in keeping God’s commandments (ver 6a;
cf 1 Jn 5 2.3); and no less in stedfast adherence
to the genuine doctrine of the Gospel (cf,1 Jn 3
23). “For many deceivers are gone forth into the
world, even they that confess not that Jesus Christ
cometh in the flesh” (ver 7; cf 1 Jn 4 1-3). Then
follows an exhortation to stedfastness (ver 8), and
a warning that whoever in the name of progress
departs from this teaching “hath not God,” while
he who abides in it “hath both the Father and the
Son” (ver 9; cf 1 Jn 2 23.24). This-leads up to
the immediately practical point, a warning to ex-
tend no hospitality and show no friendliness to the
false teachers (vs 10.11); and the Ep. closes with
the hope of a speedy and joyful meeting “face to
face’’ of the writer and his correspondent, to whom
he conveys greetings from the children of her “elect
sister.

Whether the “‘elect lady,” or “lady Electa” of
his letter is a real person or the personification of
a church is a point which has been debated from
ancient times and is still unsolved. The solution
has been found, it is true, if we can accept the
hypothesis (put forward by Zahn and Schmiedel
and adopted by Findlay) that this is the letter
referred to in 8 Jn ver 9. It ig urged on behalf of
this supposition that the two Epp. are curiously
identical in phraseology. In both the writer begins
by describing his correspondent as one whom “T
love in truth”; in both he uses a distinctive phrase
(echdrén lian), 2 In ver 4, “TI rejoice greatly,” not
found elsewhere in the NT to declare his joy at
finding “thy [my] children walking in the truth”;


and in both he concludes by saying that he has
“many things to write,” but that, looking forward
to an early interview “face to face,” he will not
commit these further thoughts to “paper and ink.”
It is argued that “none but a chancery clerk could
have clung so closely to his epistolary formulae”
in two private letters written at different periods.
But the force of this argument largely vanishes
when we look at the formulae in question. If a
modern writer may conclude hundreds of friendly
letters by subscribing himself “yours sincerely,” or
something equivalent, why may not the Presbyter
have commenced these two and many similar letters
by assuring his correspondents that he sincerely
loved them? And again, one in his official position
must often have had occasion to say that he hoped
soon to pay a personal visit, in view of which, writing
at greater length was unnecessary. Even if the
likeness in phraseology makes it probable that the
two letters were written simultaneously, this by
no means proves that the one was written to Gaius,
the other to the church of which Gaius and Dio-
trephes were members. Zahn calculates that 2 Jn
would occupy 32 lines, and 3 Jn not quite 31 lines
of ancient writing, and infers that the author used
two pages of papyrus of the same size for both
letters; but why we are to identify 2 Jn with the
letter mentioned in 3 Jn because both happen to
fill the same size of note paper is not quite clear.
On the other hand, the difficulties m the way of
this attractive hypothesis are too substantial to
be set aside. The two Epp. belong to entirely
different situations. Both deal with the subject
of hospitality; but the one forbids hospitality to
the wrong kind of guests, and says nothing about the
right kind, the other enjoins hospitality to the right
kind and says nothing about the wrong kind. In
the one the writer shows himself alarmed about the
spread of heresy, in the other, about the insubor-
dination of a self-important official. Is it conceiv-
able that the Presbyter should send at thesame time
a letter to Gaius in which he promises that he
will speedily come with a rod for Diotrephes (who
had carried the church along with him), and another
to the church in which that recalcitrant person was
the leading spirit, in which he expresses the hope
that when he comes and speaks face to face their
‘Joy may be made full’—a letter, moreover, in
which the real point at issue is not once touched
upon? Such a procedure is scarcely imaginable.
We are still left, then, with the question What
kind of entity, church or individual, is entitled ‘‘the


_lady Electa’”? (See Execr Lapy, where reasons are


given for preferring this tr.) The address of the
letter is certainly much more suggestive of an indi-
vidua] than of a church. After all that has been
so persuasively argued, notably by Dr. Findlay
(Fatoibenie in the Life Eternal, ch iii), from the
symbolizing of the church as the Bride of Christ,
it remains very hard for the present writer to sup-
pose that, in the superscription of a letter and with-
out any hint of symbolism, anyone could address
a particular Christian community as “the elect
lady” or the “Jady elect.”” On the other hand, the
difficulties urged against the personal interpretation
are not so grave a8 sometimes represented. The
statement, “I have found certain of thy children
walking in truth,” does not imply that others of
them were not doing so, but emphasizes what had
come under the writer’s personal observation.
Nor can we pronounce the elevated and didactic
love of the letter more suitable to a church than
to an individual without taking into account the
character, position and mutual relations of the
correspondents. The person (if it was a person)
addressed was evidently a Christian matron of high
social standing—one able in a special degree to


John, Gospel of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1720


dispense hospitality, and of wide influence, one
beloved of ‘‘all them that know the truth,” whose
words would be listened to and whose example
would be imitated. And, in view of the ominous
spreading of the leaven of Antichrist, it is not diffi-
cult to suppose that the Presbyter should write
to such a person in such a strain. Nor does there
seem to be anything esp. odd in the fact of the
children of a private family sending their respects
to their aunt through the apostle John (Findlay).
If he was intimate with that family, and in their
immediate vicinity at the time of writing, it appears
a natural thing for them to have done. Possibly
Dr. Harris’ “exploded” “prehistoric countess of
Huntington” is not so far astray as a modern equiva-
lent of the lady Electa.


Literature.—On the 2d and 3d Epp. see Comms.:
Liicke, Huther, Ebrard, Holtzmann, Baumgarten,
Westcott, Plummer, Bennett, Brooke: Expositions:
Findlay, Fellowship in the Life Eternal; 8. Cox, The
Private Letters of St. Paul and St. John; J.M. Gibbon,
The Eternal Life.


JOHN, GOSPEL OF:


I. IntRopuctTory
1. Scope of Gospel
2. State of Opinion as to Date of Appearance, etc
II. Externan Evipencr ror THE Fourts GosPrer
1. At End of 2d Cent.
2. Irenaeus—Theophilus
3. Middle of 2d Cent.
4. Ignatins, etc
5. John the Presbyter
6. Summary
VII. Cuaracteristics OF THE GOSPEL:
EvipeNnce
1. General Lines of Attack and Defence
2. Unwarrantahle Critical Presuppositions
3. Real Aim of Gospel—Results
(1) Relation to Synoptics
(2) Time Occupied in the Gospel
(3) A Personal Record
{4) Reminiscences of an Eyewitness
{3} Reminiscence Illustrated
6) Conclusions
IV. Procress anp DEVELOPMENT IN THE GosPEL
1. The Presentation of Jesus in the Gospel
(1) Alleged Absence of Development in Char-
acter of Jesus
(2) Alleged ‘‘ Autonomy” of Jesus
(3) ‘‘Inconceivability’’ of Logos-Presentation
2. The Logos-Doctrine of the Prologue
3. Growth of Faith and Development of Unhelief
(1) Early Confessions 3
33 Growth of Faith in the Disciples
3) Gradual Disclosure of Messiahship: Growth
of Unbelief


R. Law


INTERNAL


LITERATURE


If, Introductory.—The Fourth Gospel has a form
peculiar to itself, as well as a characteristic style
and attitude, which mark it as a unique
document among the books of the NT.
(1) There is a prologue, consisting of
1 1-18, of which something will be
said later on. (2) There is a series of scenes and
discourses from the life of Jesus, descriptive of
Himself and His work, and marking the gradual
development of faith and unbelief in His hearers
and in the nation (1 19—12 50). (3) There isa
more detailed account of the closing events of the
Passion Week—of His farewell intercourse with His
disciples (chs 13-17), of His arrest, trials, cruci-
fixion, death, and burial (chs 18-19). (4) There are
the resurrection, and the manifestations of the risen
Lord to His disciples on the resurrection day, and
on another occasion eight days after (20 1-29).
This is followed by a paragraph which describes
the purpose of the Gospel, and the reason why it
was written (vs 30.31). (5) Finally, there is a sup-
plementary ch (21), which has all the characteristic
marks of the Gospel as a, whole, and which probably,
therefore, proceeds from the same pen (thus Light-
foot, Meyer, Alford, etc; some, as Zahn, prefer to
take the ch as the work of a disciple of St. John).
The concluding vs (24.25) of this ch read: ‘This is
the disciple that beareth witness of these things, and


1. Scope
of Gospel


wrote these things: and we know that his witness is
true. And there are also many other things which
Jesus did,” ete. ‘(We know that his witness is true

seems to be a testimony on the part of those who
knew as to the identity of the disciple, and the trust-
worthinessof his witness. Nor has this earliest testi-
mony been discredited by the attacks made on it, and
the natural meaning has been vindicated by many
competent writers. The present tense, “beareth
witness,” indicates that the ‘‘disciple” who wrote the
Gospel was still alive when the testimony was given.

As to the time of the appearance of the Johannine

literature, apart from the question as to the author-

ship of these writings, there is now a
2. State of growing consensus of opinion that it
Opinion as_ arose at the end of the Ist cent., or at
to Date of the beginning of the 2d. This is held
Appearance by those who assign the authorship,

not to any individual writer, but to a
school at Ephesus, who partly worked up traditional
material, and elaborated it into the form which the
Johannine writings now have; by those also, as
Spitta, who disintegrate the Gospel into a Grund-
schrift and a Bearbeitung (cf his Das Johannes-
Evangelium als Quelle der Geschichte Jesu, 1910).
Whether the Gospel is looked on as a compilation
of a school of theologians, or as the outcome of an
editor who utilizes traditional material, or as the
final outcome of theological evolution of certain
Pauline conceptions, with few exceptions the ap-
pearance of the Johannine writings is dated early
in the 2d cent. One of the most distinguished of
these exceptions is Schmiedel; another is the late
Professor Pfleiderer. One may respect Pfleiderer
in the region of philosophical inquiry, but im criti-
cism he is a negligible quantity. And the writings
of Schmiedel on the Johannine question are rapidly
passing into the same category.

Thus the appearance of the Johannine writings
at the end of the 1st cent. may safely be accepted
as a sound historical conclusion. Slowly the critics
who assigned their appearance to the middle of the
2d cent., or later, have retraced their steps, and
assign the emergence of the Johannine writings to
the time mentioned. This does not, of course,
settle the questions of the authorship, composition
and trustworthiness of the Gospel, which must be
determined on their merits, on the grounds of ex-
ternal, and still more of internal, evidence, but it
does clear the way for a proper discussion of them,
and gives us a terminus which must set a limit to all
further speculation on matters of this kind.

Hf, External Evidence for the Fourth Gospel.—
Only an ontline of the external evidence for the
Fourth Gospel, which concerns both date and
authorship, can be given in this article. Fuller
information may be sought in the Intros to the
Commentaries on the Gospel, by Godet, Westcott,
Luthardt, Meyer; in Ezra Abbot’s The Fourth
Gospel and Its Authorship; in Zahn’s Intro to the
NT, III; in Sanday’s The Criticism of the Fourth
Gospel; in Drummond’s The Character and Author-
ship of the Fourth Gospel. All these and many
others defend the Johannine authorship. On the
other side, reference may be made to the author of
Supernatural Religion, of which many editions have
appeared. Among recent works, Moffatt’s Intro
io the NT, and B. W. Bacon’s Fourth Gospel in
Research and Debate, may be mentioned as denying
the Johannine authorship. .

The external evidence is as follows. At the end
of the 2d cent., the Christian church was in pos-

session of four Gospels, which were
1. AtEnd used as sacred books, read in churches
of 2d Cent. in public worship, held in honor as
authoritative, and treated as part of
a Canon of Scripture (see GospEis). One of these


1721


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA John, Gospel of


was the Fourth Gospel, universally ascribed to the
apostle John as its author. We have the evidence
on this point of Irenaeus, of Tertullian, of Clement
of Alexandria, a little later of Origen. Clement is
witness for the belief and practice of the church in
Egypt and its neighborhood; Tertullian for the
church in Africa; and Irenaeus, who was brought
up in Asia Minor, was a teacher at Rome, and was
bishop of Lyons in Gaul, for the churches in these
lands. The belief was so unquestioned, that Ire-
naeus could give reasons for it which would of them-
selves have convinced no one who had not already
had the conviction which the reasons were meant to
sustain. To discount the evidence of Irenaeus,
Tertullian and Clement on the ground of the desire
to find apostolic authorship for their sacred books,
is not argument but mere assertion. There may
have been such a tendency, but in the case of the
four Gospels there is no proof that there was neces-
sity for this at the end of the 2d cent. For there is
evidence of the belief in the apostolic authorship
of two Gospels by apostles, and of two by compan-
ions of the apostles, as an existing fact in the
churches long, before the end of the 2d cent.

The importance of the testimony of Irenaeus is
measured by the efforts which have been made to

invalidate his witness. But these at-
2. Irenaeus tempts fail in the presence of his his-
—tTheophi- torical position, and of the means at
lus his command to ascertain the belief

of the churches. There are many
links of connection between Irenaeus and the apos-
tolic age. There is specially his connection with
Polycarp. He himself describes that relationship
in his letter to Florinus, a fellow-disciple of Poly-
carp, who had lapsed into Gnosticism, in which he
says, ‘“‘I remember the events of that time more
clearly than those of recent years. For what boys
learn, growing with their mind, becomes joined with
it; so that I am able to describe the very place in
which the blessed Polycarp sat as he discoursed,
and his goings out and comings in, and the manner
of his life, and his physical appearance and his dis-
courses to the people, and the accounts which he
gave of his intercourse with John and the others
who had seen the Lord” (Euseb., HE, V, 20: Mc-
Giffert’s tr). We cannot say what was the age of
Irenacus at that time, but he was of sufficient age
to receive the impressions which, after many years,
he recorded. Polycarp was martyred in 155 AD,
and he had been a Christian for 86 years when he
wag martyred. Thus there was only one link be-
tween Jrenaeusand the apostolicage. Another link
was constituted by his association with Pothinus,
his predecessor in Lyons. Pothinus was a very old
man when he was martyred, and had in his posses-
sion the traditions of the church of Gaul. Thus,
Trenaeus, through these and others, had the oppor-
tunity of knowing the belief of the churches, and
what, he records is not only his own personal testi-
mony, but the universal tradition of the church.

With Irenaeus should be adduced the apologist
Theophilus (c 170), the earliest writer to mention
St. John by name as the author of the Gospel. In
prefacing a quotation from the commencement of
the prologue, he says, ‘This is what we learn from
the sacred writings, and from all men animated by
the Spirit, amongst whom John says’”’ (Ad Autol.,
ii.22). Theophilus is further stated by Jerome to
have composed a Harmony of the four Gospels
(De Viris Itlusir., 25).

From Irenaeus and Theophilus we ascend nearer
to the middle of the 2d cent., and here we encounter
the Diatessaron of Tatian, on which much need
not be said. The Diatessaron is likewise a Har-
mony of the four Gospels, and this Harmony dates
not later than 170. It begins with the 1st ver of


the Fourth Gospel, and ends with the last ver of
the appendix to the Gospel. Tatian was a pupil

of Justin Martyr, and that fact alone
8. Middle renders it probable that the ‘‘“Memoirs
of 2d Cent. of the Apostles,” which Justin quotes

so often, were those which his pupil
afterward combined in the Diatessaron. That
Justin knew the Fourth Gospel seems clear, though
we cannot argue the question here. If he did, it
follows that it was in existence about the year 130.

But there is evidence that helps us to trace the

influence of the Fourth Gospel back to the year 110.

“The first clear traces of the Fourth
4. Ignatius, Gospel upon the thought and language
etc of the church are found in the Epp. of

Ignatius (¢ 110 AD). How unmis-
takable these traces are is shown by the fact that
not infrequently this dependence of Ignatius upon
John has been used as an argument against the gen-
uineness of the Ignatian letters’ (Zahn, Intro, III,
176). This argument may now be safely used since
the Epp. have been vindicated as historical docu-
ments by Lightfoot and by Zahn. If the Ignatian
Epp. are saturated with the tone and spirit of the
Johannine writings, that goes to show that this
mode of thought and expression was prevalent in
the church of the time of Ignatius. Thus at the
beginning of the 2d cent., that distinctive mode of
thought and speech which we call Johannine had an
existence.

A further line of evidence in favor of the Gospel,
which need only be referred to, lies in the use made
of it by the Gnostics. That the Gospel was used
by the Valentinians and Basilides has been shown
by Dr. Drummond (op. cit., 265-343).

To estimate aright the force of the above evi-
dence, it is to be remembered that, as already ob-

served, there were many disciples of
5. John the the John of Ephesus, to whom the Jo-
Presbyter hannine writings were ascribed, living

far on in the 2d cent.—bishops like
Papias and Polycarp, the “presbyters’’ so often men-
tioned by Irenaeus—forming a chain connecting the
time of the origin of the Gospel with the latter half
of the century. Here arises the question, recently
so largely canvassed, as to the identity of ‘the
presbyter John” in the well-known fragment. of
Papias preserved by Euseb. (H#, ITI, 39). Were
there, as most, with Euseb., understand, two Johns—
apostle and presbyter (cf e.g. Godet)—or was there
only one? If only one, was he the son of Zebedee?
On these points wide difference of opinion prevails.
Harnack holds that the presbyter was not the son
of Zebedee; Sanday is doubtful; Moffatt believes
that the presbyter was the only John at Ephesus.
Zahn and Dom J. Chapman (John the Presbyier
and the Fourth Gospel, 1911) think also that there
was only one John at Ephesus, but he was the son
of Zebedee. It is hardly necessary to discuss the
question here, for the tradition is explicit which
connected the Gospel with the apostle John during
the latter part of his residence in Ephesus—a resi-
dence which there is no sufficient ground for dis-
puting (see JoHN, THE APOSTLE). ;

On a fair consideration of the external evidence,
therefore, we find that it is unusually strong. It is

very seldom the case that conclusive
6. Summary proof of the existence and influence of

a writing can be brought so near to the
time of its publication as in the case of the Fourth
Gospel. The date of its publication is at the end
of the 1st cent., or at the latest in the beginning of
the2d. Traces of its influence are found in the Epp.
of Ignatius. The lst Ep. of Jn is. quoted in the
Ep. of Polycarp (ch 7). The thought and style of
the Gospel had influenced Justin Martyr. It is
one of the four interwoven in the Diatessaron of


John, Gospel of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1722


Tatian. It was quoted, commented on, and inter-
preted by the Gnostics. In truth the external evi-
dence for the early date and Johannine authorship
of the Fourth Gospel is as great both in extent and
variety as it is for any book of the NT, and far
greater than any that we possess for any work of
classical antiquity.

The history of the controversy on the Johannine
authorship is not here entered into. Apart from the
obscure sect of the Alogi (who attributed the Gospel to
Cerinthus!) in the 2d cent., no voice was heard in chal-
lenge of the authorship of St. John till the close of the
17th cent., and serious assault did not begin till the 19th
cent. (Bretschneider, 1820, Strauss, 1835, Weisse, 1838,
Baur and his school, 1844 and after, Keim, 1865, etc).
The attacks were vigorously repelled by other scholars
(Olshausen, Tholuck, Neander, Ebrard, Bleek, etc).
Some adopted, in various forms and degrees, the hypothe-
sis of an apostolic basis for the Gospel, regarded as the
work of a later hand (Weizsicker, Renan, etc), From
this point the controversy has proceeded with an in-
creasing dogmatism on the side of the opponents of the
genuineness and trustworthiness of the Gospel, but
not less firmness on the part of its defenders. The
present state of opinion is indicated in the text.

II. Characteristics of the Gospel: Internal Evi-
dence.—The external evidence for the Fourth Gos-

el is criticized, but it is chiefly on
1. General internal grounds that the opposition
Lines of to the Johannine authorship and his-
Attack and torical trustworthiness of the Gospel
Defence is based. Stress is laid on the broad
contrast which admittedly exists in
style, character and plan, between the Fourth Gos-
pel and the Synoptics; on its supposed philosophi-
cal dress (the Logos-doctrine); on alleged errors
and contradictions; on the absence of progress in
the narrative, etc. The defence of the Gospel is
usually conducted by pointing out the different aims
of the Gospel, rebutting exaggerations in the above
objections, and showing that in a multitude of ways
the author of the Gospel reveals his identity with
the apostle John. He was, e.g., a Jew, a Palestinian
Jew, one familiar with the topography of Jerus, ete,
an apostle, an eyewitness, the disciple whom Jesus
loved (13 23; 202; 21 7.20). The attestation
in 21 24 of those who knew the author in his life-
time is of the greatest weight in this connection.
Instead of following these familiar lines of argument
(for which see Godet, Luthardt, Westcott, Ez.
Abbot, Drummond, etc, in works cited), a confir-
mation is here sought on the linesof a fresh compre-
hensive study.
The study of the Johannine writings in general, and


of the Fourth Gospel in particular, has been approached
in many ways and from various points


9. Unwar- of view. One of the most common of
bl these ways, in recent works, is that which
raptable = assumes that here we have the product
Critical of Cuitieg ihe eee on ane thats cts.
;~ closed in the other Gospels, an at these
Presupposi facts have been Tnodified by the experience
tions of the church, and reflect the conscious-


ness of the church at the end of the 1st

cent. or the beginning of the 2d. By this time, it is
assumed that the’church, now mainly a gentile church,
has been greatly influenced by Gr-Rom culture, that
she has been reflecting on the wonder of her own history,
and has so modified the original tradition as to assimi-
late it to the new environment, Inthe Fourth Gospel,
it ls said, we have the highest and most elahorate pres-
entation of the outcome of the process. Staring with
St. Paul and his influence, Professor B. W. Bacon
traces for us the whole process until a school of theolo-
gians at Ephesus produced the Johannine writings, and
the consciousness of the church was satisfled with the
completeness of the new _presentatlon_of Christianity
(cf his Fourth Gospel in Research and Debate). Hellen-
Istic ideas in Heb form, the facts of the Gospel so trans-
formed as to be acceptable to the Hellenlstic mind—this
is what scholars of this class find in the Fourth Gospel.
Others again come to the Gospel with the presupposi-
tlon that it is intended to present to the reader a com-
plete view of the life of Jesus, that it Is intended to
supplement and to correct the statements of the Synoptles
and to present Christ in such a form as to meet the new
needs of the church at the beginning of the 2d cent.
Others find a polemical alm in the Gospel. Welzsiicker
e.g. finds a strong polemic aim against the Jews. He


says, ‘There are the objections raised by the Jews’
against the church after its secession has been consum-
mated, and after the development of the person of its
Christ has passed through its most essential stages.
It Is not a controversy of the lifetime, but that of the
school carried back into the history of the life’’ (Apos-
tolic Age, II, 222). One would have expected that a
statement so forcibly put would have been supported
by some evidence; that we might have some historical
evidence regarding a controversy_ between Jew and
church beyond what we have in the Fourth Gospel itself.
But nothing is offered by Weizsicker except the dictum
that these are controversial topics carried on in the
school, and that they are anachronisms as they stand.
As it happens, we know from the Dial, between Justin
Martyr and Trypho what were the topics discussed be-
tween Jew and Christian in the middle of the 2d cent.,
and it is sufficient to say that these topics, as reported
by Justin, mainly regarded the interpretation of the OT,
and are not those which are discussed in the Fourth
Gospel. .
Perhaps the most surprising of_all the presupposi-
tions with regard to the Fourth Gospel is that which
lays great stress on the supposition that the book was
largely intended to vindicate a Christian doctrine of the
sacraments which flourished at the beginning of the 2d
cent. According to this presupposition, the Fourth
Gospel set forth a doctrine of the sacraments which
laced them in a unique position as a means of salvation.
hile scarcely contending that the doctrine of the sacra-
ments held by the church of the 2d cent. had reached
that stage of development which meets us in the mediae-
val church, it is, according to this view, far on the way
toward that goal afterward reached. We do not dwell
on this view, for the exegesis that finds sacramentarian-
ism in the Fourth Gospel is hopeless. That ceapel does
not put the sacraments in the place of Christ. nally,
we do not find the contention of those who affirm that
the Fourth Gospel was written with a view of making
the gospel of Jesus more acceptable to the Gentiles any
more satisfactory. As a matter of fact, the Gospel which
was most acceptable to the Gentiles was the Gospel
according to Mt. It is more frequently quoted than
any other. In the writings of the early church, it is
quoted as often as all the other Gospels put together.
The Fourth Gospel did not come into prominence in the
Christian church until the rise of the Christological con-
troversies in the 3d cent.


When, after dwelling on these ways of approach-
ing the Fourth Gospel, and reading the demands
made on the Gospel by those who
3. Real Aim approach it with these presuppositions
of Gospel— and demands, we turn to the Gospel
Results itself, and ask regarding its aim and
purpose, wefind asimpleanswer. The
writer of it expressly says: “Many other signs
therefore did Jesus in the presence of his disciples,
which are not written in this book: but these are
written, that ye may believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye may
have life in his name” (20 30.31). Pursuing this
clue, and putting away all the presuppositions which
bulk so largely in introductions, exegeses, histories
of the apostolic and sub-apostolic ages, one meets
with many surprises.

(1) Relation to Synoptics—In relation to the
Synoptics, the differences are great, but more sur-
prising is the fact that the points of contact between
these Gospels and the Fourth Gospel are so few.
The critics to whom reference has been made are
unanimous that the writer or the school who com-
piled the Johannine writings was indebted to the
Synoptics for almost all the facts embodied in the
Fourth Gospel. Apart, however; from the Passion
Week, only two points of contact are found so ob-
vious that they cannot be doubted, viz. the feeding
of the 5,000, and the walking on the sea (6 4-21).
The healing of the child of the royal officer (4 46-
53) can scarcely be identified with the healing of the
centurion’s servant (Mt, Lk); but even if the identi-
fication were allowed, this is all we have in the
Fourth Gospel of the events of the ministry in
Galilee. There is a ministry in Galilee, but the
earlier ministry in Judaea and in Galilee began
before John was cast into prison (3 24), and it has
no parallel in the Synoptics. In fact, the Fourth
Gospel assumes the existence of the other three, and
does not anew convey the knowledge which can be


1723


gathered from them. It takes its own way, makes
its own selections, and sets these forth from its own
point of view. It has its own principle of selection:
that plainly indicated in the passage already quoted.
The scenes depicted, the works done, the words
spoken, and the reflections made by the writer, are
all directed toward the aim of enabling the readers
to believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.
In the writer’s view this would issue in their ob-
taining life in His name.

-(2) Time occupied in the Gospel.—Accepting this
principle for our guidance, we turn to the Gospel,
and the first thing that strikes the reader is the smal}
amount of the real time filled up, or occupied, by
the scenes described in the Gospel. We take the
night of the betrayal, and the day of the crucifixion.
The things done and the words spoken on that day,
from one sunset to another, occupy no fewer than
7 chs of the Gospel (chs 13-19). Apart from the
supplementary ch (21), there are 20 chs in the Gos-
pel, containing 697 vs, and these 7 chs have 257 vs.
More than one-third of the whole given to the min-
istry is thus occupied with the events of one day.

Again, according to Acts 1 3, there was a min-
istry of the risen Lord which lasted for 40 days, and
of all that happened during those days John records
only what happened on the day of the resurrection,
and on another day 8 days after (ch 20). The in-
cidents recorded in the other Gospels fall into the
background, are taken for granted, and only the
signs done on these two days are recorded here.
They are recorded because they are of significance
for the purpose he has in hand, of inducing belief
in the truth that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.
If we continue to follow the clue thus afforded, we
shall be surprised at the fewness of the days on
which anything was transacted. As we read the
story of the Fourth Gospel, there are many indi-
cations of the passing of time, and many precise
statements of date. We learn from the Gospel that
the ministry of Jesus probably lasted for 3 years.
We gather this from the number of the feasts which
He attended at Jerus. We have notes of time
spent in journeys, but no account of anything that
happened during them. The days on which any-
thing was done or anything said are very few. We
are told precisely that ‘‘six days before the passover
Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was” (12
1ff), and with regard to these 6 days we are told
only of the supper and the anointing of the feet of
Jesus by Mary, of the entry into Jerus, the visit of
the Greeks, and of the impression which that visit
made on Jesus. We have also the reflections of the
evangelist on the unbelief of the Jews, but nothing
further. We know that many other things did
happen on these days, but they are not recorded in
this Gospel. Apart from the two days during which
Jesus dwelt in the place where he was, of which days
nothing is recorded, the time occupied with the
raising of Lazarus is the story of one day (ch 11).
So it is also with the healing of the blind man. The
healing is done one day, and the controversy regard-
ing the significance of that healing is all that 1 re-
corded of another day (ch 9). What is recorded
in ch 10 is the story of two days. The story of the
7th and 8th chs, interrupted by the episode of the
woman taken in adultery, which does not belong
to the Gospel, is the story of not more than two
days. The story of the feeding of the 5,000 and of
the subsequent discourse (ch 6) is the story of two
days. It is not necessary to enter into fuller detail.
Yet the writer, as remarked, is very exact in his
notes of time. He notes the days, the number of
days on which anything was done, or when anything
was said. We make these remarks, which will be
obvious to every reader who attends to them, mainly
for the purpose of showing that the Gospel on the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA John, Gospel of


face of it does not intend to, at least does not, set
forth a complete account of the life and work of
Jesus. It gives at the utmost an account of 20
days out of the 1,000 days of Our Lord’s ministry.
This is of itself sufficient to set aside the idea of
those who deal with the Fourth Gospel as if it were
meant to set aside, to supplement, or to correct,
the accounts in the Synoptics. Plainly it was not
written with that purpose.

(8) A personal record —Obviously the book pro-
fesses to be reminiscences of one who had personal
experience of the ministry which he describes. The
personal note is in evidence all through the book.
It is present even in the prologue, for in that ver
in which he describes the great fact of the incarna-
tion he uses the personal note, ‘““We beheld his
glory” (1 14). This might be taken as the keynote
of the Gospel. In all the scenes set forth in the
Gospel the writer believes that in them Jesus mani-
fested forth His glory and deepened the faith of His
disciples. If we were to ask him, when did he
behold the glory of the incarnate Word, the answer
would be, in all these scenes which are described
in the Gospel. If we read the Gospel from this
point of view, we find that the writer had a different
conception of the glory of the incarnate Word from
that which his critics ascribe to him. He sees a
glory of the Word in the fact that He was wearied
with His journey (4 6), that He made clay of the
spittle and anointed the eyes of the blind man with
the clay (9 6), that He wept at the grave of Lazarus
(11 35), that He groaned in the spirit and was
troubled (ver 38), and that He could sorrow with
a sorrow unspeakable, as He did after the interview
with the Greeks (12 27). For he records al! these
things, and evidently thinks them quite consistent
with the glory of the incarnate Word. A fair exe-
gesis does not explain these things away, but must
take them as of the essence of the manifested glory
of the Word.

The Gospel then is professedly reminiscences of
an eyewitness, of one who was personally present
at all the scenes which he describes. No doubt the
reminiscences often pass into reflections on the
meaning and significance of what he describes. He
often pauses to remark that the disciples, and he
himself among them, did not understand at the
time the meaning of some saying, or the significance
of some deed, of Jesus (2 22; 12 16, etc). At
other times we can hardly distinguish between the
words of the Master and the reflections of the dis-
ciple. But in other writings we often meet with
the same phenomenon. In the Ep. to the Gal, e.g.,
Paul writes what he had said to Peter at Antioch:
“Tf thou, being a Jew, livest as do the Gentiles, and
not as do the Jews, how compellest thou the Gentiles
to live as do the Jews?” (Gal 2 14). Shortly
after, he passes into reflections on the situation, and
it is impossible to ascertain where the direct speech
ends and the reflections begin. So it is in the
Fourth Gospel. It is impossible in many instances
to say where the words of Jesus end and the reflec-
tions of the writer begin. So it is, e.g., with his
record of the witness of the Baptist in ch 3. The
record of the Baptist’s words may end with the
sentence, ‘‘“He must increase, but I must decrease”
(ver 30), and the rest may be the reflections of the
writer on the situation.

(4) Reminiscences of an eyewitness—The phe-
nomena, of the Gospel are thus, apparently at least,
reminiscences of an eyewitness, with his reflections
on the meaning of what he has experienced. He
was present at the scenes which he describes. He
was present on the night on which the Master was
betrayed; he was present in the hall of the high
priest; he was present at the cross, and bears testi-
mony to the reality of the death of Jesus (18 15;


1724


John, Gospel of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


19 35). As we read the Gospel we note the stress
he lays on ‘“‘witness.’”” The term frequently occurs
(1 7.8.19; 3 11.26.33; 6 31; 12 17; 21 24, etc),
and is used to set forth the verified facts of expe-
rience. In these testimonies we have an unusual
combination of elevated thought and minute ob-
servation. At one time the evangelist soars aloft in-
to a spiritual world, and moves with ease among the
richest and highest elements of spiritual experience.
Using common words, he yet reads into them the
deepest meanings regarding man, the world, and
God which have ever entered into the mind of man.
Sublime mysticism and open-eyed_ practical sense
meet in his wonderful writings. Above all, we are
impressed with his sense of the supreme value of the
historical. All his spiritual meanings have a his-
torical basis. This is as apparent in the Ist Ep. as
it is in the Gospel, and in the Gospel it is conspicu-
ous. While his main interest is to focus the minds
of his readers on Jesus, His work and His word, yet
unconsciously he has written his own spiritual
biography. We gradually become aware, as we
read ourselves sympathetically into the spirit of the
Gospel, that we are following the line of a great
spiritual awakening, and are tracing the growth of
faith and love in the life of the writer, until they
become the overmastering tone of his whole life.
On the one hand, the book is a grand objective
revelation of a unique life, the story of the self-
revelation of the Son_of God, of the revelation of
the Father in Jesus Christ, moving onward to its
consummation through the contrasted develop-
ments of faith and unbelief on the part of them who
received Him, and on the part of them who received
Him not. On the other hand, it has a subjective
unity in the heart of the writer, as it tells of how
faith began, of how faith made progress, until he
came to the knowledge of the Son of God. We
can enter into the various crises through which he
passed, through which, as they successively passed,
he won the assurance which he so calmly expresses;
and these supply him with the key by means of
which he is able to unlock the mystery of the rela-
tions of Jesus to the world. The victory of faith
which he sets forth was first won iu his own soul.
This also is included in the significant phrase, ‘“‘We
beheld his glory” (1 14).

(5) Reminiscence illustrated —The Gospel receives
powerful confirmation from reflection on the nature
of reminiscence generally. A law of reminiscence
is that, when we recall anything, or any occurrence,
we recall it in its wholeness, with all the accessories
of its accompaniments. As we tell it to others, we
have to make a selection of that only which is need-
ful to convey our meaning. Inartistic natures do
not make a selection; they pour out everything
that arises in the memory (cf Dame Quickly in
Shakespeare). The finer qualities of reminiscence
are abundantly ‘lluetrated in the Fourth Gospel,
and furnish an independent proof that it is from the
pen of an eyewitness. It is possible within reason-
able limits to give only a few examples. Observe
first the exact notes of time in ch 1 and the special
notes of character in each of the 6 disciples whom
Jesus met on the first 4 days of Hisministry. Mark
the peculiar graphic note that Nathanael was under
the fig tree (ver 50). Pass on tonotice the 6 water-
pots of stone set at Cana after the manner of the
Jews’ purifying (2 6). We might refer in this con-
nection to the geographical remarks frequently
made in the course of the narrative, indicative of
an intimate knowledge of Pal, and to the numerous
allusions to Jewish laws, customs, beliefs, religious
ceremonies, usually admitted now to be accurate,
and illustrative of familiar knowledge on the part
of the writer. Our main object, however, is to call
attention to those incidental things which have no


symbolical significance, but are set down because,
as the main happening was recalled, these arose
with it. He again sees the “lad” with the 5 barley
loaves and 2 fishes (6 9); remembers that Mary
sat still in the house, when the active Martha went
forth to meet the Lord as He approached Bethany
(11 20); recalls the appearance of Lazarus as he
came forth bound hand and foot with grave-clothes
(ver 44). He has a vivid picture before him as he
recalls the washing of the disciples’ feet (13 1-15),
and the various attitudes and remarks of the dis-
ciples during the whole of that eventful night. He
still sees the attitude of the soldiers who came to
arrest Jesus (18 3-8), the flashing of Peter’s sword
(ver 10), the share of Nicodemus in the burying of
Jesus, and the kinds and weights of the spices
brought by him for the embalming of the body
(19 38-40). He tells of the careful folding of the
linen cloths, and where they were placed in the
empty tomb (20 4-8). These are only some of
those vivid touches due to reminiscence which none
but an eyewitness could safely make. Looking
hack on the past, the evangelist recalls the various
scenes and words of the Lord in their wholeness as
they happened, and he chooses those living touches
which bear the mark of reality to all readers. ‘

(6) Conclusions—These touches of vivid reality
warrant the conclusion that the writer in this Gospel
is depicting scenes in a real life, and is not drawing
onhisimagination. Looking back on his own spirit-
ual history, he remembered with special vividness
those words and works of Christ which determined
his own life, and led him on to the full assurance of
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God. The
Gospel can be understood from this point of view:
it does not seem to us that it can be understood from
any other, without ignoring all the phenomena of
the kind now indicated. When the Gospel is ap-
proached from this point of view, set forth by itself,
one can afford to neglect many of the elaborate
discussions which have arisen regarding the possible
displacement of certain chs (Spitta, etc). Much,
e.g., has been made of the sudden transference of
the scene from Galilee to Judaea as we pass from
ch 4 to ch 5, and the equally sudden transference
back to Galilee (6 1). Many suggestions have
been made, but they all proceed on the supposition
that the reminiscences were meant to be continuous,
which it has been seen is not the case. While it is
very likely that there is a sequence in the writer’s
thought, yet this need not compel us to think
of displacements. Taken as they are in the
Gospel, the selected proofs, whether they occur
in Judaea or in Galilee, in all instances indicate
progress. They illustrate the manifested glory of
Jesus, on the one hand, and the growth of faith
and the development of unbelief on the other.
This, however, opens up a separate line of objec-
tion and inquiry to which attention must now be
given.

IV. Progress and Development in the Gospel.—
It is an objection often urged against the view of the
apostolic authorship of the Fourth Gospel that in
it there is no progress, no development, no crisis,
nothing, e.g., to correspond with the significance
of the confession of St. Peter at Caesarea Philippi
(Mt 16 13-17 ||).. This is held to be true alike of
the character of Jesus, which, under the influence
of the Logos-doctrine of the prologue, exhibits no
development from first to last, and of the attitude
of the disciples, whose faith in Jesus as the Christ
is likewise represented as complete from the begin-
ning. In reality the opposite is the case. In the
course of the Gospel, as already said, the glory of
the Lord is ever more completely manifested, and
the disciples attain to a deeper faith, while the unbe-
lief of those who reject Him becomes more fixed,


1725


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA John, Gospel of


until it is absolute.
nearer examination.

The objection from the presentation of Jesus in
the Gospel takes different forms, which it is desir-

able to consider separately.
1. The Pres- (1) Alleged absence of development
entation of in the character of Jesus.—It is affirmed,
Jesus in the first, that there is no development in
Gospel the character of Jesus in the Fourth

Gospel, none of those indications such
as we have in the Synopties of widening horizons,
no recognition of the fact that the meaning, pur-
pose and issue of His calling became clearer to Him
as the days passed by. To this assertion there are
two answers. The first is, that in a series of scenes
from the activity of Jesus, selected for the definite
purpose set forth in the Gospel, there is no need to
demand a continuous history of His ministry.
Selection is made precisely of those scenes which
set forth His insight into human character and
motive, His power of sympathetic healing, His
command over Nature, and His supreme authority
over man and the world. The other remark is, that
even in the Fourth Gospel there are hints of a crisis
in the ministry of Our Lord, during which He came
to a clearer recognition of the fuller meaning of His
mission (e.g. the visit of the Greeks, ch 12). I+ will
be seen further, below, that it is not true in this
Gospel, any more than in the Synopties, that Jesus
is represented as publicly proclaiming Himself as
the Messiah from the first.

(2) Alleged “autonomy” of Jesus—Akin to the
above is the objection to the historicity of the Gos-
pel that in it Jesus is represented as always directing
His own course, maintaining an attitude of aloof-
ness to men, refusing to be influenced by them.
This, it is held, results from the dominance of the
Logos-idea in the prologue. Thereply is that there
is really no essential difference between the attitude
of Jesus in these respects in the Synoptics and in
Jn. In all alike He maintains an attitude of author-
ity. In the Synoptics He can say, “I say unto you”’
(Mt 5 22.28.32, etc). In them also He claims to
be the teacher of absolute truth, the Saviour, the
Ruler, the Judge, of men. In this regard there is
no new claim made in the Fourth Gospel: ‘No one
cometh unto the Father, but by me” (14 6). But
He had said, “(Come unto me.... and I will
give you rest’? (Mt 11 28). A claim to authority
over men is thus common to all the Gospels. In all
of them, too, in the Fourth no less than in the
others, there is on the part of Jesus loyalty, sub-
mission, subordination to the Father. In fact this
ig more conspicuous in the Fourth Gospel than in
the Synoptics: ‘The Father is greater than I” (14
28). ‘The words He speaks are the Father’s words;
the works He does are the Father’s (5 19.20; 7 16.
18, ete): “This commandment received I from my
Father” (10 18). In all the Gospels it is one con-
sistent, gracious Figure who appears. »

(3) ‘“Inconceivability” of Logos-presentation.—
A further objection, which aims at showing that this
Gospel could not be the work of ‘‘a primitive apos-
tle,” may be noticed, partly from the eminence
of him who makes it, and partly from the interest
of the objection itself. In his work on The Apos-
tolic Age, Weizsicker says, ‘It is a puzzle that the
beloved disciple of the Gospel, he who reclined at
table next to Jesus, should have come to regard and
represent his whole former experience as a life with
the incarnate Logos of God. It is impossible to
imagine any power of faith and philosophy so great as
thus to obliterate the recollection of a real hfe and
to substitute for it thismarvelous pictureof a Divine
being. We can understand that Paul, who had not
known Jesus, who had not come into contact with
the man, should have been opposed to the tradition


This will appear clearly on


of the eyewitnesses, the idea of the heavenly man,
and that he should have substituted the Christ
who was spirit for His earthly manifestation, pro-
nouncing the latter to be positively a stage above
which faith must rise. For a primitive apostle it
is inconceivable. The question is decided here and
finally here” (II, 211). It is easy to say, ‘Fora
primitive apostle it is inconceivable,” yet we know
that a primitive apostle believed that Jesus rose
from the dead, that He was exalted a Prince and
Saviour, that He was seated at the right hand of
God, that He was Lord of all (Acts 2 22-36). If
we grant that the primitive church believed these
things, it cannot be fairly said that the further
step taken in the Fourth Gospel is inconceivable.
In truth, the objection of Weizsicker is not taken
against the Fourth Gospel; it is equally effective
against Christianity in general. If Jesus be what
He is said to be in the Synoptic Gospels, and if He
be what the primitive church held Him to be, the
leading conception of the Fourth Gospel is credible
and conceivable. If Christianity is credible, the
Fourth Gospel adds nothing to the difficulty of
faith; rather it gives an additional ground for a

rational faith.
It is proper at this point that a little more should
be said on the Logos-doctrine itself, in its bearing
on the presentation of Christ in this


2. The Gospel (for the philosophical and his-
Logos- torical aspects of the doctrine, see
Doctrine Locos). Obviously the great interest
of the of the author of the reminiscences and
Prologue reflections in the Fourth Gospel is in


the personal life of the Master whom
he had known so intimately. To him this real
historical life was everything. On it he brooded,
on it he meditated, and he strove to make the sig-
nificance of it ever more real to himself first, and to
others afterward. How shall he make the reality
of that life apparent to all? What were the rela-
tionships of that person to God, to man, and to the
world? What Jesus really was, and what were His
relations to God, to man, and to the world, John
endeavors to make known in the prologue. This
real person whom he had known, revered, loved,
was something more than was apparent to the eyes
of an ordinary observer; more even than had been
apparent to His disciples. How shall this be set
forth? From the Gospel it is evident that the his-
torical person is first, and the attempt to set forth
the meaning of the person is second. The pro-
logue is an attempt to find language to set forth
fitly the glory of the person. The Logos-doctrine
does not descend on the historic person as a gar-
ment from without; it is an endeavor to describe
what John had grown to recognize as the essential
meaning of the person of Jesus. It is not a specu-
lative theory we have here, not an endeavor to
think out a theory of the world or of God; it is an
attempt to find suitable language for what the
writer recognizes to be a great fact. We need not,
therefore, seek an explanation of St. John’s Logos-
doctrine in the speculation of Heraclitus, in the
theories of theStoics, even in the eclecticism of Philo.
The interests of these men are far removed from the
atmosphere of the Fourth Gospel. They desired
a theory of the universe; John sought to set forth
the significance of a personal historical life. In the
prologue he set forth that life, and he chose a word
which he filled up with concreter meaning, a mean-
ing which included the deepest teaching of the OT,
and the highest thought of his contemporaries.
The teaching of St. Paul, esp. in the epp. of the
captivity, approaches very closely to that of the
Fourth Gospel. Thus it 1s not a right method to
bring the Logos-doctrine to the imterpretation of
the Fourth Gospel, and to look at all the phenomena


John, Gospel of
Jonah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1726


of the Gospel as mere illustrations of that doctrine.
The right method is the reverse. The Logos-
doctrine has no concreteness, no living reality,
taken apart from the personal life which was mani-
fested to the apostle. The prologue represents what
John had come to see as to the meaning of the per-
sonality he had historically known. He sets it
forth once for all in the prologue, and never once
in the Gospel does he refer to it again. We can
understand that Logos-doctrine when we look at
it in the light of those manifestations recorded in
the Gospel, manifestations which enabled St. John
to behold His glory; we cannot understand the
manifestations if we look at them merely as illus-
trations of an abstract philosophical theorem. In
brief, the Fourth Gospel is concrete, not abstract;
it is not the evolution or the demonstration of a
theory, but the attempt to set forth a concrete per-
sonality, and to find fitting words to express the
significance of that personality as St. John had
grown to see it.
As it is with the character of Jesus, so it is with
the alleged absence of development in the faith of
the disciples. Careful inquiry shows
3. Growth this objection also to be unfounded.
of Faith and (1) Early confessions —Here again,
Develop- _it is said, we see the end from the be-


ment of ginning. Inch 1 Jesusistwice greeted
Unbelief as the Messiah (vs 41.45), and twice

described as the Son of God (vs 34.
49). The Baptist at this early stage points to Him


as “‘the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of
the world’ (ver 29). Reference is made to the case
of Nicodemus (3 1 ff), to the Samaritans (4 41f),
and other incidents of the same kind, with the view
of proving that at this early stage of the ministry of
Our Lord such confessions are unlikely, and even
impossible. It is to be noticed, however, that the
confessions in these cases are represented as the
outcome of special manifestations on the part of
Jesus to the persons who make them. And the
manifestations are such as to justify the psychologi-
cal possibility of the confession. It isso in the case
of Nathanael. Nor is the objection to the testimony
of John the Baptist of a kind which admits of no
answer. For the Baptist, according to the Synop-
ties, had found his own credentials in Isa 40. There
he found himself and his mission, and described
himself, as we find it in the Fourth Gospel, “I am
the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make
straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the
prophet” (1 238; cf Mt 33; Mk 12.3). We
find also that when John ‘‘heard in the prison the
works of the Christ,’ and “sent by his disciples
and said unto him, Art thou he that cometh, or
look we for another?” (Mt 11 2), the answer of
Jesus was 2 reference to a passage in Isa 61. Ac-
cording to Jesus these were the true signs of the
Messianic kingdom. Is there any reason why we
should not say that, as John found his own ereden-
tials in Isa 40, he would also have found the charac-
ter and signs of the Coming One in the description
of the suffering servantin ch 63? If hedid so, what
more simple than that he should describe the Com-
ing One as the Lamb of God, that taketh away
thesin of the world? In His answer to John, Jesus
simply asks him to read farther on in that prophesy
which had already meant so much for him.

(2) Growth of faith in the disciples —Apart from
what may be made of these early confessions, it
may fairly be said that there are many signs of a
growth of faith on the part of the disciples. Carry-
ing with us the fact that each of these confessions
had its ground in a particular manifestation of the
glory of Christ, we go on to passages which prove
how imperfect was the faith of the disciples. It is
to be remembered also that John has only one word


to describe all the phases of faith, from the slight-
est impression up to whole-hearted conviction and
thorough surrender. We may refer to the careful
and exhaustive treatment of the meanings of the
word “‘believing”’ by E. A. Abbott in his work,
Johannine Vocabulary. In the Fourth Gospel the
vb. is always used, and never the noun. As the
word is used, itdenotes theimpression made, whether
that impression is slight and transient, or deep and
abiding. Successive steps of acceptance are seen
as the disciples advance to complete and absolute
faith.

As we read the Gospel, we perceive that Jesus
did test and try the faith of His disciples, and made
His deeds and His words both tests of faith, and a
means for its growth. As the result of the words
on the bread of life, we find that many of His dis-
ciples said, ‘“This is a hard saying; who can hear
it?”’ (6 60), and on account of the difficulty of His
words, “Many of his disciples went back, and
walked no more with him” (ver 66). On His appeal
to those who did not go away it is found that the
difficulty became really an opportunity to them for
a larger faith (vs 68.69). The incidents and events
of the night of the betrayal, and the conversations
on that night, prove how incomplete were the faith
and confidence of the disciples; how far they were
from a full understanding of the Master’s purpose.
Nor is it until after the resurrection, and the glad-
ness of seeing their risen Lord in the upper room,
that faith obtained a complete victory, and attained
to full possession of itself.

(3) Gradual disclosure of Messiahship: Growth
of unbelief —On the other side, there is as mani-
festly an evolution of unbelief from the passing
doubt of the moment on to the complete disbelief
in Jesus, and utter rejection of Him.

It is only fair here to the Gospel to observe that
the confessions to which we have already referred
are on the part of individuals who came into special
relationship with Jesus. Such is the case with
regard to Nathanael, Nicodemus, the woman of
Samaria and the Samaritan people, and the writer
places the reader in that close relationship so that
he who reads may believe. But such close relation-
ship to Jesus is only the lot of a few in this Gospel.
It is not true, as already remarked, that in this
Gospel Jesus is represented as definitely proclaim-
ing Himself as the Messiah. There is something
of the same reserve here as there is in the Synoptics.
He did not assert His claim; He left it to be inferred.
His brethren hint that He ought to put His claims
really to the test (7 3f). An account of the doubts
and speculations regarding Him is given in ch 7.
The people hesitate, and inquire, and speculate, Is
He a good man, or a deceiver? (ver 12) Had He
really a mission from God? (vs 14 ff)—all of which
goes to prove that only certain individuals had such
intimate knowledge of Him as to lead to acceptance.
In ch 10 we read, ‘‘And it was the feast of the dedi-
cation at Jerus: it was winter; and Jesus was walk-
ing in the temple in Solomon’s porch. The Jews
therefore came round about him, and said unto
him, How long dost thou hold us in suspense? If
thou art the Christ, tell us plainly’? (10 22-24).
“Tt is very clear,” as Dr. Sanday says, “that no
sharply defined issue was set before the people.
They are left to draw their own conclusions; and
they draw them as well as they can by the help of
such criteria as they have. But there is no ent-
weder .... oder... .—either Messiah or not
Messiah—peremptorily propounded by Jesus Him-
self’ (The Criticism of the Fourth Gospel, 164). The
sum of the matter as regards the development of
unbelief is given by the evangelist in the words:
‘Though he had done so many signs before them,
yet they believed not on him” (12 37). On the


1727


other hand, the culmination of faith is seen in the
word of the Lord to Thomas: “Because thou hast
seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they
that have not seen, and yet have believed” (20 29).


Lireratury.—Besides Comms. and other works
mentioned in the art., with valuable arts. on the Gospel
in Dicts. and Encs, the following may be consulted: M.
Dods, comm. on ‘Fourth ae “in Expositor's Gr Test.:
Jiilicher, Einleitung in das NT* (1906, ET); E. A. Abbott,
Johannine Vocabulary (1905), and Johannine Grammar
(1906); H. J. Holtzmann, Evangelium, Briefe und Offen-
barung des Johannes, hesorgt von W. Bauer (1908);
Essays on Some Bib. Questions of the Day b embers
of the University of Cambridge, edited by be. Swete
(1909), Essay IX, ‘'The Theology of the Fourth Gos-

el,’ by W. H. Inge, and Essay X, ‘‘The Hlstorical

alue of the Fourth Gospel,”’ Be . E. Brooke; Schmie-
del, The Johannine Writings (HT, 1908); J. Armitage
Robinson, The Historical Character of St. John’s Gospel
(1908); Askwith, The Historical Value of the Fourth
Gospel (1910); Ezra Abbot, External Evidence of the
Fourth Gospel, edited by J. H. Thayer (1891); Lowrie,
The Doctrine of St. John (1899).

James IvERACH


JOHN MARK. See Mars, Jonn.


JOHN, THE REVELATION OF. See Reve-
LATION OF JOHN.


JOIADA, joi’a-da OTN, yoyddha', “Jeh knows”;
cf JEHOIADA):

(1) A repairer of the Jerus walls (Neh 3 6);
AV “Jehoiada.”

(2) Son of Eliashib the high priest (Neh 12 10.
11.22; 13 28).


JOIAKIM, joi’a-kim (°p7", yoyakim, “Jeh
raises up’; cf JeHo1aKim; Joxim): Son of Jeshua
and Said of Eliashib, the high priest (Neh 12 10.
12.26).


JOIARLB, joi’a-rib (A917, y5yaribh, “Jeh pleads”
or “contends”; cf JEHOIARIB):

(1) A “teacher” of Ezra’s time (Ezr 8 16).

(2) A Judahite (Neh 11 5).

(3) In Neh 11 10; 12 6.19=JeHoIaRiB (q.v.).


JOIN, join: Of the NT words, koild@, lit. ‘glue,”
“weld together,” and its compounds, designate the
closest form of personal union, as in Lk 16 15; 1
Cor 6 16; Eph 6 31. In the words of institution
of marriage, suzetignumi is used (Mt 19 6; Mk
10 9, lit. “yoke together”; cf Gen 2 24).


JOKDEAM, jok’dé-am (O77P", yok*dh*‘am): An
unidentified city of Judah, named with Maon, Car-
mel and Ziph (Josh 15 56). It probably lay to the
8. of Hebron.


JOKIM, jo’kim (O°p™, ydkim, “Jeh raises
up”; of Jenoraxim; Joraxim): A Judahite, de-
scendant of Shelah (1 Ch 4 22).


JOKMEAM, jok’mé-am (PAP), yokm*am):
A town in Mt. Ephraim assigned to the Kohathite
Levites (1 Ch 6 68), named along with Gezer and
Beth-horon. Its place is taken by Kibzaim in Josh
21 22 (in LXX here the name is omitted). It is
mentioned again in 1 K 4 12 (AV wrongly “Jok-
neam”’), where it seems to indicate some position
to the E. of Ephraim. So far no identification is
possible.


JOKNEAM, jok’né-am (OF}P7, yokn‘am): A
royal city of the Canaanites taken by Joshua and
described as “in Carmel”: (Josh 12 22), in the ter-
ritory of Zebulun, and allotted to the Merarite
Levites (21 34). The border of Zebulun “reached
to the brook that is before Jokneam” (19 11). In
1K 4 12 the name appears in AV where, with RV,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Nee of


we should read “Jokmeam.” Onom places it 6
Rom miles from Lejio (Lejjiin) on the way to Pto-
lemais (Acre). This points to Tell Kaiman, a
striking mound on the eastern slope of Mt. Carmel.
To the E. of it runs the “torrent bed” of the Kishon.
It stands about 300 ft. above the valley to the N.
of it, and the sides are steep. It is crowned by the
ruins of an 18th-cent. fortress. A little lower down
are the remains of a small chapel. There are fine
springs at the foot (PEFM, I, 69f). In Jth_7 3
it appears as “Cyamon” (Kvayév, Kuamén). It is
the “Mons Cain” of the Middle Ages. ‘In the
Sam Book of Jgs it is noticed as the scene of a
conflict between the Hebrews and the Giants; and
Joshua is said to have been shut up here in magic
walls of brass, till on sending a dove to the Heb king
of Gilead, he was rescued” (Conder, HDB, s.v.).
; W. Ewina

JOKSHAN, jok’shan (]W}7, yokshén, meaning
unknown): Son of Abraham and Keturah (Gen 25
2.3 || 1 Ch 1 32). Tuch suggested that yokshan
=yoktaén (Gen 10 25-29); see HDB, s.v.; Skinner,
Gen, 350.


JOKTAN, jok’tan (JEP?, yokfdn, meaning un-
known): “Son” of Eber, and ‘father’ of 13 tribes
(Gen 10 25.26.29; 1 Ch 1 19.20.28).


JOKTHEEL, jok’thé-el, jok’thél ORM? , yoke-
the’ él):

(1) A city in the Shephelah of Judah named be-
pubs Mizpeh and Lachish (Josh 15 38); unidenti-

ed.

(2) A city in Edom formerly called Sela, taken
by Amaziah after the battle in the Valley of Salt,
and by him called Joktheel (2 K 14 7). See Szua.


JONA, jo’na.
JONADAB, jon’a-dab. See JEHoNADAB.


See Jonan; Jonas.


JONAH, jd’na (19M, yondh, “dove”; "Iwvas,
Tonds):

(1) According to 2 K 14 25, Jonah, the son of
Amittai, of Gath-hepher, a prophet and servant of
Jeh, predicted the restoration of the land of -Israel
to its ancient boundaries through the efforts of
Jeroboam II, The prophet lived and labored either
in the early part of the reign of Jeroboam (790—
750 BC), or during the preceding generation. He
may with great probability be placed at 800-780
BC. His early ministry must have made him
popular in Israel; for he prophesied of victory and
expansion of territory. His native village of Gath-
aes was located in the territory of Zebulun (Josh
19 13).

(2) According to the book bearing his name,
Jonah the son of Amittai received a command to
preach to Nineveh; but he fled in the opposite
direction to escape from the task of proclaiming
Jeh’s message to the great heathen city; was arrested
by a storm, and at his own request was hurled into
the sea, where he was swallowed by a great fish,
remaining alive in the belly of the fish for three
days. When on his release from the body of the
fish the command to go to Nineveh was renewed, J.
obeyed and announced the overthrow of the wicked
city. When the men of Nineveh repented at the
preaching of the prophet, God repented of the evil
He had threatened to bring upon them. J. was
grieved that the oppressing city should be spared,
and waited in the vicinity to see what would be the
final outcome. An intense patriot, J. wished for
the destruction of tbe people that threatened to
swallow up Israel. He thought that Jeh was too
merciful to the heathen oppressors. By the lesson


Jonah, Book of
Jonas


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1728


of the gourd he was taught the value of the heathen
in the sight of Jeh.

It is the fashion now in scholarly circles to treat
the Book of Jonah as fiction. The story is said to
be an allegory or a parable or a symbolic narrative.
Why then did the author fasten upon a true and


worthy prophet of Jeh the stigma of rebellion and.


narrowness? On the theory that the narrative is
an allegory, J. Kennedy well says that “the man who
wrote it was guilty of a gratuitous insult to the
memory of a prophet, and could not have been in-
spired by the prophet’s Master thus to dishonor a
faithful servant.”

(3) Our Lord referred on two different occasions
to the sign of Jonah the prophet (Mt 12 38-41;
Lk 11 29-32; Mt 16 4). He speaks of J.’3 ex-
perience in the belly of the fish as parallel with His
own approaching entombment for three days, and
cites the repentance of the Ninevites as a rebuke
to the unbelieving men of his own generation. Our
Lord thus speaks oul of the physical miracle of the
preservation of Jonah in the body of the fish and
of the moral miracle of the repentance of the Nine-
vites, and without the slightest hint that He re-
garded the story as an allegory.

JoHN RicHarp SAMPEY

JONAH, THE BOOK OF: This little roll of
four short chapters has given rise to almost as much
discussion and difference of opinion as the first four
chapters of Gen. It would be presumptuous to
think that one could, in a brief article, speak the
final word on the questions in debate.

I. Contents of the Book.—The story is too well
known to need retelling. Moreover, it would be
difficult to give the events in fewer words than the
author employs in his classic narrative. One event
grows out of another, so that the interest of the
reader never flags.

Whenthe call came to Jonah to preach in Nineveh,
hefled in the opposite direction, hoping thus to escape

from his unpleasant task. He was


1. Jonah afraid that the merciful God would for-
Disobe- give the oppressing heathen city, if it
dient, 1: should repent at his preaching. Jonah
1-3 was a narrow-minded patriot, who


feared that Assyria would oneday swal-

low up his own littlenation; and so he wished to do
nothing that might lead to the preservation of wicked
Nineveh. Jonah was willing to prophesy to Israel; he
at first flatly refused to become a foreign missionary.
The vessel in which the prophet had taken pas-
sage was arrested by a great storm. The heathen
sailors inferred that some god must be


2. Jonah angry with some person on board, and
Punished, cast lots to discover the culprit. When
1; 4-16 the lot fell upon Jonah, he made a


3 complete confession, and bravely sug-
gested that they cast him overboard. The heathen
mariners rowed desperately to get back to land, but
made no progress against the storm. They then
prayed Jeh not to bring innocent blood upon them,
and cast Jonah into thesea. As the storm prompt-
ly subsided, the heathen sailors offered a sacrifice
to Jeh and made vows. In this part of the story
the mariners give an example of the capacity of the
Gentiles to perform noble deeds and to offer accept-
able worship to Jeh.

Jeh prepared a great fish to swallow Jonah and
to bear him in his body for three days and nights.
Surprised to find himsclf aliveand con-

3. Jonah scious in the body of the fish, the
Miraculous- prophet prayed to his God. Already
ly Pre- y faith he speaks of his danger as a
served, past experience. The God who had
1:17—2:10 saved him from drowning in the
depths of the sea will yet permit him

once more to worship with loud thanksgiving. At


the command of Jeh the fish vomits out Jonah upon
the dry land. The almost inevitable grotesqueness
of this part of the story is one of the strongest
arguments against, the view that the Book of Jon is

literal history and not a work of the imagination.
Upon the renewal of the command to go to Nine-
veh, Jonah obeyed, and marching through the
streets of the great city, he cried, “Yet


4. Jonah’s forty days, and Nineveh shall be over-
Ministry in thrown!” His message was_ so brief
Nineveh, that he may well havespoken it in good
3:1-4 Assyrian. If the story of his deliverance


from the sea preceded him, or was made

known through the prophet himself, the effect of the
prophetic message was thereby greatly heightened.
The men of Nineveh repented at the preaching
of Jonah, the entire city uniting in fasting and
prayer. So great was the anxiety of


5. The the people that even the lower animals
Ninevites were clothed in sackeloth. The men
Repent, of Nineveh turned from deeds of
3: 6-10 violence (‘‘their evil way’) to seek the


forgiveness of an angry God. Jeh
deeided to spare the city.

Jonah breaks out into loud and bitter complaint
when he learns that Nineveh is to be spared. He

decides to encamp near the city to see
6. A Nar- what will become of it. He hopes it
row Prophet may yet be overthrown. Through a
versus the gourd vine Jeh teaches the prophet a
Merciful great lesson. If such a mean and
God, 4:1-11 perishable plant could come to have

real value in the eyes of the sullen
prophet, what estimate ought to be put on the lives
of the thousands of innocent children and helpless
cattle in the great city of Nineveh? ‘These were
dearer to the God of heaven than Jonah’s protect-
ing vine could possibly be to him.

Il. The Aim of the Book.—The main purpose of
the writer was to enlarge the sympathies of Israel
and lead the chosen people to undertake the great,
missionary task of proclaiming the truth to the
heathen world. Other lessons may be learned from
the subordinate parts of the narrative, but this is
the central truth of the Book of Jon. Kent well
expresses the author’s main message: ‘In his
wonderful picture of God’s love for all mankind,
and of the Divine readiness to pardon and to save
even the ignorant heathen, if they but repent
according to their light, he has anticipated the
teaching of the parable of the Prodigal Son, and
laid the foundation for some of the broadest faith
and the noblest missionary aetivity of the present
generation” (Sermons, Epistles, etc, 420).

Il, Is the Book History?—Most of the early in-
terpreters so understood it, and some excellent

scholars still hold this view. If Jesus


1. What thought of the story as history and so
Did Our —_— taught, that fact alone would settle
Lord the question for the devout believer.
Teach? On two, possibly three, different occa-

sions He referred to Jonah (Mt 12 38-
41; 164; Lk 11 29-32). It is significant that


Jesus brought the two great miracles of the Book of
Jon into relation with Himself and His preaching.
As Jonah was three days and three nights in the
body of the fish, so should the Son of Man be three
days in the heart of the earth. Themen of Nineveh
repented at the preaching of Jonah, while the con-
temporaries of Jesus for the most part rejected His
message. It is the fashion now among advanced
critics to treat Mt 12 40 as an addition to the
words of Jesus, though there is no manuscript
evidence in favor of regarding the verse as an inter-
polation. G. A. Smith, among recent scholars, holds
the view that Jesus did not mean to teach the
historicity of Jonah’s experience in the fish.


1729


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Jona Book of


5 lt matters not
whether that illustration be drawn from the realms of
fact or of poetry” (BTP, II, 508). In a footnote Dr.
Smith says: ‘‘Suppose we tell slothful people that theirs
will be the fate of the man who buried his talent, is
this to commit us to the bellef that the personages of
Christ's parables actually existed? Or take the homl-
letic use of Shakespeare’s dramas—as Macbeth dld,’
or ‘as Hamlet said.” Does it commit us to the historical
reality of Macheth or Hamlet? Any preacher amon
us would resent being bound by such aninference. An
if we resent this for ourselves, how chary we should he
about seeking to bind Our Lord by it.”’

Notwithstanding Principal Smith’s skilful pres-
entation of his case, we still think that Our Lord
regarded the miracles of the fish and the repentance
of the Ninevites as actual events. Orelli puts the
matter judiciously: ‘It is not, indeed, proved with
eonclusive necessity that, if the resurrection of
Jesus was a physical fact, Jonah’s abode in the fish’s
belly must also be just as historical. On this point
also the saying, ‘A greater than Jonah is here,’ holds
good. But, on the other hand, how arbitrary it
is to assert, with Reuss, that Jesus regarded Jonah’s
history as a parable!
in it a sign, a powerful! evidence of the same Divine
power which showed itself also in His dying in order
to live again and triumph in the world. Whoever,
therefore, feels the religious greatness of the book,
and accepts as authoritative the attitude taken to
its historical import by the Son of God Himself,
will be led to accept a great act of the God who
brings down to Hades and brings up again, as an
actual experience of Jonah in his flight from his
Lord” (The Twelve Minor Prophets, 172, 3).

Most modern critical scholars since Kleinert
(1868) and Bloch (1875) have regarded the Book

of Jon as a work of the imagination.
2. Modern Some prefer to call it an allegory,
Critical others a parable, others a prose poem,
Views others a didactic story, others a mid-

rash, others a symbolical book. Keil,
Pusey, Delitzsch, Orelli, J. Kennedy and others
have contended for the historical character of the
narrative. A few treat it as a legend containing
a kernel of fact. Cheyne and a few other scholars
assert that in the symbolic narrative are imbedded
mythical clements. The trend of critical opinion,
even in evangelical circles, has of late been toward
the symbolical interpretation. Radical critics
boldly set aside the teaching of Jesus as erroneous,
while the more evangelical take refuge either in the
doctrine of the Kenosis (Phil 2 5-8), or in the prin-
ciple of accommodation. The last explanation
might commend itself to the devout student, viz.
that Jesus did not think it worth while to correct
the views of his contemporaries, had Our Lord not
spoken more than once of the sign of Jonah, and in
such detail as to indicate His acceptance of the en-
tire narrative with its two great miracles.

IV. Authorship and Date.—The old view that
Jonah was the author is still held by some scholars,
though most moderns place the book in the late exilic
or post-exilic times. A few Aram.words occur in the

_ Heb text. The question in debate is whether the
language of Tere in the days of Jeroboam IT had
taken over words from the Aramaic. There had
certainly been a century of close political and com-
mercial contact between Israel and the Aramaeans
of Damaseus, so that it would not be surprising to
meet with Aram. words in a prophet of Samaria.
Hosea, in the generation following Jonah, betrays
little evidence of Aram. influence in his style and
vocabulary. Of course, the personal equation is
a factor that ought not to be overlooked. If the
author was a Judaean, we should probably have to
think of the post-exilic period, when Aram. began
to displace Heb as the vernacular of the Jews. The
Book of Jon is anonymous, and we really do not
know who the author was or when he lived. The


“Christ is using an illustratlon:


On the contrary, Jesus saw -


view that Jonah wrote the story of his own disobe-
dience and his debate with the merciful God has
not been made wholly untenable.

V. The Unity of the Book.—Nachtigal (1799)
contended that there were three different authors of
widely different periods. Kleinert (1868) held that
two parallel narratives had been woven together in
chs 3 and 4. Kaufmann Kohler (1879) contended
that there were a considerable number of glosses
and interpolations besides some transpositions of
material. W. Béhme, in 1887, advanced the most
radical theory of the composition of the roll. He
partitioned the story among two authors, and two
redactors or eupElementeess A few additional
glosses were charged to later hands. Even radical
critics treat Béhme’s theory as one of the curiosities
of criticism. Winckler (AOF, II, 260 ff) tried to
improve the story by a few transpositions. Hans
Schmidt (1905) subjects the roll of Jonah to a
searching criticism, and concludes that a good many
changes have been made from religious motives.
Budde follows Winckler and Schmidt both in trans-
posing and in omitting some material. Sievers
(1905) and Erbt (1907) tried to make of the Book of
Jon a poem; but they do not agree as to the meter.
Sievers regards the roll as a unit, while Erbt con-
tends for two main sources besides the prayer in
ch 2. Bewer, in ICC (1912), is far more conser-
vative in both textual and literary criticism, recog-
nizing but few glossesin our present text and arguing
for the unity of the story apart from the insertion
of the psin ch 2. Nearly all recent critics assign
Jonah’s prayer to a writer other than the author
of the narrative about Jonah, but opinions vary
widely as to the manner in which the psalm found
its way into the Book of Jon. Bewer holds that it
was probably put on the margin by a reader and
afterward crept into the text, the copyist inserting
it after ver 2, though it would more naturally follow
ver11. Bewerremarks: ‘The literary connections
with various post-exilic pss argue for a post-exilic
date of the ps. But how early or how late in the
post-exilic period it belongs we cannot tell. The
Heb is pure and no Aram. influence is apparent.”
It is evident, then, that the presence or absence of
Aram. influence does not alone settle the question
of the date of the document. Geography and the
personal equation may be more important than the
question of date. Bewer recognizes the fact that
the ps in Jon is not a mere cento of quotations from
the Pss. “The phrases it has in common with other
pss,’ writes Professor Bewer, ‘were the common
property of the religious language of the author’s
day” (p. 24). Those who still believe that David
wrote many of the pss find no difficulty in believing
that a prophet of 780 BC could have drawn upon
his knowledge of the Psalter in a prayer of thanks-
giving to Jeh. ;

LireratureE.—Among comms. covering the twelve
Minor Prophets, see esp. Pusey (1861), Keil (E'T, 1880),
von Orelli (ET, 1893), Wellhausen (1898), G. A. Smith
(1898). Among speclal comms. on Jon, consult Klei-
nert, in Lange (ET, 1875); Perowne, in Cambridge
Bible (1897); Bewerin ICC (1912). See also C. H. H.
uae, Biblical Essays (1886); H.C.'Trumbull, ‘‘ Jonah
in Nineveh,” JBL, XI (1892); J. Kennedy, Book of
Jon Cleo) Konig in HDB; Cheynein EB. For more
elaborate bibliography see Bewer in ICC, 25-27.

Joun Ricuarp SAMPEY

JONAM, jd/nam (Tovép, Iéndm, WH; ‘lovdy,
Téndn, TR; AV Jonan): An ancestor of Jesus in
Lk’s genealogy (3 30).


JONAN, jo’nan.


JONAS, jd’nas (’Iwvds, Jonds; AV Jonan):

(1) Son of Eliasib (1 Esd 9 1).

(2) Corresponds in 1 Esd 9 23 to “Eliezer’’ in
Ezr 10 23.


See Jonam.


Jonas
Joppa


JONAS, jd’nas (IM, ydnah, or 21", yohdnan;
*Twva, Tond):

(1) The name given in Mt 12 39-41; 16 4; Lk
11 29-32 AV to the OT prophet Jonah (RV renders
“Jonah’’). See Jonan.

(2) (Iwdvys, Todnés): The name given in Jn 21
15.16 AV to the father of the apostle Simon Peter.
Nothing further is known of him, except the differ-
ent forms of hisname. In Jn 1 42 AV he is called
Jona (cf also Mt 1617 AV). In Jn 1 42; 21 15.
16 RV he is called John, with the marginal note
“Gr Joanes.”” In Mt 16 17 RV Simon Peter is
called Simon Bar-Jonah.

Jonas may be a contraction for Joanes (Keim).
It has also been suggested that the father of Simon
may have had a double name, Jona-Johannes (cf
F. H. Chase in HDB, art. “John, father of Simon
Peter”). C. M. Kerr


JONATH ELEM REHOKIM, jo’nath @lem
ré-ho’kim ("PM poy ni, ydnath ’élem rehokim)
(Ps 56, title): ‘The silent dove of the far ones” (i.e.
either of far-off lands, or among aliens), or ‘“The
dove of the distant terebinths,” in either case indi-
eating the tune to the melody of which the ps was
to be sung. See Psatms; Sona.


JONATHAN, jon’a-than GOV, yhanathan,
JR, yonathan, ‘‘Jeh has given’; "lavaddv, Jdna-
than; cf JEHONATHAN):

(1) (Heb yhGnathan): The young ‘‘Levite” of
Jgs 17, 18 referred to by name in 18 30, where he
is called “the son of Gershom, the son of Moses,”
and where AV has ‘‘Manasseh”’ for Moses, following
the MT in which the letter nan of Manasseh is
“suspended.”

Rashi states the reason thus: ‘‘Because of the honor of
Moses was the nan written so as to alter thename."’ The
orlginal word was Moses, but it was thought undesirable
that a descendant of his should have anything to do with
jmages; and soJ. wasmade to have affinity (metaphorically)
with Manasseh. Seo GB, Intro, 335-38.

J. was a Levitical Judahite of Beth-lehem-judah,
who came to the house of Micah, in the hill country
of Ephraim, and hired himself as a priest in Micah’s
sanctuary (17 1-13). The Danites sent 5 men
north to spy for new territory, and on their way
the spies came to the house of Micah, where they
found J. and consulted the oracle through him
(18 1-5). Having received a favorable answer,
they set out and came to Laish, and on their return
south they advised that au expedition be sent
thither (18 6-10). Their clansmen accordingly sent
out a band of warriors who on their way passed by
Micah’s house. The spies informed their comrades
of the ephod and teraphim and images there, and
they seized them, inducing J. at the same time to
accompany them as their priest (vs 11-20). At
Laish he founded a priesthood which was thus de-
scended from Moses (ver 30).

It has been held that there are two sources in the narra-
tive in Jgs 17, 18 (see Moore, Jgs, 365-72). The section
is important because of the light it throws on life and re-
ligion in early Israel. Tho ''Levites'' were not all of one
tribe (see Moore, op. cit., 383-84); there were priests who
claimed descent from Moses as well as Aaronite priests;
and images were common in early Heb worship (cf Gen
81 30ff; Jes 8 27; 1 8 19 13).

(2) Son of King Saul. See separate art.

(3) (Heb y*héndihan, ydndthan, 2 8 16 27.36;
17 17.20; 1K 1 42.43): Son of Abiathar the
priest. He acted with Ahimaaz as courier to inform
David of events at Jerus during Absalom’s revolt.
It was he who also brought to Adonijah the news of
Solomon’s accession.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


(3) The prophet Jonah (2 Esd 1 39; Tob 14 (4) (Heb yhdnathan, 2 § 21 21 || 1 Ch 20 7):
s


1730


Son of Shimei or Shimea, David’s brother; he is
said to be the slayer of Goliath. See JeHonapaB


(1).

(5) (2 8 28 32, Heb yhonathan = 1 Ch 11 34,
Heb yanathan): One of David’s mighty men. See
JASHEN.

(6) (Heb yandihén, 1 Ch 2 32.33): A Jerah-
meelite.

(7) (Heb y*hondthan, and so 1 Ch 27 25 AV):
Son of Uzziah, and one of David’s treasurers.

(8) (Heb ychénathan, 1 Ch 27 32): A dadh of
David, RV “uncle,” RVm “brother’s son”; if he
was David’s nephew, he will be the same as (4)
above. He ‘‘was a counsellor” to David, and “‘a
man of understanding, and a scribe.”

(9) (Heb yonathan, Kar 8 6; 1 Esd 8 32): Father
of Ebed, a returned exile.

(10) (Heb yénathan, Ezr 10 15; 1 Esd 9 14):
One who either supported (RV) or opposed (RVm,
AV) Ezra in the matter of foreign marriages; see
JAHZEIAH. ;

(11) (Heb yondthan, Neh 12 11): A priest, de-
scendant of Jeshua (Joshua) =‘‘Johanan” (12 22.23);
see JEHOHANAN, (3). :

(12) (Heb yénathan, Neh 12 14): A priest.

(13) (Heb yénaithan, Neh 12 35): A priest, father
of Zechariah.

(14) (Heb yhandthan, Jer 37 15.20; 38 26): A
scribe in whose house Jeremiah was imprisoned.

(15) (Heb yonathan, Jer 40 8): Son of Kareah;
a Judahite captain who joined Gedaliah after the
fall of Jerus.

(16) (‘IwvdOns, Tondihés, 1 Macc 2 5; 9-18; and
"Ivabdv, Inathin, 2 Mace 8 22; Swete reads Jond-
thés): The Maccabee surnamed Apphus in 1 Macc
2 5, son of Mattathias.

(17) Son of Absalom (1 Macc 13 11). He was
sent by Simon the Maccabee to capture Joppa (cf
11 70, where there is mentioned a Mattathias, son
of Absalom).

(18) A priest who led in prayer at the first sacri-
fice after the return from exile (2 Macc 1 23).

, Davip Francis Roperts

JONATHAN (jFIWD, yhonathan; also 727,
yonathan, “Jeh has given”; *Iwvaddv, lonaihdn):

The eldest son of Saul, the first king


1. Three of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin.
Periods The life of J., as far as we are told

: about him, falls naturally into 3
periods.


_ (1) First period—He comes on the scene as the
right hand and lieutenant of his father in his early
struggles to beat off the hostile tribes, esp. the Am~
monites (1 S 11), who beset the territory of Israel
on all sides. As soon as Saul had gained his first
decisive victory, the people rallied to him in great
numbers, so that he was able to count upon 3,000
men whenever they took the field. These were
divided into two small armies, Saul retaining 2,000
and making Michmash his headquarters, the rest
being stationed at Gibeah under J., some 5 miles
distant as the crow flies. J. thus commanded the
base, while his father led the fighting force. This
position of comparative inactivity does not appear
to have been much to the taste of J. Midway
between the two camps was a Phili outpost at
Geba, facing Michmash across the pass of that
name, a valley with steep sides, now the Wddi
Suweinit. Saul does not seem to have felt himself
strong enough to commence hostilities against the
Philis, and took means to increase the forces at his
disposal. The Philis no sooner heard that the
Israclites had cast off their yoke (1 8 13 3b: for
“Let the Hebrews hear,” read ‘The Hebrews have
revolted,” after LXX), than they came out in great


1731


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jonas
Joppa


numbers (13 5). They seem to have compelled
Saul to evacuate Michmash, which they occupied,
Saul falling back on Gibeah (13 16) and Gilgal with
a greatly reduced following (13 3.4a seems to be a
summary anticipation, in Heb style, of the events
detailed in ch 14). In spite of this, J., accompanied
only by his armor-bearer, surprised the Phili out-
post at Geba (14 5, “Gibeah” should be “Geba”),
which was killed to a man. This feat precipitated
a general engagement, in which the Israelites, whose
only weapons appear to have been their farming
implements (13 20), Saul and J. alone being armed
with iron swords and spears, routed their enemies.
The completeness of the victory was impaired by
the superstitious action of Saul in refusing to allow
the people to eat until the day was over (14 24).
As this order was unwittingly broken by J., Saul
wished to have him executed; but this the people
refused to allow, as they clearly recognized that the
credit of the victory was due to the energetic action
of J. in striking before the enemy had time to con-
centrate. (In the Heb text there is some confusion

_ between Gibeah and Geba; cf 10 5m and 13 3.)
(2) Second period.—The 2d period of the life of
J.is that of his friendship for David. The narrative
is too well known to need recapitulating, and the
simple tale would only be spoiled by telling it in
other words. J.’s devotion to David was such that
he not only took his part against his father, Saul
(chs 18, 19), but was willing to surrender to him
his undoubted claim to become Saul’s successor
(ch 20). Their last meeting took place in the
“desert” of Ziph, to the 8S. of Hebron, some time
ae had been driven into outlawry (23
(3) Third period.—The 3d phase of J.’s life is
that of the exile of David, when Saul was directing
his energies to combat what he no doubt considered
the rebellion of the son of Jesse. During this civil
war, if that can be called war in which one of the
two sides refuses to take the offensive against the
other, J. remained entirely passive. He could not
take part in proceedings which were directed against
his friend whom he believed to be destined to occupy
the place which he himself should in the ordinary
course of events have filled. We therefore hear no
more of J. until the encroachments of the Philis
once more compelled Saul to leave the pursuit of
the lesser enemy in order to defend himself against
the greater. Saul’s last campaign against the Philis
was short and decisive: it ended in the defeat of
Gilboa and the death of himself and his sons. The
men of Jabesh-gilead, out of gratitude for Saul’s
rescue of their town at the beginning of his reign,
crossed over to Beth-shan, on the walls of which
town the Philis had hung in chains the bodies of
Saul and Jonathan, and took them down under
cover of darkness and carried them to Jabesh.
There they burned the bodies after the manner of
the primitive inhabitants of the land, and buried

the bones. : ‘

If we may judge from the little which has been
handed down to us concerning him, J. must have
been one of the finest spirits that ever


2. His lived. His character ie as das as ous
Character knowledge goes, nearly perfect. e

was athletic and brave (1 8 14 13;
28 1 22.23). He could keep his plans secret


when secrecy was necessary in order to carry them
to a successful issne (14 1), and could decide on
what course of action to follow and act upon it on
the instant. His attack upon the
Phili garrison at Geba (or Gibeah, if
we adopt the reading of the LXX and
Tg of 13 3; cf 10 5) was delivered at
the right moment, and was as wise as it was daring.
Tf he had a fault, from a military point of view, 1t


3. Military
Qualities


ae have been an inability to follow up an advan-
tage. The pursuit of the Philis on the occasion
referred to ended with nightfall. In this respect,
however, he perhaps cannot be censured with justice,
as he never had an entirely free hand.

J.’s independence and capacity for acting on his
own responsibility were combined with devotion to


his father. While holding his own
4. Filial opinion and taking his own course,
Piety he conformed as far as possible to his


father’s views and _ wishes. While
convinced of the high deserts of David, he sought
by all means to mitigate Saul’s hatred toward him,
and up to @ certain point he succeeded (19 6).
Filial duty could not have been more severely tested
than was that of J., but his conduct toward both
his father and his friend is above criticism. Only
on one occasion did his anger get the better of him
(20 34) under gross provocation, Saul having im-
pugned the honor of J.’s mother (20 30 LXX)
Ahinoam (14 50), and attempted his life. The
estrangement was momentary; Saul and Jonathan
were undivided in life and in death (2 § 1 23 to be
so read).
But it is as the befriender of David that J. will
always be remembered. He is the type of the very
perfect friend, as well as of the chival-


5. Friend- rous knight, for all time. His devotion
ship for to David was altogether human; had
David it been dictated by a superstitious


belief in David’s destiny as the future
ruler of his people (23 17), that belief would have
been shared by Saul, which was not the case (20 31).
In disinterestedness and willingness to efface his
own claims and give up his own titles the conduct
of J. is unsurpassed, and presents a pleasing con-
trast to some of the characters with whom we meet
in the Bible. In this respect he resembles ‘Alt, the
cousin and son-in-law of Muhammad, who was the
bravest of the brave, save when fighting in his own
cause, and who had no ambition to fill the highest
posts. So J. preferred to serve rather than to com-
mand (1 8 23 17). J. and David stand for the
highest ideal of Heb friendship, as do Damon and
Pythias in Gr lit.
We may be sure that J. won the affection of the
people. His squire was ready to follow him any-
where (14 7). David’s devotion to
6. Inspired him seems to have heen sincere,
Affection althongh it unfortunately coincided
with his own self-interest. J. appears
to have inspired as great an affection as he himself
felt (1 S 20 41; 2 8 1 26). His quarrel with his
father was largely due to the solicitude of the latter
for his son’s interests (1 S 18 29; 20 31).
Jonathan’s sons were, in common with his
brother’s, killed in the wars. One alone—Merib-
baal (Mephibosheth)—survived. J.’s
7. His De- posterity through him lasted several
scendants generations. A table of them is given
inl Ch 8 33 ff || 9 40 ff (cf2 8 9 12).
They were famous soldiers and were, like their an-
cestors, distinguished in the use of the bow (1 Ch
8 40). THomas HunteR WEIR


JONATHAS, jon’a-thas (Swete reads *Ia@dv,
Taihdn, in B; Na@év, Nathén, in &): The Lat form
of the common name ‘‘Jonathan” (Tob 5 13). See
JaTHAN. It is sometimes represented as Nathan.


JOPPA, jop’a (127, yaphd, NID? yapha’ ; *léwwrn,
Iépp2): In Josh 19 46 AV called “Japho,” a city
in the territory allotted to Dan; but

j. Ancient there is nothing to show that in pre-
Notices exilic times it ever passed into Israel-
itish hands. “The gate of Joppa” is

mentioned in the Am Tab (214, 32f; cf 178, 20),


Joppa
Jordan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1782


as guarded by an Egyp officer for Amenhotep IV.
It was conquered by Thothmes III, and old Egyp
records speak of the excellence of its gardens and
fruit trees. Sennacherib claims to have taken J.
after a siege (KB, 2, 93). To J., the Chronicler
tells us, the cedars of Lebanon were brought in
floats for transportation to Jerus by the workmen

of the king of Tyre (2 Ch 2 16). The
2. Biblical city does not appear in the history as
References Philistine, so we may, perhaps, infer

that it was held by the Phoenicians,
the great seamen of those days. It was donbtless
a Phoen ship that Jonah found here, bound for


Traditional House of Simon the Tanner.


Tarshish, when he fied from the presence of the
Lord (Jon 18). In Ezra’s time, again, cedars
were bronght here for the buildings in Jeras (Ear
3 7). Having been brought by messengers from
Lydda to J., Peter here raised the dead Dorcas to life
(Acts 9 36f). On the roof of Simon’s house by the
sea, the famous vision was vouchsafed to this apostle,
from which he learned that the gospel was designed.
for Jew and Gentile alike (Acts 10 1 ff; 11 5 ff).
The men of J., having treacherously drowned
some 200 Jews, Judas Maccabaens fell upon the
town “and set the haven on fire by

3. History night, and burned the boats, and put


from Maec- to the sword those that had fled
cabean thither” (2 Macc 12 3 ff). Jonathan
Times took the city, in which Apollonins


had placed a garrison (1 Macc 11
47 ff). It was not easy to hold, and some years
later it was captured again by Simon, who garri-
soned the place, completed the harbor and raised
the fortifications (1 Macc 12 86f; 13 11; 14
5-34). It is recorded as part of Simon’s glory that
he took it “for a haven, and made it an entrance for
the isles of the sea,” the Jews thus possessing for
the first time a seaport through which commerce


Through the Rocks at Joppa.
might be fully developed. It was taken by Pompcy


and joined to the province of Syria (Ant, XIV, iv, 4;
BJ, I, vii, 7). Caesar restored it to the Jews under


Hyrcanus (Ant, XIV, x, 6). It was among the
cities given by Antony to Cleopatra (XV, iv, 1).
Caesar added it to the kingdom of Herod (vii. 3;
BJ, I, xx, 3), and at his death it passed to Arche-
lans (Ant, XVII, xi, 4; BJ, Il, vi, 3). At his
deposition it was attached to the Rom province.
The inhabitants were now zealous Jews, and in the
Rom wars it suffered heavily. After a massacre
by Cestius Gallus, in which 8,400 of the people
perished, it was left desolate. Thns it became a
resort of the enemies of Rome, who turned pirates,
and preyed upon the shipping in the neighboring
waters. The place was promptly captured and
destroyed by Vespasian. The people took to their
boats, but a terrific storm burst upon them, dashing
their frail craft to pieces on the rocks, so that vast
numbers perished (BJ, III, ix, 2-4). At a later
time it was the seat of a bishopric. During the
Crusades it had a checkered history, being taken,
now by the Christians, now by the Moslems. It
was captured by the French under Kleber in 1799.
It was fortified by the English, and afterward ex-
tended by the Turks (Baedeker, Pal, 130).
The modern Yafa is built on a rocky mound 116 ft,
high, at the edge of the sea. A reef of rocks runs parallel
? to the shore a short distance out. It may
4, Descrip- be rounded in calm weather by lighter
tion vessels, and it affords a certain amount of
rotection. There is a gap in the reef
through which the boats pass that meet the steamers
calling here. In time of storm the passage is dangerous.
On one of these rocks Perseus is said to have rescued the
chained Andromeda from the dragon. Y4é/fé is a pros-
perons town, profiting much by the annual streams of
pilgrims who pass through it on their way to visit the
holy places in Pal. A good trade is done with Egypt,
Syria and Constantinople. Soap, sesame, wheat and
oranges are the chief exports. Thefamous gardens and
orange groves of Jaffa form one of the main sights of
interest. The Christians and the Moslems have rival
traditions _as to the site of the house of Simon the


tanner. The remains of the house of Tabitha are also
pointed out. From Jaffa to Jerus the first railway in Pal


was built.
: W. Ewine
JORAH, jo’ra (TIM, ydrah, meaning uncertain,
perhaps “‘harvest-born”’): A family which returned
with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 18)=‘‘Hariph” of Neh 7
24=“‘Arsiphurith” (AV “Arzephurith’”) of 1 Esd 5
16.


JORAL, jo’ra-i on, yoray, “whom Jeh teaches”’):
A Gadite chief, but possibly the name of a clan
(1 Ch 6 13).


JORAM, jo’ram (D7, ydrdm, “Jeh is exalted”;
cf JEHORAM):

(1) Son of Toi (or Ton, according to LXX, B, and
1 Ch 18 9.10), sent by his father to greet David
(28 8 10)=‘Hadoram” (1 Ch 18 9.10) aform pre
ferred by commentators in 2 S also.

(2) Same as Jehoram, king of Judah (2 K 8 21-
24; 11 2; 1 Ch 311; Mt 1 8 [‘Iwpdu, Tardm)).

(3) Same as Jehoram, king of Northern Israel
(2 K 8 29; ef 2 K 9 15 RVm).

(4) Unform 8, ydram): A Levite (1 Ch 26 25).

(5) (Iwpéu, Iorém, 1 Esd 1 9) = “Jozabad”
(2 Ch 36 9); see JozaBan (4).


JORDAN, jér’dan (JI, yardén, “flowing down-
ward”; ‘Iop8avns, Iordénés): The Jordan river
proper begins at the junction of four
streams (the Bareighit, the Hdsbany,
the Leddan, and the Bdnias), in the
upper part of the plain of Lake Haleh. The Bar-
erghit receives its supply of water from the hills on
the W., which separate the valley from the river
Litany, and is the least important of the four. The
Hasbdny is the longest of the four (40 miles), issuing
from a great fountain at the western foot of Mt.
Hermon near Hasbeiya, 1,700 ft. above the sea,


1. Source


1733


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joppa
Jordan


and descends 1,500 ft. in its course to the plain.
The Leddan is the largest of the four streams,
issuing in several fountains at the foot of the mound
Tell el-kddy (Dan, or Laish) at an elevation of 505
ft. above the sea. The Bénias issues from a cele-
brated fountain near the town of Bantas, which is
identified as the Caesarea Philippi associated with
the transfiguration. The ancient name was Paneas,
originating from a grotto consecrated to the god Pan.
At this place Herod erected a temple of white marble
dedicated to Augustus Caesar. This is probably
the Baal-gad of Josh 11 17 and 12 7. Its altitude
is 1,100 ft. above tide, and the stream falls about
600 ft. in the 5 miles of its course to the head of
the Jordan.

The valley of Lake Hdleh, through which the
Jordan wends its way, is about 20 miles long and

5 miles wide, bordered on either side
2. Lake by hills and mountains attaining ele-
Hfleh vations of 3,000 ft. After flowing 4 or
5 miles through a fertile plain, the
Jordan enters a morass of marshy land which nearly
fills the valley, with the exception of 1 or 2 miles
between it and the base of the mountains upon the
western side, This morass is almost impenetrable
by reason of bushes and papyrus reeds, which in
places also render navigation of the channel diffi-
cult even with a canoe. Lake Hdaleh, into which
the river here expands, is but 7 ft. above tide, and
is slowly contracting its size by reason of the accu-
mulation of the decaying vegetation of the surround-
ing morass, and of the sediment brought in by the
river and three tributary mountain torrents. Its
continued existence is evidence of the limited period
through which present conditions have been main-
tained. It will not. be many thousand years before
it will be entirely filled and the morass be changed
into a fertile plain. When the spies visited the
region, the lake must have been much larger than
it ig now.

At the southern end of Lake Hdleh, the valley
narrows up to a width of a few hundred yards, and
the river begins its descent into levels below the
Mediterranean. The river is here only about 60
ft. broad, and in less than 9 miles descends 689 ft.
through a narrow rocky gorge, where it meets the
delta which it has deposited at the head of the Sea
of Galilee, and slowly winds its way to meet its
waters. Throughout this delta the river is easily
fordable during a great part of the year.

The Sea of Galilee occupies an expansion of the
Jordan valley 12 miles long and from 3 to 6 miles


wide. The hills, reaching, in general,
8. Sea of 1,200 or 1,500 ft. above the lake, come
Galilee down close to its margin on every side.


On the E. and S. they are mainly of
volcanic origin, and to some extent of the same
character on the N.W. side above Tiberias. In the
time of Christ the mouth of the river may have been
a half-mile or more farther up the delta than now.
‘As all the sediment of the upper Jordan settles
in the vicinity of the delta near Capernaum, a
stream of pellucid water issues from
4, The the southern end of the lake, at the
Yarmiik modern town of Kerak. Before it
reaches the Dead Sea, however, it
becomes overloaded with sediment, From Kerak
the opening of the valley is grand in the extreme.
A great plain on the E. stretches to the hills of De-
capolis, and to the S., as far as the eye can reach,
through the Ghér which descends to the Dead Sea,
bordered by mountain walls on either side. Four
or five miles below, it is joinéd on the E. by the
Yarmak, the ancient Hieromax, the largest of all its
tributaries. The débris brought down by this
stream has formed a fertile delta terrace 3 or 4 miles
in diameter, which now, as in ancient times, is an


attractive place for herdsmen and agriculturists.
The valley of the Yarmdk now furnishes a natural
grade for the Acre and Damascus Railroad, as it did
for the caravan routes of early times. The town
of Gadara lies upon an elevation just 8. of the
Yarmtk and 4 or 5 miles E. of the Jordan.


i Carta Z
Jordan Leaving the Sea of Galilee.


Ten miles below the lake, the river is joined on the
W. by Wady el-Bireh, which descends from the
vicinity of Nazareth, between Mt. Tabor and Endor,
and furnishes a natural entrance from the Jordan
to Central Galilee. An aqueduct here still furnishes
water for the upper terrace of the Ghér. Wady
el-Arab, with a small perennial stream, comes in
here also from the E.

Twenty miles below Lake Galilee the river is
joined by the important Wddy el-Jélad, which de-

scends through the valley of Jezreel
5..El-Ghiér between Mt. Gilboa and the range of

the Little Hermon (the hill Moreh of Jgs
71). This valley leads up from the Jordan to the val-
ley of Esdraelon and thence to Nazareth, and fur-
nished the usual route for Jews going from Jerus to
Nazareth when they wished to avoid the Samaritans.
This route naturally takes one past BeisGn (Beth-
shean), where the bodies of Saul and Jonathan were
exposed by the Philis, and past Shunem and Nain.
There is a marked expansion of the Ghér opposite
Beisan, constituting an important agricultural dis-
trict. The town of Pella, to which the Christians
fled at the time of the destruction of Jerus, lies upon
the E. side of the Ghér; while Jabesh-gilead, where
the bodies of Saul and Jonathan were finally taken
by their friends and cremated, is a little farther up
the slope of Gilead. Twenty miles farther down,
the Ghér, on the E., is joined by Wady Zerka (the
brook Jabbok), the second largest tributary, sepa-
rating Ammon from Gilead, its upper tributaries
flowing past Ammon, Mizpeh, and Ramoth-gilead.
It was down this valley that Jacob descended to
Succoth.

A few miles below, the Wady Farah, whose head
is at Sychar between Mts. Ebal and Gerizim, de-
scends from the W., furnishing the natural route for
Jacob’s entrance to the promised land.

At Damieh (probably the Adam of Josh 3 16),
the Ghér is narrowed up by the projection, from
the W., of the mountain ridge terminating in Kurn
Sartabeh, which rises abruptly to a height of 2,000
ft. above the river.

The section of the Ghér between Damich and the
Dead Sea is of a pretty uniform width of 10 to 12
miles and is of a much more uniform level than the
upper portions, but its fertility is interfered with
by the lack of water and the difficulty of irrigation.
From the vicinity of Jericho, an old Rom road follows
up the Wady Nawatimeh, which furnished Joshua
a natural line of approach to Ai, while through the
Wady el-Kelt ig opened the natural road to Jerus.
Both Ai and the Mount of Olives are visible from
this point of the Ghér.


Jordan
Jordan Valley


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1734


In a direct line it is only 70 miles from Lake Gali-
lee to the Dead Sea, and this is the total length of
the lower plain (the Zér); but so numer-

6. The Zér ous are the windings of the river across
the flood plaim from one bluff to the

other that the length of the river is fully 200 miles.
Col. Lynch reported the occurrence of 27 rapids, which
wholly interrupted navigation, and many others
which rendered it difficult. The major part of the
descent below Lake Galilee takes place before reach-
ing Damieh, 1,140 ft. below the Mediterranean.
While the bluffs of the GAér, upon either side of the
Zor, are nearly continuous and uniform below
Damieh, above this point they are much dissected


Notwithstanding the great number of fords where
it is possible to cross at low water, those which were
so related to the lines of travel as to be of much
avail were few. Beginning near the mouth of the
J. and proceeding northward, there was a ford at
el- Henu leading directly from Jericho to the high-
lands N.E. of the Dead Sea. Two or three miles
farther to the N. is the ford of the pilgrims, hest
known of all, at the mouth of Wady Kelt. A few
miles farther up the river on the road leading from
Jericho to es-Sali, near the mouth of the Wddy
Nimrin, there is now a bridge where the dependence
was formerly upon the ford. Just below the mouth
of the Wady Zerka (Jabbok) is the ford of Damieh,


Tue River JorpAN.


by the erosion of tributary streams. Still, nearly
everywhere, an extended view brings to light
the original uniform level of the sedimentary de-
posits formed when the valley was filled with
ee to a height of 650 ft. (see AraBan; Drap

BA).

The river itself averages about 100 ft. in width
when confined strictly within its channel, but in the
early spring months the flood plain of the Zér is
completely overflowed, bringing into its thickets
a great amount of driftwood which increases the
difficulty of penetrating it, and temporarily drives
out ferocious animals to infest the neighboring
country.

According to Conder, there are no less than 60
fording-places between Lake Galilee and the Dead

Sea. For the most part it will be seen


7. The that these occur at rapids, or over bars
Fords of deposited by the streams which de-
Jordan scend from one side or the other, as


for example, below the mouths of the
Yarmik, Jabbok, Jalad and Kelt. These fords are,
however, impassable during the high water of the
winter and spring months. Until the occupation
by the Romans, no bridges were built; but they
and their successors erected them at various places,
notably below the mouth of the Yarmdk, and the
Jabbok, and nearly opposite Jericho.


where the road from Shechem comes down to the
river. A bridge was at one time built over the river
at this point; but owing to a change in the course
of the stream this is now over a dry water-course.
The next important crossing-place is at the opening
of the valley of Jezreel coming in from the W.
where probably the Bethabara of the NT should
he located. Upon this ford a number of caravan
routes from E. to W. converge. The next impor-
tant crossing-place is at el-Mujamia, 2 or 3 miles
below the mouth of the Yarmik. Here, also, there
was a Rom bridge. There are also some traces of
an ancient bridge remaining just below the exit of
the river from Lake Galilee, where there was a
ford of special importance to the people residing
on the shores of this lake who could not afford to
cross in boats. Between Lake Galilee and Lake
Hileh, an easy ford leads acrosa the delta of the
stream a little above its junction with the lake;
while 2 or 3 miles below Lake Hdleh is found ‘‘the
bridge of Jacob’s daughters’? on the line of one of
the principal routes between Damascus and Galilee.
Above Lake Hdaleh the various tributaries are easily
crossed at several places, though a bridge is required
to cross the Bareighit near its mouth, aud another
on the Hdshany on the main road from Caesarea
Philippi to Sidon, at el-Ghagar.
Grorce Freperick WRIGHT


‘


1735


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jordan
Jordan Valley


JORDAN VALLEY: As more fully detailed else- The surface of this old lake bed has also been
where (see ARABAH; DEap SEa; GEOLOGY oF


PaLEstTINE), the Jordan valley in its
1. Physical lower portion occupies a remarkable
Peculiarities depression in the earth’s surface, reach-
ing its greatest depth in the Dead Sea,
the surface of which is 1,300 ft., the bottom 2,600
ft. below tide level, the portion of the basin below


the level of the sea being about 100 miles in length
and from 10 to 15 miles in breadth at base, and from
two to three times that distance between the bor-
dering summits of the mountains and plateaus on
either side. In the early prehistoric period, cor-
responding with the Glacial epoch, this depression
was filled with water to a height of 1,400 ft. (see
references above) which gradually disappeared by
evaporation as present climatic conditions came on.
At an elevation of approximately 650 ft. above the
Dead Sea, very extensive sedimentary deposits
were made, which, while appearing only in frag-
ments along the shores of the Dead Sea, are con-
tinuous over the bottom of the valley (the so-called
Ghér), farther N. These deposits are from 100 to
900 ft. thick, consisting of material which was
brought down into the valley by the tributary
mountain streams descending from each side, while
the water stood at this higher level. Naturally
these deposits slope gradually from the sides of the
valley toward the center, the coarser material of the
deposits being nearer the sides, and the amount of
sediment being much increased opposite the mouths
of the larger streams. The deposit was at first
continuous over the entire Ghér, or valley, but has
since been much dissected by the J. river and its
tributaries. The J. itself has eroded a channel
through the soft sediment, 100 ft. more or less deep,
from Lake Galilee to the Dead Sea, a distance in a
straight line of about 70 miles. At first this channel
was narrow, but it has been constantly enlarged by
the stream as it has meandered from side to side,
undercutting the banks so that they cave into the
river and are washed down to fill up the Dead Sea,
a process which is esp. familiar to residents upon the
banks of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers. This
narrow gorge is called the Zér, and will hereafter
be referred to under thisname. The Zér at present
averages about 3 mile wide, the most of which is
occupied by a flood plain extending from the banks
of the river to the foot of the sedimentary bluffs on
either side. This flood plain is so overgrown with
brush and reeds that it is practically impenetrable,
except by wild beasts, which, according to Scriptural
references, have infested it from earliest times,
among which may be mentioned the lion, the tiger,
the wild boar. During the spring months, when the
snows are melting from Mt. Hermon and cloud-
bursts are sending sudden torrents of water down
the river courses from the plateau of Gilead and
the mountains of Samaria, the J. “overflows all its
banks,” i.e. covers this flood plain and drives out the
beasts to infest the neighborhood for a short time.


much dissected by the tributary streams which come
in from either side, they having cut channels across
the Ghér down to a depth corresponding to that of
the Zér. As a consequence the roads leading up
the valley find it necessary to hug the base of the
mountains on either side to avoid the abrupt de-
scent into the channels of the tributary streams,
which are deepest near their mouths. Another
natural consequence of these physical peculiarities
is that agriculture cannot be carried on except as
water to irrigate the level surfaces of the Ghér is
carried out from the higher levels of the perennial
streams. There are many remains of such aque-
ducts for irrigation constructed in early times.
These are now almost all in ruins and unused.
Merrill, however, estimates that 200 sq. miles of the
J. valley, over which the surface is as level as a
prairie, and as free from stones, could be irrigated
at the present time and made as fruitful as the valley
of the Nile. But: from time immemorial settled
agriculture in the Ghér has been rendered precarious
by the incursions of the nomadic tribes, who periodi-
cally come down from the desert regions on the E.
Two descriptions (the first from my own journal)
of the general views obtained of the J. valley from
adjoining elevated points will give
2. Two De- vividness to our conceptions of this
scriptions remarkable depression.


“Tt was the middle of Decemher when,
after wading all day across the southern flanks of Mt.
Hermon, through snow knee-deep for our horses, we
descended helow the clouds and the snow to the brink of
the eastern mountain wall overlooking the upper valley
ofthe J. It was a sight ever to be remembered, with the
glistering peak of Mt. Hermon to ourright, and the jagged
walls of the horders of Naphtali stretching across the
horizon on the W., only a few miles away, while hetween
and at our feet were the green fields of the upper J.
valley, through which ran the silver thread of the river,
broadening out into the expanded waters of Lake
Merom. Over the plain could dimly he seen the black
tents of the Arabs, and the husbandmen plowing the
fields for an early harvest. No wonder the spies were
impressed with the attractiveness and fertility of the
region."’ This of the upper J. valley.

Dr. Merrill gives the following description of the view
of the lower J. valley from the summit of Kurn_Séar-
tabeh, March 23: “Jebel esh Sheikh [Mt. Hermon] was
covered with snow, and_so_was the Lehanon range
farther to the W. and N. Lake Merom and the vol-
canic peaks on the plain to the E. of it and S. of Her-
mon were distinctly seen, likewise the Sea of Galilee, the
hills ahout Safed, the hills W. of Tiherias and the slope
from their summit, which inclines toward Mt. Tahor;
also Gamala and Gadara, all the range of Jebel ‘Ajlan
or hills of Gilead, Kulat er Rubad, Jebel Metsera and
Jebel Osha, the mountains of Moah, and the Dead Sea.
But the mere naming of different points that can he
seen gives no adequate idea of the extent and magnifi-
cence of the prospect which one enjoys from the top of
this strange landmark. Hills to the W. obstruct the
view in that direction, and to the E. nothing can be
seen Berane the highest part of the Moah and Gilead
ranges, but it is the north-and-south sweep which makes
the prospect a glorious one. No language can picture
correctly the J. valley, the winding stream, the jungles
on its hanks, the strange Ghér with its white, ragged
sides, the vast plain of the valley, throngh and in the
middle of which the lower Ghér [the Zér] is sunk, the
dense green oases formed here and there hy some moun-
tain stream, and the still, lifeless sea, as bright and
motionless as molten lead, lying far to the S., ending
the great valley and touching the mountains on either
side! This is an outline merely, but I cannot summon
to my aid words which will describe it more accurately.
The J. valley or Ghér, in front of Sartabeh, is about
8 miles wide, and looks like a vast plain. The lower
Ghér [Zér] is the ragged channel cut down along the
middle of the large one. This distinction of the upper
and lower Ghér is hy no means so strikingly defined
ahove the mouth of the Zerka as it is helow that point,
and all the way thence to the Dead Sea.”


Considered in detail the valley may be divided,
as Conder suggests, into 8 sections. “First the
portion between Banias and the Haleh, where it is
some 5 miles broad, with steep cliffs some 2,000
ft. high on either side and a broad marsh between.
Secondly, from the Hdleh to the Sea of Galilee,


Jordan Valley
Joseph


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1736


where the stream runs close to the eastern hills,
and about 4 miles from the base of those on the

W., which rise toward the high Safed
3. Division mountains, more than 3,500 ft. above
into Eight the lake. Thirdly, for 13 miles from
Sections the S. end of the Sea of Galilee to the

neighborhood of Beisdén. Here the
valley is only 13 miles broad W. of the river, and
about 3 on the E., the steep cliffs of the plateau of
Kaukab el Hawa on the W. reaching an altitude
of 1,800 ft. above the stream.

“South of Beisdn is the 4th district, with a plain
W. of J., 12 miles long and 6 miles broad, the line
of hills on the E. being straight, and the foot of the
mountains on this side about 2 miles from the river.
In the neighborhood of Beisdn, the cross-section of
the plain shows 3 levels: that of the shelf on which
Beisdn stands, about 300 ft. below sea-level; that.
of the Ghér itself, some 400 ft. lower, reached by an
almost precipitous descent; and that of the Zér,
or narrow trench, from a half to a quarter of a mile
wide, and about 150 ft. lower still. The higher
shelf extends westward to the foot of Gilboa; it
dies away on the §., but on the N. it gradually rises
into the plateau of Kaukab and to the western
table-land above the sea of Galilee, 1,800 ft. above J.

“After leaving the Beisdn plain, the river passes
through a narrow valley 12 miles long and 2 or 3
miles wide, with a raised table-land to the W.,
having a level averaging about 500 ft. above the
sea. The Beisdén plain is full of springs of fresh
water, some of which are thermal, but a large cur-
rent of salt, warm water flows down Wddy Maleh, at
the northern extremity of this 5th district.

“Tn the 6th district, the Damieh region, the valley
again opens to a width of about 3 miles on the W.,
and 5 on the E. of J. The great block of the Kurn
Sdrtibeh bere stands out like a bastion, on the W.,
2,400 ft. above the river. Passing this mountain,
the 7th district is entered—a broad valley extend-
ing from near Fusdil to ‘Oshel Ghirdb, N.of Jericho.
In this region the Ghér itself is 5 miles broad, W.
of the river, and rather more on the E. The lower
trench or Zér is also wider here and more distinctly
separated from the Ghér. A curious geographical
feature of this region was also discovered by the
Survey party. The great affluents of the Fér’ah
and ‘Aujeh do not flow straight to J., but turn S.
about a mile W. of it, and each runs, for about 6
miles, nearly parallel with the river; thus the
mouth of the Fér’ah is actually to be found just
where that of the next valley is shown on most


maps.

The 8th and last district is that of the plain of
Jericho, which, with the corresponding basin (Ghér-
es-Seisebin) E. of J., measures over 8 miles N. and
S., and more than 14 across, with J. about in
the middle. The Zér is here about a mile wide,
and some 200 ft. below the broad plain of the
Ghér.”

Owing to its depression below sea-level the climate
of the lower J. valley is even more than tropical.

In the summer months the thermome-
4. Climate: ter scarcely falls below 100° F., even
Fauna and in the night; but during the winter
Flora months, though the days are hot, the

thermometer frequently goes down to
40° in the night time.

The fauna of this part of the J. valley and about
the Dead Sea is said by Tristram (SWP, “Fauna
and Flora’’) to be identical with that now existing
in Ethiopia. Of the mammalia characteristic of
this general region, 34 are Ethiopian and 16 Indian,
though there is now no possible connection with
either Ethiopia or India. The fish of the J. show
close affinity to many species of the Nile and of the
lakes and rivers of tropical Africa. Many species


of birds, also, now confined to the lower basin and
the Dead Sea, are related to Ethiopian and Indian
species.

The flora is equally interesting. Out of 162
species of plants found at the S.W. corner of the
Dead Sea, 135 species are African in their affinity.
In the marshes of Lake Hiuleh, many acres are
covered with the papyrus plant, which became
extinct in Egypt long ago, and 1s now found in
Africa only in the Upper Nile beyond the 7th degree
of N. lat. The most common trees and plants of
the J. valley are the castor-oil plant and the oleander.
flourishing esp. about Jericho, several varieties of
the acacia tree, the caper plant, the Dead Sea
apple (Solanum Sodomaewm) the oser tree of the
Arabs, tamarisks, Agnus castt (a flowering bam-
boo), Balanites Aegyptiaca (supposed to be the balm
of Gilead), Populus Euphratica (a plant found all
over Central Asia but not W. of the J.), and many
tropical plants, among which may be mentioned
Zygophyllum coccineum, Boerhavia,I ndigofera, several
Astragali, Cassias, Gymnocarpum, and Nitraria.

Georcr FREDERICK WRIGHT

JORIBUS, jor'i-bus (’Iép.Bos, Jéribos; AV

Joribas):


(1) In1 Esd 8 44, called ‘“Jarib’’ in Ezr 8 16.
(2) In1 Esd 9 19, called “‘Jarib’ in Ezr 10 18.


JORIM, jo’rim (’‘Twpelp, Ldreim, from Dam,
yhoram, D1, yordm): An ancestor of Jesus in
Lk’s genealogy (Lk 3 29).


JORKEAM, jér’ké-am (BYP, york*am; AV
Jorkoam): This is probably to be taken as the name
of a town, the ‘father’ or “founder” of which was
Raham (1 Ch 2 44). It may be identical with
“Jokdeam” of Josh 15 56.


JOSABAD, jos’a-bad. See Jozapan.


JOSABDUS, jé-sab’dus (’IwcaB86s, Tdsabdés, 1
Esd 8 63; probably identical with ’IwtaBdsos,
Idzabddos, in 9 23): The same as Jozabad of Ezr
8 33; 10 23 (qv.).


_ JOSAPHAT, jos’a-fat (‘Iecaddr, Tdsaphdt, AV
in Mt 1 8 for JeHosHapHatT [q.v.]): A king of
Judah, mentioned in Mt’s genealogy of Christ.


JOSAPHIAS, jos-a-fi’as ("Iwcaptas, Idsaphias,
1 Esd 8 36): Called “Josephiah”’ in Ezr 8 10.


_ JOSE, j6’sé (Iwo4, Tdsé): AV form for “Jesus”
(CIyoots, Tésois) in Lk’s genealogy (8 29), RV Gr.


JOSECH, jo’sek (Iwohx, Toséch, WH; Ioohd,
Toséph, TR; AV Joseph): An ancestor of Jesus in
Lk’s genealogy (8 26).


JOSEDECH, jos’é-dek, JOSEDEK, jos’édek
(‘lwoedéx, Jdsedék): Father of Jeshua (1 Esd 65 5).
In Hag 11 RV, the relationship is described as
“Joshua the son of JrnozapaK [q.v.], the high
priest.”


JOSEPH, jo’zef (20%, yoséph; ’lartd, [aséph):

(1) The 11th son of Jacob and 1st of Rachel
(see separate art.).

(2) The father of Igal of Issachar,

1. Inthe one of the 12 spies (Nu 18 7),
OT (3) A son of Asaph (1 Ch 25 2.9).
; (4) A man of the sons of Bani, who
had married a foreign wife (Ezr 10 42).

(5) A priest of the family of Shebaniah in the
days of Joiakim (Neh 12 14).


1737


(1) Son of Zacharias, defeated by Gorgias c 164
BC (1 Macc 6 18.56.60).
(2) Called a brother of Judas Macca-


2. In the  baeus in 2 Macc 8 22, probably by
Apoc mistake for John.

(8) Great-grandfather of Judith
(Jth 8 1).


(1) The husband of Mary, the mother of Jesus
(see special art.).


3. In the


oe Jesus according to AV (Lk 8 24.26.


30); the name of two according to RV,
which reads ‘‘Josech” in Lk 3 26.

(4) A Jew of Arimathaea in whose sepulcher Jesus
was buried (Mt 27 57, etc; see art.).

(5) One of the brethren of Jesus, according
to RV (Mt 13 55, AV “Joses”). AV and RV
pee have ‘Joses’ in Mt 27 56; Mk 6 3; 15


(6) Joseph Barsabbas (Acts 1 23; see art.).


(7) Joseph, surnamed Barnabas (Acts 4 36, AV
“Joses’’; see BARNABAS). S. F. Hunter


JOSEPH, jé’zef (AOD, yoséph, “He will add”;
LXX 'Iworf, [dséph. The narrative [Gen 30 23.
24] indicates not so much a double etymology as the
course of Rachel’s thoughts. The use of FOX,
*dsaph, “He takes away,” suggested to her mind by
its form in the future, 101", ydséph, “He will add,”
“And she called his name J., saying, Jeh add to me
another son’’):


I. Tus Joszra Story, a Literary Question
1. An Independent Original or an Adaptation?
2. A Monograph or a Compilation ?
(1) An Analytical Theory Resolving It into a
Mere Compilation
(2) A Narrative Full of Gems
(a) The Brothers Presented; Joseph Weep-


ing
(b) The Scene between the Brothers of
Joseph and the Steward
(c) Judah's Speech
(d) Revelation of Joseph to His Brethren
(3) The Argument from Chronology Supporting
It as a Monograph .
Il. Tue Story or Joseru, a BroGrRaPay
1. A Bedouin Prince in Canaan
2. A Bedouin Slave in Egypt
3. The Bedouin Slave Becomes Again the Bedouin
Prince
4, The Prime Minister
5. The Patriarch
LitERATURE


The eleventh son of Jacob. The Bib. narra-
tive concerning J. presents two subjects for con-
sideration, the J. story, a literary question, and
the story of J., a biography. It is of the first
importance to consider these questions in this
order.


Cheyne in #'B reaches such conclusions concerning the
J. story that the story of J. is mutilated almost beyond
recognition as a hiography at all. Driverin HDB holds
that the J. story was ‘‘in all probability only committed
to writing 700-800 years" later than the time to which
J. is attributed, points out that J.’s name was also the
name of a tribe, and concludes that ‘‘the first of these
facts at once destroys all guarantee that we possess in
the J. narrative a literal record of the facts,”" and that
“the second fact raises the further question whether the
figure of J., in part or even as a whole, is a reflection of the
history and characteristics of the tribe projected upon
the past in the individual form.’’ But he draws hack
from this view and thinks it ‘‘ more probable that there
was an actual person J., afterward... . rightly or
wrongly regarded as the ancestor of the tribe... .
who underwent substantially the experience recounted
of him in Gen.’ In the presence of such critical notions
concerning the literature in which the narrative of J. is
embodied, it is clear that until we have reached some
conclusions concerning the J. story, we Cannot be sure
that there is any real story of J. to relate.


IL. The Joseph Story, a Literary Question.—This
literary problem will be solved, if satisfactory


answers may be found to two questions: Is it
an independent original or an adaptation? Suit-


(2, 3) The name of 3 ancestors of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA — Joresn Valley


oseph


able material for such an adaptation as would
produce a J. story has been sought at either end
of the line of history: J. the pro-
1. An Inde- genitor and J. the tribe. The only
pendent contestant for the claim of being an
Original or early original of which the J. story
an Adapta- might be an adaptation is the nasty
tion? “Tale of Two Brothers” (RP, series I,
. vol II, 137-46). This story in its
essential elements much resembles the J. story.
But such events as it records are common: why
not such stories?

What evidence does this ‘‘Tale of Two Brothers’
afford that the J. story is not an independent original ?
Are we to suppose that because many French romances
involve the demi-monde, there was therefore no Madame
de Pompadour? Are court scandals so unheard of that
ancient Egypt cannot afford two? And why impugn
the genuineness of the J. story because the “ Tale of Two
Brothers'’ resembles it? Is anyone so ethereal in his
passions as not to know by instinct that the essential
elements of such scandal are always the same? The
difference in the narrative is chiefly in the telling. At
this latter point the J. story and the ‘‘Tale of Two
Brothers’' bear no resemblance whatever.


If the chaste beauty of the Bib. story be observed,
and then one turn to the ‘Tale of Two Brothers”
with sufficient knowledge of the Egyp tongue to
perceive the coarseness and the stench of it, there
can be no question that the J. story is independent
of such a literary source. To those who thus sense
both stories, the claim of the ‘‘Tale of Two Brothers”
to be the original of the J. story cannot stand for a
moment. If we turn from J. the progenitor to J.
the tribe, still less will the claim that the story is an
adaptation bear careful examination. The perfect
naturalness of the story, the utter absence from its
multitudinous details of any hint of figurative
language, such as personification always furnishes,
and the absolutely accurate reflection in the story
of the Egypt of J.’s day, as revealed by the many
discoveries of which people of 700-800 years later
could not know, mark this theory of the reflection
of tribal history and characteristics as pure specu-
lation. And besides, where in all the history of
literature has it been proven that a tribe has been
thus successfully thrown back upon the screen of
antiquity in the ‘individual form”? Similar mis-
takes concerning Menes and Minos and the heroes
of Troy are a warning to us. Speculation is legiti-
mate, so long as it does not cut loose from known
facts, but gives no one the right to suppose the
existence in unknown history of something never
certainly found in known history. So much for
the first question.

Isitamonographoracompilation? The authorof
amonograph may makelarge use of literary materials,

and the editor of a compilation may
2. A Mono- introduce much editorial comment.
graph ora Thus, superficially, these different kinds


Com- of composition may much resemble
pilation? each other, yet they are, in essential

character, very different the one from
the other. A compilation is an artificial body, an


automaton; a monograph is a natural body with
a living soul in it. This story has oriental pecul-
iarities of repetition and pleonastic expression, and
these things have been made much of in order to
break up the story; to the reader not seeking
grounds of partition, 1t is one of the most unbroken,
simply natural and unaffected pieces of narrative
literature in the world. Ifit stood alone or belonged
to some later portion of Scripture, it may well be
doubted that 1t would ever have been touched by
the scalpel of the literary dissector. But it belongs
to the Pent. There are manifest evidences all over
the Pent of the use by the author of material, either


- documentary or of that paradoxical unwritten lit.


which the ancients handed down almost without


Joseph


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1738


the change of a word for centuries. (1) An analyti-
cal theory has been applied to the Pent as a whole,
to_ resolve it into a mere compilation. Once the
principles of this theory are acknowledged, and
allowed sway there, the J. story cannot be left un-
touched, but becomes a necessary sacrifice to the
system. A sight of the lifeless, ghastly fragments
of the living, moving J. story which the analysis
leaves behind (cf EB, art. “Joseph”) proclaims
that analysis to have been murder. There was a
life in the story which has been ruthlessly taken,
and that living soul marked the narrative as a mono-
graph. (2) Where else is to be found such a com-
pilation? Here is one of the most brilliant pieces of
literature in the world, a narrative full of gems:
(a) the account of the presentation of the brothers in
the presence of J. when he was obliged to go out to
weep (Gen 43 26-34), and (6) the scene between
the terrified brothers of J. and the steward of his
house (Gen 44 6-13), (c) Judah’s speech (Gen 44
18-34), (d) the touching close of the revelation of
J. to his brothers at last (Gen 45 1-15). The soul
of the whole story breathes through all of
these. Where in all literature, ancicnt or modern,
is to be found a mere compilation that is a great
piece of literature? So far removed is this story
from the characteristics of a compilation, that we
may challenge the world of literature to produce
another monograph in narrative literature that sur-
passes it. (3) Then the dates of Egyp names and
events in this narrative strongly favor its origin so
early as to be out of the reach of the compilers.
That attempts at identification in Egyp of names
written in Heb, presenting as they do the peculiar
difficulties of two alphabets of imperfectly known

honetic values and uncertain equivalency of one
in terms of the other, should give rise to differences
of opinion, is to be expected. The Egyp equiva-
lents of Zaphenath-paneah and Asenath have been
diligently sought, and several identifications have
been suggested (Brugsch, Egypt under the Pha-
raohs, 122; Budge, History of Egypt, V, 126-27).
That which is most exact phonetically and yields
the most suitable and natural meaning for Zaphe-
nath-paneah is by Lieblein (PSBA, 1898, 204-8).
It is formed like four of the names of Hyksos kings
before the time of J., and means “the one who fur-
nishes the nourishment of life,” ic. the steward
of therealm. The name Asenath is found from the
XIth Dynasty on to the XVIIIth. Potiphar is
mentioned as an Egyptian. Why not of course an
Egyptian? The narrative also points distinctly to
conditions obtaining under the Hyksos kings.
When the people were like to perish for want of
food they promised J. in return for help that they
would be “servants of Pharaoh” (Gen 47 18-25).
This suggests a previous antagonism to the govern-
ment, such as the Hyksos kings had long to contend
with in Egypt. But the revolution which drove
out the Hyksos labored so effectually to eradicate
every trace of the hated foreigners that it is with
the utmost difficulty that modern Egyptological re-
search has wrested from the past some small items
of information concerning them. Is it credible that
the editor of scraps, which were themselves not
written down until some 700-800 years later, should
have been able to produce such a life-story fitting
into the peculiar conditions of the times of the
Hyksos? Considered as an independent literary
problem on its own merits, aside from any entan-
gling necessities of the analytical theory of the Pent,
the J. story must certainly stand as a monograph
from some time within distinct memory of the events
it records. If the J. story be an independent origi-


nal and a monograph, then there is in reality to be |


considered the story of J. :
Il, The Story of Joseph.—It is unnecessary to


recount here all the events of the life of J., a story
so incomparably told in the Bib. narrative. It will
be sufficient to touch only the salient points where
controversy has raged, or at which archaeology has
furnished ‘special illumination. The story of_J.
begins the tenth and last natural division of Gen
in these words: “The generations of Jacob” (Gen
37 2). Up to this point the unvarying method of
Gen is to place at the head of each division the an-
nouncement “the generations of” one of the patri-
archs, followed immediately by a brief outline of
the discarded line of descent, and then to give in


. detail the account of the chosen line.


There is to be now no longer any discarded line
of descent. All the sons of Jacob are of the chosen
people, the depositary of the revelation of redemp-
tion. So this division of Gen begins at once with
the chosen line, and sets in the very foreground that
narrative which in that generation is most vital
in the story of redemption, this story of J. begin-
ning with the words, “J., being seventeen years
old, was feeding the flock with his brethren” (Gen
87 2). J. had been born in Haran, the firstborn
of the beloved Rachel, who died at the birth of her
second son Benjamin. A motherless lad among the
sons of other mothers felt the jealousies of the sit-
uation, and the experience became a temptation.
The “evil report” of his brethren was thus natu-
rally carried to his father, and quite as naturally
stirred up those family jealousies which set his feet
in the path of his great career (87 2-4). In that
career he appears as a Bedouin prince in Canaan.

The patriarchs of those times were all sheiks or
princes of those semi-nomadic rovers who by the

peculiar social and civil customs of


1A that land were tolerated then as they
Bedouin are to this day under the Turkish
Prince in government in the midst of farms and
Canaan settled land tenure. Jacob favored


Rachel and her children. He put
them hindermost at the dangerous meeting with
Esau, and now he puts on J. a coat of many colors
(Gen 37 3). The appearance of such a coat a little
earlier in the decoration of the tombs of Benihassan
among Palestinian ambassadors to Egypt probably
indicates that this garment was in some sense cere-
monial, a token of rank. In any case J., the son of
Jacob, was a Bedouin prince. Did the father by
this coat indicate his intention to give him the pre-
cedence and the succession as chieftain of the tribe?
It is difficult otherwise to account for the insane
jealousy of the older brethren (Gen 87 4). Ac-
cording to the critical partition of the story, J.’s
dreams may be explained away as mere reflections
or adaptations of the later history of J. (cf Penta-
TEUCH). In a real biography the striking provi-
dential significance of the dreams appears at once.
They cannot be real without in some sense being
prophetic. On the other hand they cannot be other
than real without vitiating the whole story as a
truthful narrative, for they led immediately to the
great tragedy; a Bedouin prince of Canaan becomes
a Bedouin slave in Egypt.

The plot to put J. out of the way, the substitution
of slavery for death, and the ghastly device for de-
ceiving Jacob (Gen 37 18-36) are


2. ABed- perfectly natural steps in the course
ouin Slave of crime when once the brothers had
in Egypt set out upon it. The counterplot of


Reuben to deliver J. reflects equally
his own goodness and the dangerous character of
the other brothers to whom he did not dare make
a direct protest.

Critical discussion of ‘‘ Ishmaelites’’ and ‘‘Mldianltes"’
and ‘‘'Medanites’’ presents some interesting things and


many clever speculations which may well be considered
on their own merits by those interested in ethnology and


ee
ri


“3052
ernest
aw


SHEEP AT DOTHAN


1739


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joseph


etymologies. Many opinlons advanced may prove to
be correct. But let It be noted that they are for the
most part pure speculation, Almost nothing is known
of the interrelatiou of the trans-Jordanic tribes in that age
other than the few hints in the Bible. And who can say
what manner of persons might be found In a caravan
which had wandercd about no one knows where, or
how long, to pick up trade _before it turned into the
northern caravan route? Until archaeology supplies
more facts it is folly te attach much importance to such
speculations (Kyle, The Deciding Voice of the Monuments
in Bib. Criticism, 221).

In the slave market in Egypt, J. was bought by
Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, “an Egyptian.”
The significant mention of this fact fits exactly into
a place among the recovered hints of the history of
those times, which make the court then to be not
Egyp at all, but composed of foreigners, the dynasty
of Hyksos kings among whom an ‘Egyptian’ was
so unexpected as to have his nationality mentioned.
_ Js native nobility of character, the pious train-
ing he had received in his father’s house, and the
favor of God with him gave him such prosperity
that his master intrusted all the affairs-of his house-
hold to him, and when the greatest of temptations
assails him he comes off victorious (ch_39). There
is strong ground for the suspicion that Potiphar did
not fully believe the accusation of his wife against
J. The fact that J. was not immediately put to
death is very significant. Potiphar could hardly do
less than shut him up for the sake of appearances,
and perhaps to take temptation away from his wife
without seeming to suspect her. It is noticeable
also that J.’s character soon triumphed in prison.
Then the same Providence that superintended his
dreams is leading so as to bring him before the king
(chs 40, 41). i ;

The events of the immediately preceding history
prepared J.’s day: the Hyksos kings on the throne,


those Bedouin princes, “shepherd
3. The kings” (Petrie, Hyksos and_ Israelite
Bedouin Cities), the enmity of the Egyptians
Slave Be- against this foreign dynasty so that
comes they accounted every shepherd an
Again the “abomination” (46 34), the friendly
Bedouin relation thus created between Pales- |
Prince tinian tribes and Egypt, the princely


character of J., for among princes a
prince is a prince however small his principality,
and last of all the manifest favor of God toward
J., and the evident understanding by the Pharaohs
of Sem religion, perhaps even sympathy with it
(41 39). All these constitute one of the most
majestic, Godlike movements of Providence re-
vealed to us in the word of God, or evident any-
where in history. The same Providence that
presided over the boy prince in his father’s house
came again to the slave prince in the Egyp prison.
The interpretation of the dreams of the chief
butler and the chief baker of Pharaoh (40—41
1-24) brought him at last through much delay
and selfish forgetfulness to the notice of the king,
and another dream in which the same cunning
hand of Providence is plainly seen (ch 41) is the
means of bringing J. to stand in the royal presence.
The stuff that dreams are made of interests
scarcely less than the Providence that was super-
intending over them. As the harvest fields of the
semi-nomadie Bedouin in Pal, and the household
routine of Egypt in the dreams of the chief butler
and the chief baker, so now the industrial interests
and the religious forms of the nation appear in the
dreamsof Pharaoh. The “‘seven kine” of the goddess
Hathor supplies the number of the cows, and the
doubling of the symbolism in the cattle and the
grain points to the two great sources of Egypt’s
welfare. The Providence that had shaped and
guided the whole course of J. from the Palestinian
home was consummated when, with the words,


“TInasmuch as thou art a man in whom is the spirit
of God,” Pharaoh lifted up the Bedouin slave to be
again the Bedouin prince and made him the prime
minister.

The history of “kings’ favorites” is too well known
for the elevation of J. to be in itself incredible. Such

things are esp. likely to take place
4, The among the unlimited monarchies of the
Prime Orient. The late empress of China had
Minister | been a Chinese slave girl. The investi-
ture of J. was thoroughly Egyp—the
“collar,” the signet “ring,” the “chariot” and the
outrunners who cried before him ‘“Abrech.” The
exact meaning of this word has never been certainly
ascertained, but its general import may be seen illus-
trated to this day wherever in the East royalty
rides out. The policy adopted by the prime min-
ister was far-reaching, wise, even adroit (Gen 41
25-36). It is impossible to say whether or not it
was wholly just, for we cannot know whether the
corn of the years of plenty which the government
laid up was bought or taken as a tax levy. The
policy involved some despotic power, but J. proved
a magnanimous despot. The deep and subile
statesmanship in J.’s plan does not fully appear
until the outcome. It was probably through the
policy of J., the prime minister, that the Hyksos
finally gained the power over the people and the
mastery of the land.

Great famines have not been common In Egypt, but
are not unknown. The only one which corresponds well
to the Bible account is that one recorded in the iuscrip-
tlon of Baba at el Kab, trd by Brugsch. Some scarce!
justifiable lon dat have been made to discredit Brugsch
in his account of that inscription. The monument still
remains and is easily visited, but the inscription is so
mutilated that it presents many difficulties. The
severity of the famine, the length of its duration, the
preparation by the government, the distribution to the
people, the success of the efforts for relief and even the
time of the famine, as far as It can be determined, corre-
spond well to the Bible account (Brugsch, Egypt under
the Pharaohs, ch vi). The way in which such famines in
Egypt come about has been explained by a movement
of the sudd, a sedgelike growth in the Nile, so as to clog
the upper river (Wright, Scientific Confirmations, 70-79).

J.’3 brethren came “with those that came,” ie.
with the food caravans. The account does not
imply that the prime minister presided in person
at the selling of grain, but only that he knew of the
coming of his brethren and met them at the market
place. The watchfulness of the government against
“spies,”’ by the careful guarding of the entrances to
the land, may well have furnished him with such
information. Once possessed with it, all the rest,
of the story of the interviews follows naturally (cf
traditions of J., Jew Enc). |

The long testing of the brethren with the attend-
ant delay in the relief of the father Jacob and the
family (chs 42-45) has been the subject of much
discussion, and most ingenious arguments for the
justification of J. All this seems unnecessary.
J. was not perfect, and there is no claim of perfec-
tion made for him in the Bible. Two things are
sufficient to be noted here: one that J. was ruler
as well as brother, with the habits of a ruler of
almost unrestrained power and authority and
burdened with the necessity for protection and the
obligation to mete out justice; the other that the
deliberateness, the vexatious delays, the subtle
diplomacy and playing with great issues are thor-
oughly oriental. It may be also that the perplexi-
ties of great minds make them liable to such va-
garies. The career of Lincoln furnishes some
curious parallels in the parleying with cases long
after the great president’s mind was fully made
up and action taken.

The time of these events and the identification
of J. in Egypt are most vexed questions not con-
clusively settled. Toffteen quite confidently pre-


Joseph Barnabas
Joseph’s Dream


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1740


sents in a most recent identification of J. much evi-
dence to which one would like to give full credence
(Toffteen, The Historical Exodus). But aside from
the fact that he claims two exodi, two J.s, two
Aarons, two lawgivers called Moses, and two givings
of the law, a case of critical doublets more astound-
ing than any heretofore claimed in the Pent, the
evidence itself which he adduces is very far from
conclusive. It is doubtful if the texts will bear
the translation he gives them, esp. the proper names.
The claims of Rameses II, that he built Pithom,
compared with the stele of 400 years, which he says
he erected in the 400th year of King Nubti, seems
to put J. about the time of the Hyksos king. This
is the most that can be said now. The burial of
Jacob is in exact accord with Egyp customs. The
wealth of the Israelites who retained their posses-
sions and were fed by the crown, in contrast with
the poverty of the Egyptians who sold everything,
prepares the way for the wonderful growth and in-
fluence of Israel, and the fear which the Egyptians
at last had of them. “And J. died, being 110 years
old,” an ideal old age in the Egyp mind. The
reputed burial place of J. at Shechem still awaits
examination.
Joseph stands out among the patriarchs in some
respects with preéminence. His nobility of char-
acter, his purity of heart and life,
5. The his magnanimity as aruler and brother
Patriarch make him, more than any other of the
OT characters, an illustration of that
type of man which Christ was to give to the world
in perfection. J. is not in the list of persons dis-
tinetly referred to in Scripture as types of Christ—
the only perfectly safe criterion—but none more
fully illustrates the life and work of the Saviour.
He wrought salvation for those who betrayed and
rejected him, he went down into humiliation as the
way to his exaltation, he forgave those who, at
least in spirit, put him to death, and to him as to
the Saviour, all must come for relief, or perish.


LireraturE.—Comms, on Gen; for rabbinical lit.,
ef Seligsohn in Jew Enc, some very interesting and
curious traditions: Ebers, Egypten und die Biicher Moses;
“The Tale of Two Brothers,'’ RP, series I, vol II, 137-
46; Wilkinson-Birch, The Manners and Customs of the
Ancient Egyptians; Erman, Life in Ancient Egypt.

M. G. Kye


JOSEPH BARNABAS. See BARNABAS.


JOSEPH BARSABBAS, bir-sab’as (BaprafPas,
Barsabbds, or BapoaBas, Barsabis; AV Barsabas,
bar’sa-bas; for etymology, etc, of Joseph, see general
art. on JosErH): Joseph Barsabbas was surnamed
Justus (Acts 1 23). Barsabbas was probably a
patronymic, i.e. son of Sabba or Seba. Other inter-
pretations given are “son of an oath,” “son of an
old man,” “son of conversion,” “son of quiet.”
It is likely that the ‘Judas called Barsabbas’’ of
Acts 15 22 was his brother. Ewald considers that
both names refer to the same person, but this is
improbable.

J. was one of those who accompanied the apostles
“all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and went
out among us, beginning from the baptism of John,
unto the day that he was received up from us”
(Acts 1 21.22). At the meeting of the brethren
under the presidency of Peter in Jerus shortly after
the crucifixion, he was, therefore, proposed along
with Matthias as a suitable candidate for the place
in the apostleship left vacant by the treachery and
death of Judas Iscariot; but was unsuccessful
(Acts 1 15-26).

According to Eusebius (H£, I, 12), J. was one
of the 70 (Lk 10 1), and Papias reeords the oral
tradition that he drank a cup of poison without
harm (cf Mk 16 18). The Acts.of St. Paul, a work
belonging to the 2d cent. and first mentioned by


Origen, relates that Barsabbas, Justus the Flatfoot
and others were imprisoned by Nero for protesting
their faith in Christ, but that upon a vision of the
newly martyred Paul appearing to the emperor, he
ordered their immediate release. C. M. Kerr


JOSEPH, HUSBAND OF MARY (for etymology,

etc, of Joseph, see Josrpn): Joseph, the carpenter

(Mt 13 55), was a “just man” (Mt

1. Refer- 1.19 AV), who belonged to Nazareth

euces in NT (Lk 2 4). He was of Davidiec descent

(Mt 1 20; Lk 2 4), the son of Heli

(Lk 8 23) or Jacob (Mt 1 16), the husband of

Mary (Mt 1 16), and the supposed father of Jesus
(Mt 13 55; Lk 3 23; 4 22; Jn 1 45; 6 42).

(1) Before the Nativity—The Gospels of Mt and
Mk alone give any detailed reference to J. and the
birth of Jesus, and their accounts vary in part. Lk
begins with the Annunciation to Mary at Nazareth
(Lk 1 26-38). Overwhelmed with the tidings,
Mary departed ‘“‘with haste’’ ‘into the hill country,
.... into a city of Judah,” to seek communion
with Elisabeth, with whom she had been coupled
in the Annunciation by the angel Gabriel (Lk 1
39-55). After abiding with her about three months
she returned ‘‘unto her own house” (Lk 1 56 AY).
The events recorded in Mt 1 18-24 probably took
place in the interval between this return and the
birth of Jesus. During Mary’s visit to Elisabeth,
J.had likely remained in Nazareth. The abrupt
and probably unexplained departure of his espoused
wife for Judah (cf the phrase “with haste’), and
her condition on her return, had caused him great
mental distress (Mt 1 18-20). Though his indig-
nation was tempered with mercy, he was minded
to put her away “‘privily,” but the visitation of the
angel in his sleep relieved him from his dilemma, and
he was reconciled to his wife (Mt 1 24). The nar-
rative is then continued by St. Luke. While J. and
Mary still abode in Nazareth, ‘there went out a
decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world
should be enrolled” (Lk 2 1). ‘And all went to
enrol themselves, every one to his own city’ (Lk
2 3). Being of the house and lineage of David,
J. went up with Mary, who was “great with child,’
from Galilee, “out of the city of Nazareth, into
Judaea, to the city of David, which is called Beth-
lehem”’ (Lk 2 4.5), and there Jesus was born (Lk
27; ef Mt 2 1).

(2) After the Nativity—(a) St. Luke’s account:
The two accounts now diverge considerably. Ac-
cording to Lk, the Holy Family remained for a time
at Bethlehem and were there visited by the shep-
herds (Lk 2 8-20). After a sojourn of 40 days for
the purification (ef Lk 2 21.22; Lev 12), J. de-
parted with his wife for Jerus “to present” the
infant Jesus “‘to the Lord” and to offer up sacrifice
according to the ancient law (Lk 2 24). There
he was present at the prophesying of Simeon and
Anna concerning Jesus, and received the blessing
of the former (Lk 2 34). After “they had accom-
plished all things according to the law of the Lord,
they returned into Galilee, to their own city Naz-
areth” (Lk 2 39). Every year, at the Passover,
they made this journey to Jerus (Lk 2 41). The
care and solicitude of J. and Mary for the boy Jesus
and their grief at His temporary loss are also re-
corded (Lk 2 45.48.51). There is evidence that,
though Mary “‘kept all these things in her heart,”
J. at least had no understanding then of the Divine
oe of the charge committed to his care (Lk 2

(0) St. Matthew’s account: But according to Mt
it was from the Wise Men of the East that Jesus
received homage at Bethlehem (Mt 2 I-11).
There is no further mention of the dedicatory
journey to Jerus, or of the return to Nazareth.


1741


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joseph Barnabas
Joseph’s Dream


Instcad, it is stated that on the departure of the Wise
Men from Bethlehem, J. was warncd in a dream of
the impending wrath of Herod, and escaped with
his wife and the infant Jesus into Egypt (Mt
2 13.14). Upon the death of Herod, an angel
appeared to J., and he returned to the land of Israel
(Mt 2 19-21). His original intention was to settle
once more in Judaea, but on learning that Arche-
laus, the son of Herod, was ruler there, “he with-
drew into the parts of Galilee, and came and dwelt
in a city called Nazareth” (Mt 2 22.23).

(c) The proper sequence of the two narratives:
‘The narrative of Mt would thus imply that the Holy
Family had no connection with Nazareth previous
to their return from Egypt. It has, however, been
suggested by Ramsay that Mt mercly reports what
was common knowledge, and that Lk, while quite
cognizant of this, supplemented it in his own
Gospel with details known only to the Holy Family,
and in part to the mother alone (cf Sir W. Ramsay,
Was Christ Born at Bethlehem? 78-79). A com-
parison of the two Gospel narratives makes it clear
that the visitation of the Wise Men fell on a later
date than that of the shepherds. The latter took
place immediately after the Nativity (cf Lk 2 11.
15.16, “is born... . this day,” “let us now go,”
“and they came with haste’). On the other hand,
when the Wise Men came to Jerus, Christ was
already born (cf Mt 2 1). Time was required for
this journey to Jerus and the consultation of Herod
with the chief priests (Mt 2 4); and during this
interval the events recorded in Lk 2 8-39 had taken
place. That there was sufficient time for this is
attested also by the fact that Herod’s decree was
directed against children up to two years of age
(Mt 2 16). Thus it was after the return of the
Holy Family to Nazareth, and on a further visit
to Bethlehem, implied by Mt but not recorded by
Lk, that the infant Jesus received the adoration of
the Wise Men. Jesus being born in 6 BC, this
took place in 5 BC, and as Herod died in 4 BC, J.
may have missed only one of the Passovers (cf Lk
2 41) by his flight into Egypt. (For a full discus-
sion, cf Ramsay, op. cit.) As no mention is made of
J. in the later parts of the Gospels where the Holy
Family is referred to (cf Mt 12 46; Lk 8 19), it
is commonly supposed that he died before the com-
mencement of the public ministry of Christ.

If a type is to be sought in the character of J.,
it is that of a simple, honest, hard-working, God-

fearing man, who was possessed of

2. Character large sympathies and a warm heart.
Strict in the observance of Jewish law

and custom, he was yet ready when occasion arose
to make these subservient to the greater law of the
Spirit. Too practical to possess any deep insight
into the Divine mysteries or eternal significance of
events which came within his knowledge (cf Lk 2
50), he was quick to make answer to what he per-
ceived to be the direct call of God (cf Mt 1 24).
Originally a ‘(just man” (AV), the natural clemency
within his heart prevailed over mere justice, and
by the promptings of the Holy Spirit that clemency
was transferred into a strong and enduring love
(cf Mt 1 24). J. is known to us only as a dim
figure in the background of the Gospel narratives,
yet his whole-hearted reconciliation to Mary, even
in the face of possible slanderings by his neighbors,
his complete self-sacrifice, when he left all and fled
into Egypt to save the infant Jesus, are indicative
that he was not unworthy to fulfil the great trust
which was imposed upon him by the Eternal Father.
rding to St. James, a

parece. ee roam a ag sta but with later
additions (cf Hennecke, Neutestamentliche Apokryphen,
ty: gives a detailed account of the marriage of the


aged with Mary, of their journey to Bethlehem, and
of the birth of Jesus. A similar gospel, reputed to be hy


Thomas the philosopher, of later origin and ostic
tendency (cf Hennecke, 63-73), narratcs several fantas-
tic, miraculous happenings in the domestic

3. Refer- life of the Holy Family, and the dealings
ences in of Joseph with the teachers of the youth-
hal ful Jesus. Other legends, from Syr or
Apocryphal fgyp sources, also dealing with the In-
Literature fancy, in which J. figures, are extant.


The chief is The History of Joseph the
Carpenter (cf Hennecke, Handbuch der neutestamentlichen
Apokryphen, 95-105)._ This contains an account of the
death and burial of J. at the age of 110, and of the
entreatles of Mary to Christ to save him. Its aim was
to show forth Christ as the Saviour, even at the last
hour, and the rightful manner of Christian death. J.
has received a high place in the Calendar of the Roman
Catholic Saints, his feast being celebrated on March 19.
C. M. Kener
JOSEPH OF ARIMATHAEA (a4mé ’Apipabalas,
apé Arimathaias; for etymology, etc, of Joseph,
see gen. art. on JosePrH): Joseph of Arimathaea—
a place the locality of which is doubtful, but lying
probably to the N.W. of Jerus—was a “rich man”
(Mt 27 57), “a councillor of honorable estate,’ or
member of the Sanhedrin (Mk 15 43; Lk 23 50),
“a good and righteous man . . . . who was looking
for the kingdom of God’ (Lk 23 50; Mk 16 43),
and “himself was Jesus’ disciple’ (Mt 27 57; Jn
19 38). Although he kept his discipleship secret
“for fear of the Jews” (Jn 19 38), he was yet faith-
ful to his allegiance in that he absented himself
from the meeting which found Jesus guilty of death
(cf Lk 23 51; Mk 14 64). But the condemnation
of his Lord awakened the courage and revealed the
true faith of J. On the evening after the cruci-
fixion he went “boldly” to Pilate and begged the
body of Jesus. There is a fine touch in that he
himself took down the body from the cross. With
the assistance of Nicodemus he wound it in fine
linen with spices (ef Mt 27 57, J. was a “rich
man”) and brought it to the new sepulcher in
the garden near the place of His crucifixion.
There they “laid him in a tomb that was hewn in
stone, where never man had yet lain” and ‘rolled
a stone against the door of the tomb’ (cf Mt 27
57-60; Mk 15 42-46; Lk 23 50-53; Jn 19 38-42).
In this was held to be the fulfilment of the
prophecy of Isa &3 9,


The Gospel of St. Peter, written probably in Syria
about the middle of the 2d cent., gives a slightly different
account. According to this J., ‘the friend of Pilate and
the Lord,” was present at the trial of Jesus, and imme-
diately upon its conclusion besonght of Pilate that he
might have the body for burial. This was granted, and
after the crucifixion the Jews handed the body over to
J. (cf Hennecke, Neutestamentliche Apokryphen, 27-30),
Legends of a later origin record that J. was sent by
Philip from Gaul to Britain along with 11 other disciples
in 63 AD, and built an oratory at Glastonbury (cf Per.ip
THE APostLe), that he bronght the Holy Grail to Eng-
land, and that he freed Ireland from snakes.


C. M. Kerr
JOSEPH, PRAYER OF: An OT pscudepigraph,
no. 3 in the Stichometry of Nicephorus (Westcott,
Canon of the NT’, 571), with the length given as
1,100 lines, and no. 5 in the List of Sixty Books (West-
cott, 568). The work is lost, and the only quota-
tions are in Origen (In Joan., ii.25, Eng.in Anie-
Nicene Fathers, IX, 341; In Gen.,iii.9,12). Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob are said to have been created before
every work, but Jacob-Israel is the greatest, “the
firstborn of every living creature,” the “first minister
in God’s presence,” greater than the angel with whom
he wrestled. The purport may be anti-Christian,
the patriarchs exalted in place of Christ; cf, per-
haps, En 71 (but not so in Charles’s 1912 text),
but Origen’s favorable opinion of the book proves

that the polemic could not have been very direct.
Literature.—GJV, 4th ed, ITI, 359-60; Dillmann
in PRE, 2d ed, XII, 362; cf Beer in 3d ed, XVI, 256;
Fabricius, Codex pseudep. Vet. Test., 1, 761-71.

Burton Scorr Haston
JOSEPH’S DREAM. See Astronomy, II, 6;


JOSEPH.


Joseph, Gospel of THF INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joshua


1742


JOSEPH, THE CARPENTER, GOSPEL OF.
See APOCRYPHAL GOSPELS.


JOSEPHUS, jé-sé’fus (Idenpos, Léséphos; B
reads @écynwos, Phésépos): In 1 Esd 9 34, corre-
sponding to “Joseph” in Ezr 10 42.


JOSEPHUS, jé-sé’fus, FLAVIUS, fla’vi-us: Was
born at Jerus 37-38 AD, and died at Rome early in
the 2d cent., when is not known pre-


1. Early cisely. His father and mother be-
Life and longed to families of the priestly
Beliefs aristocracy; consequently he received


an excellent education, becoming fa-

miliar, not only with Jewish, but with Hellenistic,
culture. When 16 years old he resorted to one
Banus, an Essense (q.v.), in the desert of Engedi,
with whom he remained for 3 years, absorbing
occult, lore, and practising the ascetic life. It
might have been expected from his social position
that, on his return to Jerus, he would join the
SappuceeEs (q.v.); but, his Essene experience hav-
ing indoctrinated him with ceremonialism, he pre-
ferred to become a PHARISEE (q.v.). He evidently
believed, too, that. the Pharisees were akin to the
Stoics, who were then influential in the Hellenistic
world. During his absence in the desert, the mis-
government of the Rom procurators at Jerus had
grown apace. And the ineptitudes and injustices
of Felix, Alhanus and Florus were succeeded by
anarchy under Annas, the high priest (62). Ac-
cordingly, the Zza.ors (q.v.) plotted against Rom
rule. Rebellion simmered, and many of the dis-
affected were transported to Rome to be dealt with
there. Among these were several priests, whom
Jos knew. About the year 64, he went to Rome to
plead for them, met shipwreck on the voyage, was
rescued with a few survivors and was brought to
port at Puteoli. Here he met Alityrus, a Jewish
actor, who happened to be in the good graces of
Poppaea, Nero’s consort. The empress, a Jewish
proselyte, espoused his cause at Rome, and showed
him many favors. At the capital, he also dis-
cerned the power of the Romans and, in all prob-
ability, grew convinced of the hopelessness of armed
revolt. On his return to Jerus, he found his people
set upon insurrection, and was forced, possibly
against his better judgment, to make common cause
with them. The first part of his public career is
concerned with the great struggle that now began.
When war broke out, Jos was appointed governor
of Galilee, the province where the Rom attack would


first fall. He had no military fitness
2. Public for command, but the influence of his
Career friends and the exigencies of politics


thrust the office upon him. The
Zealots soon found that he did not earry out the
necessary preparations with thoroughness, and they
tried to compass hisremoval. But he was too influ-
ential, too good a politician also, to be undermined.
Surana by enemies among his own folk, who
even attempted to assassinate him, he encountered
several dangerous experiences, and, at length, flying
from the Romans, was beleaguered with his army
in Jotopata, near the Lake of Gennesaret, in May,
67. The Jews withstood the siege for 47 days with
splendid courage, till Titus, assaulting under cover
of a mist, stormed the stronghold and massacred
the weary defenders. Jos escaped to a cave where,
with his usual adroitness, he saved himself from
death at the hands of his companions. The Romans
soon discovered his hiding-place, and haled him
before Vespasian, the commander-in-chief. Jos
worked upon the superstitions of the general, and
so ingratiated himself that Vespasian took him to
Alexandria in his train. Having been liberated by
his captor, he adopted the family name of the


Flavians, according to Rom custom. Returning
to Pal with Titus, he proceeded to mediate between
the Romans and the Jews, earning the suspicion
of the former, the hatred of the latter. His wonted
diplomacy preserved him from anything more
serious than a wound, and he was an eyewitness of
the terrible events that marked the last days of
Jerus. Then he accompanied Titus to Rome for
the TrrumPH (q.v.). Here he lived the remainder
of his days, in high favor with the ruling house, and
relieved from all anxiety about worldly goods by
lavish imperial patronage. He was thus enabled
to devote himself to literary pursuits.
The works of Jos render him one of the most
valuable authorities for the student of NT times.
They are as follows: (1) Concerning
3. Works the Jewish War, written before 79;
we have the Gr tr of this history by the
author; there are 7 books: I, the period from Antio-
chus Epiphanes (175 BC) to Herod the Great (4
BC); II, from 4 BC to 66 AD, covering the early
events of the War; III, occurrences in Galilee in
67 AD; IV, the course of the War till the siege of
Jerus; V and VI, the investment and fall of Jerus;
VII, the aftermath of the rebellion. While this
work igs not written with the objective accuracy of
scientific history, it is credible on the whole, except
where it concerns the réle played by the author.
(2) The Antiquities of the Jews, written not later
than 94 AD. In this Jos purports to relate the
entire history of his race, from the beginning till the
War of 66 AD. The 20 books fall naturally into
5 divisions, thus: (a) I-X, from prehistoric times
till the Captivity, in other words, the period related
in the OT substantially; (0) XI, the age of Cyrus;
(c) XII-XIV, the beginnings of the Hellenistic
period, from Alexander the Great, including the
Maccabean revolt, till the accession of Herod the
Great; (d) XV-XVII, the reign of Herod; (e)
XVIII-XX, from Herod’s death till the War of 66.
While it cannot be called an apology for the Jews,
this work betrays the author’s consciousness of the
disfavor with which his people were viewed through-
out the Rom Empire. Jos does what he can to
disabuse the Gr-Rom educated classes, although he
shows curious obliquity to the grandeur of Heb
religion. Allin all, the work is disappointing; but
it contains many details and sidelights of first im-
portance to investigators. (3) The treatise called,
since Jerome, Against Apion, is Josephus’ most
inspiring performance. The older title, Concern-
ing the High Antiquity of the Jews, tells us what it
contains—a defence of Heb religion against the
libels of heathendom. It is in two books. The
vituperation with which Jos visits Apion is unim-
portant in comparison with the defence of Mosaic
religion and the criticism of paganism. Here the
author’s character is seen at its best; the air of
Worldly Wiseman has been dropped, and he ap-
proaches enthusiasm. (4) His last work is the
Vita or Autobiography, a misleading title. It is
an echo of old days in Galilee, directed against the
traductions of an associate, Justus of Tiberias. We
have Jos at his worst here. He so colors the narra-
tive as to convey a totally wrong impression of the
part he played during the great crisis. In exten-
uation, it may be said that his relations with the
imperial court rendered it difficult, perhaps impos-
sible, for him to pursue another course.


Lirzeraturn.—wW. D. Morrison, The Jews under Rom
Rule (London, 1890); E. Schtirer, History of the Jewish
Peopleinthe Time of Jesus Christ, div I, voll (Edinburgh,
1890); A. Hansrath, History of NT Times, IV, div VI1,ch
ii (London, 1895); H. Graetz, History of the Jews from
the Earliest Times to the Present Day, II, ch x (London,
1891); art. “Josephus” in Jew Enc. Transiations by
Whiston (many edd), and of The War of the Jews, by
Traill and Taylor (London, 1862).
R. M. WENLEY


1743


JOSES, j6'séz, j6’zez (?Iwofjs, I sés):

(1) One of the brethren of Jesus (Mk 6 3; in
Mt 13 55 the Gr is “Joseph,”’ and RV so renders).

(2) A son of Mary, perhaps identical with (1)
(Mt 27 56; Mk 16 40.47). See Breturen or
THE LorRD.

(3) A name of Barnabas (Acts 4 36 AV, where
again Gr and RV have “Joseph’’). See BaRNaABas.


JOSHAH, jo’sha (MWS, yoshah, “Jeh’s gift”):
A descendant of Simeon, chief in his family (1 Ch
4 34.38).


JOSHAPHAT, josh’a-fat (UW, ydshaphat,
“Jeh has judged”; cf JEHOSHAPHAT):

(1) One of David’s mighty men (i Ch 11 483),
a “Mithnite,” but not inclyded in the list of 2 8 23.

(2) A priest and trumpeter of David’s time (1 Ch
15 24), AV “Jehoshaphat.”


JOSHAVIAH, josh-a-vi’a (TWN, ydshawyah,
allied form to JosHag [q.v.]): Son of Elnaam, one
of the band of braves who served David (1 Ch 11
46), omitted from the list of 2 8 28, which is less
complete and differs in detail.


JOSHBEKASHAH, josh-bé-k4’sha, josh-bé-kash’a
(AWWpaw , yoshb-kashah, “son” of Heman; 1 Ch
26 4.24): The last 8 or 9 names in ver 4 are taken
by commentators to be not names but the words of
aprayer. See OTJC?, 143, n.; Curtis, Chron, 278,
280; SBOT.


JOSHEB-BASSHEBETH, jé-sheb-ba-shé’beth
(FAW. AW, ydshebh ba-shebheth): This proper
name in RV takes the place of the tr ‘‘that sat in the
seat” in AV (2 S 23 8). The phrase so rendered is
meaningless. The text has evidently suffered cor-
ruption. There can be no doubt that a proper
name isintended. This, according to the || passage
in 1Ch11 11, should be Jasbobeam. Some
scholars think that this also is a corruption, and
by a process of emendation arrive at ‘“Eshhaal” as
the correct name (Driver, Heb Text of S; SBOT,
ad loc.).


JOSHIBIAH, josh-i-bi’a (TMIWM, ysshibhyah,
“Jeh sets,” or ‘‘causes to dwell”; AV Josibiah): A
Simeonite (1 Ch 4 35).


JOSHUA, josh’t-a ([a] PWN, yhoshan, [6]
PVM, yhoshur’, “Jeh is deliverance” or ‘‘opu-
lence”; ef JesHua; ’Iynvods, [ésots):

(1) Joshua the son of Nun; the name has the
Heb form (a) abovein Dt 3 21; Jgs 2 7; elsewhere
the form (b), except in Neh 8 17, where it is of the
form yéshi*' (See Jesnus); cf also Nu 18 8.16;
Dt 32 44. See following article. :

(2) In 18 6 14.18 (form [b6]), the Bethshemite
in whose field stood the kine that brought the ark
from the Philistines. ;

(3) In 2 K 28 8 (form [b]), governor of Jerus in
the time of Josiah.

(4) The high priest at Jerus after the return.
See separate article. 8. F. Hunter


JOSHUA:


I. Form snp SIGNIFICANCE or Nama
Il. Hisrory or tae Lire or Josuva
. First Appearance
. The Minister of Moses
. One of the Spies
. The Head of the People ;
(1) His First Act—Sending of the Spies
2) Crossing of the Jordan
03) Capture of Jericho
4) Conquest of Ai and Bethel
& Reading of the Law on Mt. Ebal


PONE


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA anaes Gospel of


(8) The Gibeonltes

(7) Conquest of the South

8) Northern Conquests

9) Allotment of Territory

ne Cities of Refuge

11) Final Address and Death
III. Sources or History
IV. CHARACTER AND Work or JosHvua

I. Form and Significance of Name.—The name
Joshua, a contracted form of Jehoshna (WWW,
PVN, yhoshue'), which also appears in the form
Jeshua (2702, Neh 8 17), signifies ‘‘Jeh is deliver-
ance” or “salvation,” and is formed on the analogy
of many Israelite names, as Jehoiakim ("P77 ,
yhoyakim), “Jeh exalteth,” Jehohanan (J,
yhohanan), “Jeh is gracious,” Elishua or Elisha
(DNDN, aisha’, NWN, aisha), “God is de-
liverance,” Elizur (MAREN, "Eictr), “God is a
rock,” etc. In the narrative of the mission of the
spies in Nu 18, the name is given as Hoshea (VO,
hoshé', ve 8.16; cf Dt 32 44), which is changed
by Moses to Joshua (ver 16). In the passage in Dt,
however, the earlier form of the name is regarded
by Dr. Driver (Comm. in loc.) as an erroneous read-
ing.

The Gr form of the name is Jesus ("Inco0ds, Tésons,
Acts 7 45; He 4 8, RV “Joshua,” but AV “Jesus’
in both passages), and this form appears even in the
passages cited above from Neh and Dt. In Nu 13


‘8.16, however, LXX has Atoy, Hausé. The name


occurs in later Jewish history, e.g. as that of the
owner of the field in which the ark rested after its
return from the land of the Philis (1 8 6 14.18),
and appears to have become esp. frequent after the
exile (Ezr 2 40; Zec 3 lab, etc). It is also found
(Jeshua) with a local signification as the name of
one of the “‘villages’’ in Southern Judaea, where the
repatriated Jews dwelt after their return from
Babylon (Neh 11 26).

Il. History of the Life of Joshua.—The narrative
of the life of Joshua, the son of Nun, is naturally
divided into two parts, in which he held entirely
different positions with regard to the people of
Israel, and discharged different duties. In the
earlier period he is the servant and minister of Mosca,
loyal to his leader, and one of his most trusted and
valiant captains. After the death of Moses he
himself succeeds to the leadership of the Israelite
host, and conducts them to a settlement in the
Promised Land. The service of the earlier years
of his life is a preparation and equipment for the
office and responsibility that devolved upon him
in the later period.

The first appearance of J. in the history is at
Rephidim, on the way from the wilderness of Sin

to Horeb. Neither the exact site of
1. First Rephidim nor the meaning of the name
Appearance can be determined; the Israelites,

however, apparently came to Rephi-
dim before they approached the rich oasis of Feirdn,
for at the former place ‘‘there was no water for the
people to drink” (Ex 171). The fact that the
host encamped there seems to assume the existence
of wells; either, therefore, these were found to be
dry, or they failed before the wants of the great
host were satisfied. The Amalekités, wandering
desert tribes, claimed the ownership of the wells,
and, resenting the Israelite intrusion, swooped down
npon them to drive them away and to enrich them-
selves with the spoil of their possessions. Under
the command of J., the Israelites won a complete
victory in a battle that seems to have been pro-
longed until sunset; the fortunes of the battle
varying with the uplifting or falling of Moses’
hands, which were accordingly supported by Aaron
and Hur throughout the day (vs 11 ff). A curse


Joshua


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1744


and sentence of extermination prononnced against
Amalek were formally written down and communi-
cated to J., apparently that, as the future leader
of Israel, he might have it in charge to provide for
their fulfilment.

It is evident also that at this period J. was no
young and untried warrior. Although no indica-
tion of his previous history is given, his name is
introduced into the narrative as of a man well
known, who is sufficiently in the confidence of
Moses to be given the chief command in the first
conflict in which the Israelites had been engaged
since leaving Egypt. The result justified the
choice. And if, during the march, he had held the
position of military commander and organizer
under Moses, as the narrative seems to imply, to
him was due in the first instance the remarkable
change, by which within the brief space of a month
the undisciplined crowd of serfs who had fled from
Egypt became a force sufficiently resolute and
compact to repel the onset of the Amalekite hordes.

In all the arrangements for the erection and
service of the tabernacle, J. the warrior naturally

has no place. He is briefly named


2. The (Ex 24 13) as the minister of Moses,
Minister accompanying him apparently to the
of Moses _ foot of the mount of God, but remain-


ing behind with the elders and Aaron

and Hur, when Moses commenced the ascent. A
similar brief mention is in 32 17, where he has
rejoined Moses on the return of the latter from the
mount with the two tables of the testimony, and is
unaware of the outbreak of the people and their
idolatrous worship of the molten calf in the
camp; cf 33 11, where again he is found in the
closest. attendance upon his leader and chief. No
further reference is made to J. during the stay of
the Israelites at Sinai, or their subsequent journey-
ings, until they found themselves at Kadesh-barnea
on the southern border of the Promised Land (Nu
13). His name is once mentioned, however, in an
earlier ch of the same book (Nu 11 28), when the
tidings are brought to Moses that two men in the
camp of Israel, Eldad and Medad, had been in-
spired to prophesy. There he is described in har-
mony with the previous statements of his position,
as Moses’ minister from his youth. Jealous of his
leader’s prerogative and honor, he would have the
irregular prophesying stopped, but is himself
checked by Moses, who rejoices that the spirit of
God should rest thus upon any of the Lord’s people.
Of the 12 men, one from each tribe, sent forward
by Moses from Kadesh to ascertain the character
of the people and land before him,

8. One of two only, Hoshea the Ephraimite,
the Spies whose name is significantly. changed
to Joshua (13 8.16), and Caleb the
Judahite, bring back a report encouraging the
Israelites to proceed. The account of the mission
of the spies is repeated substantially in Dt 1 22-46.
There, however, the suggestion that spies should be
commissioned to examine and report upon the land
comes in the first instance from the people them-
selves. In the record of Nu they are chosen and
sent by Moses under Divine direction (13 1f).
The two representations are not incompatible,
still less contradictory. The former describes in
an altogether natural manner the human initiative,
probable enough in the circumstances in which the
Israelites found themselves; the latter is the Divine
control and direction, behind and ahove the affairs
of men. The instructions given to the spies (vs
17 ff) evidently contemplated a hasty survey of the
entire region of the Negeb or southern borderland
of Pal up to and inciuding the hill country of
Judaea; the time allowed, 40 days (ver 25), was too
brief to accomplish more, hardly long enough for


this purpose alone. They were, moreover, not
only to ascertain the character of the towns and
their inhabitants, the quality and products of the
soil, but to bring back with them specimens of the
fruits (ver 20). An indication of the season of the
year is given in the added clause that “the time was
the time of first-ripe grapes.’”? The usual months
of the vintage are September and October (cf Lev
23 39); in the warm and sheltered valleys, however,
in the neighborhood of Hebron, grapes may some-
times he gathered in August or even us early as July.
The valley from which the fruits, grapes, figs and
pomegranates were brought was known as the
valley of Eshcol, or the “cluster” (Nu 13 23 f;
32 9; Dt 1 24).

No hesitating or doubtful account is given by all
the spies of the fertility and attractiveness of the
country; but in view of the strength of its cities
and inhabitants only J. and Caleb are confident of
the ability of the Israelites to take possession of it.
Their reports and exhortations, however, are over-
borne by the timidity and dissuasion of the others,
who so entirely alarm the people that they refuse to
essay the conquest of the land, desiring to return
into Egypt (Nu 14 3f), and attempt to stone J.
and Caleb (14 10). These two alone, therefore,
were exempted from the sentence of exclusion from
the Promised Land (vs 24.30.38; 26 65; 32 12;
Dt 1 25 ff). The remainder of the spies perished
at once by a special visitation (Nu 14 36); and the
people were condemned to a 40-year exile in the
wilderness, a year for each day that the spies had
been in Pal, until all the men of that genera-
tion ‘from twenty years old and upward” were
dead (14 29; 26 64f; 32 11 ff). An abortive at-
tempt was made to invade the land in defiance of
the prohibition of Jeh, and ended in failure and
disastrous defeat (vs 40ff; Dt 1 41 ff; cf 21 1-3).

Upon the events of the next 38 or 40 years in the
life of Israel an almost unbroken silence falls. The
wanderers in the wilderness have no _ history.
Some few events, however, that are recorded without
note of time, the rebellion of Korah, Dathan and Abi-
ram, and the breaking out of the plague because of
the people’s murmuring, and probably others (Nu 15
32-36; 16f), appear to belong to this period. In
none of them does J. take an active part, nor is his
name mentioned in connection with the campaigns
against Sihon and Og on the BE. of the Jordan.
When the census of the people is taken in the plains
of Moab opposite Jericho, J. and Caleb with Moses
himself are found to be the only survivors of the
host that 40 years previously came out of Egypt
(26 63 ff). As the time of the death of the great
leader and lawgiver drew near, he was commissioned
formally to appoint J. as his successor and to hand
over to him and to Eleazar the priest the duty of
finally apportioning the conquered territory among
the several tribes (27 18 ff; 32 28; 34 17; cf Dt
1 38; 3 28; 31 3.7.23; 349). Some of these pas-
sages anticipate the direct Divine commission and
encouragement recorded in Josh (1 1.5 ff) and
given to him after the death of Moses.

The history of J. in his new capacity as supreme
head and leader of the people in several instances

recapitulates as it were the history of
4. The his greater forerunner. It was not
Head of the unnatural that it should be so; and
People the similarity of recorded events

affords no real ground for doubt with
regard to the reliability of the tradition concerned.
The position in which Israel now found itself
on the E. of the Jordan was in some respects not
unlike that which confronted Moses at Kadesh-
barnea or before the crossing of the Red Sea. J.,
however, was faced with a problem much less diffi-
cult, and in the war-tried and disciplined host at


1745


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joshua


his command he possessed an instrument immensely
more suitable and powerful for carrying out his
purpose.

(1) Sending of the spies.—His first act was to
send spies from Shittim to ascertain the character
of the country immediately opposite on the W. of
the Jordan, and esp. the position and strength of
Jericho, the frontier and fortified city which first
stands in the way of an invader irom the E. who
proposes to cross the river by the fords near its
mouth (Josh 2 2). In Jericho the spies owed their
lives to the quick inventiveness of Rahab (cf He
11 31), who concealed them on the roof of her house
from the emissaries of the king; and returning to
J., they reported the prospects of an easy victory
and conquest (vs 23 f).

There were doubtless special reasons which Induced
J. to essay the crossing of the Jordan at the iower fords
opposite Jericho. Higher up the river a probably easier
crossing-place led directly into Central Pal, a district in
which BU pron his advance would not have been
obstructed by fortified cities such as confronted him
farther south: which therefore would seem to offer the
advantages of an open and ready entrance into the heart
of the country. is decision was probably influenced
by a desire to possess himself of a fortified base at Jericho
and in the neighboring cities. The favorable report of
the spies also proved that there would be no great diff-
culty in carrying out this plan.

(2) Crossing of the Jordan.—The actual crossing
of the river is narrated in chs 3,4. The city of
Jericho was built in a plain from 12 to 14 miles wide
formed by the recession of the hills that border the
valley of the Jordan from the Sea of Galilee to the
Dead Sea, and stood at the mouth of the valley of
Achor (7 24.26; 16 7). The modern village of Ertha
is built at a short distance S.E. of the ancient site,
and Gilgal lay half-way to the river. At the latter
place the fixed camp was established after the taking
of Jericho, and Gilgal formed for some considerable
time the base of operations, where the women and
children remained in safety while the men were
absent on their warlike expeditions. There also
the tabernacle was erected, as the symbol and
center of national life, and there apparently it
remained until the time came for the removal to
Shiloh (18 1). :

Within the plain the stream has excavated a
tortuous bed to a depth of 200 ft. below the surface,
varying from an eighth of a mile to a mile in breadth.
In ordinary seasons the waters are confined to a
small portion of the channel, which is then crossed
opposite Jericho by two fords where the depth does
not exceed 2 or 3 ft. When the river is low it may
be erossed elsewhere. In times of flood, however,
the water rises and fills the entire channel from
bank to bank, so that the fords become impractica-
ble. It is expressly stated that it was at such a
time of flood that the Israelites approached the
river, at the “time of harvest,’ or in the early
spring (8 15). The priests were directed to carry
the ark to the brink of the river, the waters of which,
as soon as their feet. touched them, would be cut
off, and a dry passage afforded. The narrative
therefore is not to be understood as though it indi-
cated that a wall of water stood on the right and
left of the people as they crossed; the entire breadth
of the river bed was exposed by the failure of the
waters from above. See JoRDAN.

An interesting parallel to the drying up of the Jordan
before J. is recorded by an Arab. historian of the Middle
Ages, who writes to explain a natural but extraordinary
occurrence, without any thought of the miraculons or
any apparent knowledge of the passage of the Israelites.
During the years 1266-67 AD, a Mohammedan sultan
named Beybars was engaged in building a bridge over
the Jordan near Damieh, a place which some have identi-
fled with the city Adam (Josh 3 16); but the force of the
waters repeatedly carried away and destroyed his work.
On one night, however, in December of the latter year,


the river ceased entirely to flow. The opportunity was
seized, and an army of workmen so strengthened the


bridge that it resisted the flood which came down upon
it the next day, and stood firm. It was found that at
some distance up the river, where the valley was nar-
row, the banks had been undermined by the runnin
water and had fallen in, thus comiplevely, amming bac
the stream. It seems not improbable that it was by
agency of this character that a passage was secured for
the Israelites; even as 40 years earlier a ‘‘strong east
wind" had been employed to drive back the waters of
the Red Sea before Moses.


At the command of J., under Divine direction,
the safe crossing of the Jordan was commemorated
by the erection at Gilgal of 12 stones (4 3-9.20 ff),
one for each of the tribes of Israel, taken from the
bed of the river. In ver 9itisstated that 12 stones
were set up in the midst of the river. The state-
ment is probably a misunderstanding, and a mere
confusion of the tradition. It is not likely that
there would be a double commemoration, or an
erection of stones in a place where they would
never be seen. At Gilgal also the supply of manna
ceased, when the natural resources of the country
became available (5 12). The date of the passage
is given as the 10th day of the Ist month (4 19);
and on the 14th day the Passover was kept at Gilgal
in the plains of Jericho (6 10). For the 2d time,
also, at the crisis of the first entrance into the land
J. was encouraged for his work by a vision and
Divine promise of assistance and direction (6 13-15).

(3) Capture of Jericho—The narrative that
follows, of the taking of Jericho, illustrates, as would
naturally be expected in the case of a city so sit-
uated, the effeminate and unwarlike character of
its inhabitants. There was apparently little or no
fighting, while for a whole week J. with priests and
people paraded before the walls. <A brief reference
(6 1) seems to indicate that the citizens were quickly
driven to take refuge behind their fortifications.
Twice seven times the city was compassed, with
the ark of the covenant borne in solemn procession,
and at the 7th circuit on the 7th day, while the
people shouted, the wall of the city fell ‘im its
place” (6 20m), and Jericho was taken by assault.
Only Rahab and her household were spared. All
the treasure was devoted to the service of the Lord,
but the city itself was burnt, and a solemn curse
pronounced upon the site and upon the man who
should venture to rebuild its walls (6 26). The
curse was braved, whether deliberately or not, by
a citizen of Bethel in the time of King Ahab; and
the disasters foretold fell upon him in the loss of his
children (1 K 16 34). Thenceforward Jericho ap-
pears to have been continuously inhabited. There
was a settlement of the sons of the prophets there
in Elisha’s day (2 K 25.15). The natural fer-
tility of the site won for it the name of the city of
palm trees (Dt 34 3; Jgs 1 16; 3 13).

From the plains of Jericho two valleys lead up
into the central hill country in directions N.W. and
S.W. respectively. These form the two entrances
or passes, by which the higher land is approached
from the E. Along these lines, therefore, the in-
vasion of the land was planned and carried out.
The main advance under J. himself took place by
the northernmost of the valleys, while the immediate
southern invasion was intrusted to Caleb and the
two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, the supreme
control remaining always in the hands of J. (cf,
Josh 14, 16; Jgs 1). This seems on the whole to
be the better way of explaining the narratives in
general, which in detail present many difficulties.

(4) Conquest of At and Bethel—At the head of
the northern pass stood the city of Luz or Bethel
(Gen 28 19; Josh 18 13; Jgs 1 23). Ai lay close
at hand, and was encountered by the invaders before
reaching Bethel; its exact site, however, is unde-
termined. The two towns were in close alliance
(cf Josh 8 17), and the defeat and destruction of
the one was quickly followed by the similar fate


Joshua


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1746


that overtook the other. Before Ai, the advance
guard of the Israelites, a small party detached on
the advice of the spies sent forward by J. from
Jericho, suffered defeat and were driven back in
confusion (7 2ff). The disaster was due to the
failure to obey the command to “devote” the whole
spoil of Jericho, and to the theft by one of the people
of treasure which belonged rightfully to Jeh (7 11).
When the culprit Achan had been discovered and
punished, a renewed attempt upon Ai, made with
larger forces and more skilful dispositions, was
crowned with success. The city was taken by a
stratagem and destroyed by fire, its king being
hanged outside the city gate (8 281). Unlike
Jericho, it seems never to have been restored.
Bethel also was captured, through the treachery
apparently of one of its own citizens, and its in-
habitants were put to the sword (Jgs 1 24f).

(5) Reading of the law on Mi. Ebal.—Of further
campaigns undertaken by J. for the subjugation of
Central Pal no account has been preserved. It is
possible, therefore, that the conquest of this part
of the country was accomplished without further
fighting (see Josuua, Book or). In the list of the
cities (Josh 12 7-24) whose kings were vanquished
by J., there are no names of towns that cau be
certainly identified as situated here; the greater
part evidently belong to the north or south. The
only record remaining is that of the formal erection
of an altar on Mt. Ebal in the presence of all the
people and the solemn reading of the law in their
hearing (8 30-35). It is expressly noted that all
this was done in accordance with the directions of
Moses (ef Dt 11 29; 27 2-8.11 ff). It would further
appear probable that this ceremony really took place
at the close of the conquest, when all the land was
subdued, and is narrated here by anticipation.

(6) The Gibeonites —The immediate effect of the
Israelite victories under J. was very great. Espe-
cially were the Hivite inhabitants of Gibeon struck
with fear (9 3 ff) lest the same fate should over-
take them that had come upon the peoples of
Jericho and Ai. With Gibeon, 3 other cities were
confederate, viz. Chephirah, Beeroth and Kiriath-
jearim, or the “city of groves’ (9 17). Gibeon,
however, was the chief, and acted in the name of the
others. It is usually identified with the modern
village or township of el-Jib, 7 or 8 miles N. by W.
of Jerus; and all four lay clustered around the head
of the pass or valley of Aijalon, which led down
from the plateau westward to the foothills of the
Shephelah, toward the plain and the sea. Gibeon
held therefore a position of natural strength and
importance, the key to one of the few practicable
routes from the west into the highlands of Judaea,
equally essential to be occupied as a defensive posi-
tion against the incursions of the dwellers in the
plains, and as affording to an army from the east a
safe and protected road down from the mountains.

By a stratagem which threw J. and the leaders
of Israel off their guard, representing themselves
as jaded and wayworn travelers from a distance, the
Gibeonites succeeded in making a compact with
Israel, which assured their own lives and_safety.
They affirmed that they had heard of the Israelite
victories beyond Jordan, and also of the gift to them
by Jeh of the whole land (9 9.24). J. and the
princes were deceived and entered too readily into
covenant with them, a covenant and promise that
was scrupulously observed when on the 3d day of
traveling the Israelites reached their cities and
found them to be close at hand (vs 16 ff). While,
however, their lives were preserved, the men of
Gibeon were reduced to the position of menial serv-
ants, “‘hewers of wood and drawers of water”; and
the writer adds, it is thus “unto this day” (vs 21.27).
See GiBEOn.


The treaty of peace with the Gibeonites and the
indignation thereby aroused among the neighbor-
ing kings, who naturally regarded the independent
action of the men of Gibeon as treachery toward
themselves, gave rise to one of the most formidable
coalitions and one of the most dramatic incidents
of the whole war. The king of Jerus, Adoni-zedek
(“the Lord of righteousness” or “the Lord is right-
eousness,” 10 1; cf Melchizedek, “the king of
righteousness,” Gen 14 18; in Jgs 1 5 ff the name
appears as Adoni-bezek, and so LXX reads here),
with the 4 kings of Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish and
Eglon (10 3), formed a plan to destroy Gibeon in
revenge, and the Gibeonites sent hastily for assist-
ance to J., who had returned with his army to Gil-
gal. The Israelites made a forced march from
Gilgal, came upon the allied kings near Gibeon, and
attacked and defeated them with great slaughter.
The routed army fled westward “by the way of the
ascent to Beth-horon”’ (ver 10), and in the pass was
overtaken by a violent hailstorm, by which more
perished than had fallen beneath the swords of the
Israelites (ver 11). The 5 kings were shut up in a
cave at Makkedah, in which they had taken refuge,
whence they were subsequently preent forth and
put to death. The actual pursuit, however, was
not stayed until the remnant had found temporary
security behind the walls of their fortified cities
(10 16 ff). _ The victory of Israel was commem-
orated by J. in a song of which some words are
preserved (10 12 f). See BEtH-HORON, BATTLE


OF.

(7) Conquest of the south—With almost severe
simplicity it is further recorded how the confederate
cities in turn were captured by J. and utterly de-
stroyed (10 28-39). And the account is closed by
a summary statement of the conquest of the entire
country from Kadesh-barnea in the extreme south
as far as Gibeon, after which the -people returned
to their camp at Gilgal (10 40-43).

(8) Northern conquests—A_ hostile coalition of
northern rulers had finally to be met and defeated
before the occupation and pacification of the land
could be said to be complete. Jabin, king of Hazor,
the “fort,” was at the head of an alliance of northern
kings who gathered together to oppose Israel in
the neighborhood of the waters of Merom (11 1 ff).
Hazor has been doubtfully identified with the
modern Jebel Hadireh, some 5 miles W. of the lake.
No details of the fighting that ensued are given.
The victory, however, of the Israelites was decisive,
although chariots and horses were employed against
them apparently for the first time on Can. soil.
The pursuit was maintained as far as Sidon, and
Misrephoth-maim, perhaps the “boilings’ or
“tumults of the waters,” the later Zarephath on the
coast 8. of the former city (11 8; cf 13 6); and the
valley of Mizpeh must have been one of the many
wadies leading down to the Phoen coast land. The
cities were taken, and their inhabitants put to the
sword; but Hazor alone appears to have been
burnt to the ground (11 11 ff). That the royal city
recovered itself later is clear from the fact that a
king of Hazor was among the oppressors of Israel
in the days of the Judges (Jgs 4). For the time
being, however, the fruit of these victories was a
widespread and much-needed peace. “The land
had rest from war” (11 23).

(9) Allotment of territory —Thus the work of con-
quest, as far as it was effected under J.’s command,
was now ended; but much yet remained to be done
that was left over for future generations. The
ideal limits of Israel’s possession, as set forth by
Jeh in promise to Moses, from the Shihor or Brook
of Egypt (cf 1 Ch 13 5) to Lebanon and the entering
in of Hamath (Nu 34), had not been and indeed
never were reached. In view, however, of J.’s age


1747


(18 1), it was necessary that an allotment of their
inheritance W. of the Jordan should at once be
made to the remaining tribes. Reuben, Gad and
half the tribe of Manasseh had been already pro-
vided for by Moses in Eastern Pal (13 15-32).
Chs 14-21 accordingly contain a detailed account
of the arrangements made by the Israclite leader for
the settlement of the land and trace the bound-
aries of the several tribal possessions. The actual
division appears to have been made on two separate
occasions, and possibly from two distinct centers.
Provisiou was first made for Judah and the children
of Joseph; and between the northern border of the
former tribe, recorded in detail in 16 5-11, and the
inheritance of the sons of Joseph, a tract of land for
the present left unassigned wag later given to the
tribes of Benjamin and Dan. An extra portion
also was promised by J. to the descendants of Joseph
a we ground of their numbers and strength (17
For the 7 tribes that were yet without defined
inheritance a rough survey of the land appears to
have been made, and the unallotted districts were
divided into 7 portions, for which lots were then
east at Shiloh in the presence of the assembled tribes
(chs 18,19). The express mention of Shiloh here
(18 1.10) suggests that the previous division was
carried out at some other place, and if so, probably
at Gilgal, the earlier resting-place of the ark and
the tabernacle. No definite statement, however,
to that effect is made. Benjamin’s portion was
assigned between the territories of Judah and the
children of Joseph (18 11). Simeon received his
inheritance out of the land given to Judah, a part
on the south being taken away on the ground that
the whole was too great for a single tribe (19 1-9).
Zebulun, Issachar, Asher, and Naphtali were estab-
lished in the north (19 10-39). And Dan was
settled on the seacoast by Joppa, with additional
territory in the extreme north, of which they appar-
ently took independent and forcible possession,
beyond the inheritance of the other tribes (19 40-
48; of Jgs 18 27-29). es
(10) Cities of refuge —Finally the 6 cities of
refuge were appointed, 3 on each side of the Jordan,
and the 48 cities of the Levites taken out of the
territories of theseveral tribes (Josh 20,21; cf Nu
35; Dt 4 41-43). The two and a half tribes whose
inheritance lay in Eastern Pal were then dismissed,
their promise of assistance to their brethren having
been fulfilled (ch 22); and an altar was erected by
them on the right bank of the Jordan whose purpose
is explained to be to serve as a standing witness to
the common origin of all the tribes, and to frustrate
any future attempt to cut off those on the E. from
the brotherhood of Israel. On
(11) Final address and death—tIn_a_ closing
assembly of the Israelites at Shechem, J. delivered
to the people his final charge, as Moses had done
before his death, reminding them of their own
wonderful history, and of the promises and claims
of God, and exhorting them to faithful and loyal
obedience in His service (23, 24). A stone also was
set up under the oak in the sacred precinct of Jeh,
. to be a memorial of the renewed covenant between
God and His people (24 26f). Then at the age of
110 the second great leader of Israel died, and was
laid to hig rest within his own inheritance in Tim-
nath-serah (vs 29.30; in Jgs 2 9, Timnath-heres),
in the hill country of Ephraim. The site of his
grave is unknown. Tradition has placed it at
Kefr Haris, 9 miles S. of Nablus or Shechem. But
the localizing by tradition of the burying-place of a
hero or saint is often little more than accidental, nor
can any reliance be placed upon it in this instance.
i .—That the narratives con-
cla SoH Efe ind were of J. rest in the main upon a


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joshua


basis of tradition can hardly be doubted. How far the
detalls have been modified, or a different coloring im-
parted in the course of a long transmission, it is impos-
slble to determine. There is a remarkable similarity or
pee between many of the leading events of J.’s
ife as ruler and captain of Israel and the experiences of
his predecessor Moses, which, apart from any literary
criticism, suggests that the narratives have been drawn
from the same general source, and subjected to the same
conditions of environment and transmission. Thus
both are called to and strengthened for their work by a
special Divine revelation, Moses at Horeb in the burn-
iug hush, J. at Jericho. Both lead the people across
the bed of waters miraculously driven back to afford
them passage. And both at no long interval after the
passage win a notable victory over their adversaries—
a victory ascribed in each case to direct Divine inter-
vention on their behalf, although in different ways.
At the close of their life-work, moreover, both Moses
and J. deliver stirring addresses of appeal and warning
to the assembled Israelites; and hoth are laid in nameless
graves. These all, however, are occurrences perfect!
natural and indeed inevitabie in the position in whic
each found himself. Nor do they afford adequate
grouud for the supposition that the achievements of the
greater leader have been duplicated, or by mistake
attributed to the less. To cross the Jordan and to de-
feat the Canaanite confederacy were as essential to the
a of Israel as the passage of the Red Sea and the
reaking up of the gathering of Amalekite clans; and
no true or sufficient history could have evaded the narra-
tion of these events. The position of Israel also on the
E. of the Jordan about to undertake the invasion and
conquest of the Promised Land as imperatively de-
manded a specially qualified captain and guide, a master-
mind to control the work, as did the oppressed people in
Egypt or the wanderers in the desert. hat J, was not
sO great a man as his predecessor the entire narrative
testifies. Moses, however, must of necessity have had
a successor to take up his unfinished work and to carry
It to completion.


IV. Character and Work of Joshua.—As to the
personal character of J., there is little to be inferred
from the narrative of his campaigns. In this respect
indeed they are singularly colorless. In early life
his loyalty to Moses was conspicuous and unswerv-
ing. As his successor, he seems to have faithfully
acted upon his principles, and in the direction of
the Israelite campaigns to have proved himself a
brave and competent general, as wise in counsel as
he was strong in fight. The putting to death of
captives and the handing over to the sword of the
inhabitants of hostile cities, which the historian so
often records as the consequence of his victories,
must evidently be judged by the customs of the
times, and have perhaps lost nothing in the narra-
tion. They do not in any case justify the attribu-
tion to Joshua of an especially inhumane disposition,
or a delight in slaughter for its own sake. After
the death of Moses he would appear to have been
reluctant to undertake the onerous position and
duty assigned to him through mistrust of his own
ability and lack of self-confidence, and needed more
than once to be encouraged in his work and assured
of Divine support. In the language of his closing
discourse there is apparent a foresight and appre-
ciation of the character and tendencies of the people
who had followed him, which is hardly inferior to
that of Moses himself.

In a real sense also his work was left unfinished
at his death. The settlement of Canaan by the
tribes of Israel within the appointed and promised
limits was never more than partial. The new
colonists failed to enjoy that absolute and undis-
turbed possession of the land to which they had
looked forward; witness the unrest of the period
of the Judges, prolonged and perpetuated through
monarchical times. For all this, however, the
blame cannot justly be laid to the account of J.
Many causes undoubtedly concurred to an issue
which was fatal to the future unity and happiness
and prosperity of Israel. The chief cause, as J.
warned them would be the case, was the persistent
idolatry of the people themselves, their neglect of
duty, and disregard of the commands and claims
of their God. A. 8, Grpen


jose eook of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joshua,


1748


JOSHUA: Son of Jehozadak (Hag 1 1.12.14;
22.4; Zec 3 1.3.6.8.9; 6 11 form [b]) and high
priest in Jerus, called ‘Jeshua” in Ezr-Neh. His
father was among the captives at the fall of Jerus
in 586 BC, and also his grandfather Seraiah, who
ae va to death at Riblah (2 K 26 18 ff; 1 Ch

5).

Joshua appears in Ezr 3 2 with Zerubbabel at
the head of the returned exiles and as leader in the
work of building an altar and reéstablishing sacri-
ficial worship (538 or 537 BC). Ear 3 8 tells of
their laying the foundation of the temple, and in 4
1 ff the two heads of the community refuse to allow
the Samaritans to codperate in the building opera-
tions, with the result that the would-be helpers
became active opponents of the work. Building
then ceased until Haggai and Zechariah in 520
(Har 5; Hag 1 1-11) exhort the community to re-
start work, and the two leaders take the lead (Hag
1 12-15). Thefollowing are, in chronological order,
the prophetic utterances in which J. is spoken of:
(1) Hag 1 1-11; (2) Hag 2 1-9; (8) Zee 1 1-6;
(4) Hag 2 10-19; (5) Hag 2 20-23; (6) the visions
of Zec 1 7—6 8 together with (7) the undated utter-
ance of Zec 6 9-15.

Two of these call for special attention. First, the
vision of a trial in which J. is prosecuted before the

angel of Jeh by Satan (ha-sdtan, “the


1. The adversary”), who is, according to one
Vision of _ view, “not the spirit of evil who ap-
Zec 3:1-10 pears in later Jewish writings; he is


only the officerof justice whose business
is to see that the case against criminals is properly
resented” in the heavenly court of justice (H. P.
Sith OT History, 356); while others regard him
as the enemy of God’s people (cf Orelli, Minor
Prophets, ET, 327). We are not told what the
charge against J.is: some hold him to be tried as
in some way a representative of the people or the
priesthood, and his filthy garments as symbolical
of sin; while others explain the garments as put
on to excite the court’s pity. The adversary is
rebuked by “the angel of Jeh’”’ (read at beginning
of ver 2, ‘‘and the angel of Jeh said,” etc), and J.
is acquitted. He is then ordered to be stripped of
his old clothes and to be arrayed in “rich apparel”
(ver 4), while a “clean turban” (ARVm) is to be
put on his head. Conditional upon his walking in
God’s ways, he is promised the government of the
temple and “‘free access” to God, being placed
among the servants of the “angel of Jeh.”’ J. and
his companions “‘are men that are a sign’’ (ver 8),
ie. a guaranty of the coming of the Messiah; there
is set before J. a stone which is to be inscribed upon,
and the iniquity of the land will be removed, an
event to be followed by peace and plenty (vs 9 f).
In vs 4ff Nowack and Wellhausen (with the LXX
mostly) read, ‘‘And he answered and spake unto those
that stood before him [i.e. his servants] thus: Take the
filthy garments from off him, and clothe him with rich
apparel, [5] and set_a clean turban upon his head. So
they set a clean turban upon his head and clothed him
with clean garments. And the angel of Jeh stood up,
[6] and solemnly exhorted J.,"’ etc. They also omit the
first ‘‘for'’ in ver 8 as a dittography.
Different interpretations are given of the vision:
(1) Some claim to see here a contest between the
civil and religious powers as represented by Zerub-
babel and J. respectively (6 13), and that Zecha-
riah decides for the supremacy of the latter. The
Messiah-King is indeed in Jerus in the person of
Zerubbabel, though as yet uncrowned; but J. is to
be supreme (see G. A. Smith, Jerus, II, 303; H. P.
Smith, OT History, 356f). This explanation is
dependent to a large extent upon 6 9-15, and is
not supported by 3 8. It is difficult to explain ver
2 on this view, for Zerubbabel could also be de-
scribed as a ‘“‘brand plucked out of the fire.’ What


the vision says is that the vindication of J. is a sign
for the coming of Jeh’s ‘servant, the Branch,” a
title that is not given to J. (cf ver 7).

(2) Others maintain that the garments are sym-
bolical of the sins of the predecessors of J., who is
tried for their offences and himself regarded as being
unworthy of the office because he had been brought
up in a foreign and heathen land (so Keil, Orelli).

(3) Hitzig, followed by Nowack (Kleine Prophe-
ten, 325), holds that the idea which lies at the basis
of the vision is that Satan is responsible for the ills
which the community had suffered (cf Job 1, 2).
The people had begun to think that their offerings
were not acceptable to God and that He would not
have pity upon them. There was a feeling among
the most pious ones that God’s righteousness would
not allow of their restoration to their former glory.
This conflict between righteousness and mercy is
decided by silencing the accuser and vindicating J.

Tt is difficult to decide which view, if any, is correct.
“The brand plucked out of the fire'’ seems to point to
God's recognizing that the community, or perhaps the
priestly succession, had almost been exterminated hy
the exile. It reminds us of the oak cf which, after its
felling, the stump remaineth (Isa 6 13), and may per-
haps point to God's pity being excited for the community.
The people, attacked hy their enemies and represented
hy J., are to he restored to their old glory: that act heing
symholized hy the clothing of J. in clean raiment; and
that symbolical act (cf Isa 8 18) is a sign, a guaranty,
of the coming of the Messiah-King. The ritualistic tone
of Mal will then follow naturally after the high place
given here to the high priest. It is noteworthy that the
promise of 3 7 is conditional.

One more point remains, viz. the meaning of the
stone in 39. It has been differently explained as
a jewel in the new king’s crown (Nowack); afounda-
tion stone of the temple, which, however, was already
laid (Hitzig); the chief stone of 47 (Ewald,
Steiner); the Messiah Himself (Keil); the stone in
the high priest’s breastplate (Bredenkamp), and the
stone which served as an altar (Orelli). Commen-
tators tend to regard the words “upon one stone are
seven eyes” as a parenthetical addition character-
istic of the author of Zec 9 ff.

The utterance of Zec 6 9-15 presents to us
some more exiles coming from Babylon with silver

and gold apparently for the temple.
2. Joshua’s According to the present text, Zecha-


Crown, riab is commanded to see that this is
Zec 6: used to make a crown for J. who is to
9-15 be a priest-king. This is taken to mean


that he is to be given the crown that
had been meant for Zerubbabel. But commenta-
tors hold that the text has been altered: that the
context demands the crowning of Zerubbabel—the
Branch of Davidie descent. This view is supported
by ver 13, ‘‘And the counsel of peace shall be be-
tween them both”; and therefore the last clause
of ver 11isomitted. Wellhausen keeps vs 9 and 10,
and then reads: ‘{11] Yea, take of them silver and
gold and make a crown, [12] and say to them: Thus
saith Jeh of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose
name is the Branch, from whose root there will be
a sprout, [13] and he will build the Temple of Jeh,
and he will obtain glory and sit and rule upon his
throne. And Joshua will be a priest on his right
hand, and there will be friendly peace between them
both. [14] The crown shall be,” etc; ver 15 is in-
complete.

It will be objected that this does away with the
idea of a priest-king, an idea found also in Ps 110.
But it seems fairly certain that Ps 110 (see Kirk-
patrick, The Book of Psalms) does not refer to J.,
the point there being that the king referred to was
a priest, although not descended from Aaron, being
a priest after the order of Melchizedek, while here the
point is, if the present text be correct, that a priest
is crowned king. What became of Zerubbabel after
this is not known. See Ed. Meyer, Der Papyrus-


1749


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joshua
Joshua, Book of


fund von Elephantine®, 70 ff, 86 ff. J. is called Jesus
in Sir 49 12. See ZeruBBaBEL; Hacaar; Zucua-
RIAH. Davin Francis Rosperts


JOSHUA, BOOK OF:


I. Trirtie ann AUTHORSHIP
II. Oonrents
1. Invasion and Conqnest of Western Palestine
2. Pee of the Country to the Tribes of
srae.
Historical CHARACTER AND CHRONOLOOY
1. The Book of Josh as History
2. Chronology
IV. Sources or tas Written Narrative
- ReLATION To THE BOOK oF Jos
1. Parallel Narratives
2. Omissions in the History
VI. Puace or Josy in THe Hen Canon


IIT.


VII. Greex AND OTHER ANCIENT VERSIONS
1. The Greek
2. Other Ancient Versions
VIII. Revroious Purross anp TsacHina


Literature


L Title and Authorship.—The name Joshua
signifies “Jeh is deliverance” or “salvation” (see
JosHua). The Gr form of the name is Jesus
(‘Inoots, Tésovis, Acts 7 45; He 48). In later
Jewish history the name appears to have become
popular, and is even found with a local significance,
as the designation of a small town in Southern
Pal (Y1W2, yéshue*, Neh 11 26). The use of the
title by the Jews to denote the Book of Josh did
not imply a belief that the book was actually written
or dictated by him; or even that the narratives
themselves were in substance derived from him,
and owed their authenticity and reliability to his
sanction and control. In the earliest Jewish lit-
erature the association of a name with a book was
not intended in any case to indicate authorship.
And the Book of Josh is no exception to the rule
that such early writings, esp. when their contents
are of a historical nature, are usually anonymous.
The title is intended to describe, not authorship,
but theme; and to represent that the life and deeds
of Joshua form the main subject with which the
book is concerned.

I, Contents.—With regard to the contents of
Josh, it will be found to consist of two well-marked
divisions, in the first of which (chs 1-12) are nar-
rated the invasion and gradual conquest under the
command of J. of the land on the W. of the Jordan;
while the 2d part describes in detail the allotment
of the country to the several tribes with the bound-
aries of their territories, and concludes with a brief
notice of the death and burial of J. himself.

Ch 1: Renewal of the Divine promise to J. and ex-
hortation to fearlessness and courage (vs 1-9); direc-

tions to the people to prepare for the pas-


sage of the river, and a reminder to the


1, Invasion eastern tribes (Reuben, Gad, and half


and Con- Manasseh) of the condition under which
quest of they held their possession beyond, Jordan:
Western the renewal by these tribes of their pledge

5 of loyalty to Moses’ successor (vs 10-18).
Palestine Ch 2: The sending of the two spies from


Shittim and their escape from Jericho
through the stratagem of Rahab.

Ch 3: The passage of Jordan by the people over
against Jericho, the priests bearing the ark, and standin
in the dry bed of the river until all the people had crosse
over. ;

Ch 4: Erection of 12 memorial stones on the other
side of Jordan, where the people encamped after the
passage of the river (vs 1-14); the priests with the Ark
of the Covenant ascend in their turn from ont of the
river-bed, and the waters return into their wonted course

vs 15-24). :

: Ch 5: iaeth excited among the kings on the W. of
Jordan by the news of the successful crossing of the
river (ver_1); circumcision of the people at Gilgal (vs
2-9); celebration of the Passover at Gilgal in the plains
of Jericho (vs 10.11); cessation of the supply of the
manna (ver 12); appearance to J. of the captain of the
Lord's host (vs 13-15). : ‘

Ch 6: Hy ona given to J. for the siege and taking
of Jericho (vs 1-5); capture of the city, which is de-
stroyed by fire, Rahab and her household alone being
saved (vs 6-25); a curse is pronounced on the man who
rebuilds Jericho (ver 26).


Cbh7: The crime and punishment of Achan, who stole
for himself part of the spoil of the captured city (vs 1.
16-26); incidentally his sin ts the cause of a disastrous
defeat before Ai (vs 2-12).

Ch 8: The taking of Al Ee a stratagem, destruction
of the city, and death of its king (vs 1-29); erection of
an altar on Mt. Ebal, and reading of the Law before the
assembled people (vs 30-35).

Ch 9: atherlng of the peoples of Pal to oppose J.
(vs 1-2); a covenant of peace made with the Gibeonites,
who represent themselves as strangers from afar country
(vs 3-26); they are, however, reduced to a condition of
servitude (ver 27).

Ch 10: Combination of 5 kings of the Amorites to
punish the inhabitants of Gibeon for their defection, and
defeat and rout of the kings by J. at Beth-horon (vs
1-14); return of the Israelites to Gilgal (ver 15); cap-
ture and death by hanging of the 5 kings at Makkedah
(vs 16-27); taking and destruction of Makkedah (ver
28), Libnah (vs 29.30), Lachish (vs 31.32), Gezer aS
33), Eglon (vs 34.35), Hebron (vs 36.37), Debir (vs
38.39), and summarily all the land, defined as from
Kadesh-barnea unto Gaza, and as far N.
(40-42); return to Gua (ver 43).

Ch 11: Defeat of Jabin, king of Hazor, and allied
kings at the waters of Merom (vs 1-9); destruction of
ent A 10-15); reiterated summary of J.'s conquests

‘vs_ 16-23).

Ch 12: Final summary of the Israelite conquests in
Canaan, of Sihon and Og on the E. of the Jordan under
the Jeadersnip et Moses (vs 1-6); of 31 kings and their
cities on the W. of the river under J. (vs 7-24).

Ch 18: Command to J. to allot the land on the W. of
the Jordan, even that which was still unsubdued, to the

nine and a half tribes (vs 1-7); recapitula-
2. Ailot-


tion of the inheritance given by Moses
ment of the border of Renben (vs 15-23), of Gad (vs


as Gibcon


on the E. of the river (vs 8-13.32); the


Country to 24-28), of the half-tribe of Manasseh (vs

the Tribes 29-31):, the tribe of Levi alone received no
landed inheritance (vs 14.33).

of Israel


Ch 14: Renewed statement of the Bo
ciple on which the division of the land had
been made (vs 1-5); Hebron given to Caleb for his
inheritance (vs 6-15).

Ch 15. The inheritance of Judah, and the boundaries
of his territory (vs 1-20), including that of Caleb (vs 13-
19); enumeration of the cities of Judah (vs 21-63).

Ch 16: Inheritance of the sons of Joseph (vs 1-4); the
border of Ephraim (vs 5-10).

Ch 17: Inheritance of Manasseh and the border of the
half-tribe on the W. of the Jordan (vs 1-13); complaint
of the sons of Joseph of the insufficiency of their inherit-
ance, and grant to them by J. of an extension of terri-
tory (vs 14-18). ae

Ch 18: The land yet nnsubdued divided by lot into 7
portions for the remaining 7 tribes (vs 1-10); inheritance
of the sons of Benjamin and the border of their territory
(vs 11-20); enumeration of their cities (vs 21-28).

Ch 19: Inheritance of Simeon and his border (vs 1-9);
of Zebulun and his border (vs 10-16); of Issachar and his
border (vs 17-23); of Asher and his border (vs_ 24-31);
of Naphtali and his border (vs 32-39); and of Dan and
his border (vs 40-48); inheritance of Joshua (vs 49.50);
concluding statement (ver 51). |

Ch 20: Cities of Refuge appointed, three on each side
ofthe Jordan. | ‘ i ‘i

ChQ1: 48 cities with their suburbs given to the Levites
ont of the territories of the several tribes (vs 1-41); the
people had rest in the land, their enemies being subdued,
according to the Divine promiee (vs 43-45). |, =

Ch 22: Dismissal of the eastern tribes to their inherit-
ance, their duty to their brethren having been fulfilled
(vs 1-9); the erection by them of a great altar by the
side of the Jordan aroused the suspicion of the western
tribes, who feared that they intended to separate them-
selves from the common cause (vs 10-20); their reply
that the altar is to serve the purpose of a witness between
themselves and their brethren (vs 21-34). z

Ch 23: J.’s address of encouragement and warning to


the people. ;
ch 24: Second address of J., recalling to the parle
their history, and the Divine interventions on their be-
half (ve 1-23); the people’s pledge of loyalty to the Lord,
and formal covenant in Shechem (vs 24.25); the book
of the law of God is committed to writing, and a stone is
erected as a permanent memorial (vs 26-28); death and
burial of J. (vs 29-31); burial in Shechem of the bones
of Joseph, brought from Egypt (ver 32); death and
burial of Eleazar, son of Aaron (ver 33).


UI. Historical Character and Chronology.—As


a historical narrative, therefore, detailing the steps
en to secure the conquest and .


1. The possession of Canaan, Josh is incom-
Book of plete and ismarked by many omissions,
Josh as and in some instances at least includes
History phrases or expressions which seem to


imply the existence of parallel or even
divergent accounts of the same event, e.g. in the


Joshua, Book of
Josiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1750


passage of the Jordan and the erection of memorial
stones (chs 3, 4), the summary of the conquests
of Joshua (10 40-43; 11 16-23), or the references
to Moses’ victories over the Amorite kings on the
E. of the Jordan.


This last fact suggests, what is in itself sufficiently
prohahle, that the writer or compiler of the book made nse
of previously existing records or narratives, not necessar-
ily in every instance written, hut prohably also oral and
traditional, upon which he relied and out of which by
means of excerpts with modifications and omissions, the
resultant history was composed. The incomplete and
defective character of the book therefore, considered
merely as a history of the conquest of Western Pal and
its allotment among the new settlers, would seem to
indicate that the ‘‘sources"' available for the writer's use
were fragmentary also in their nature, and did not pre-
sent a complete view either of the life of J. or of the ex-
periences of Israel while under his direction.


Within the limits of the book itself, moreover,
notifications of chronological sequence, or of the
length of time occupied in the various
2. Chro- campaigns, are almost entirely want-
nology ing. Almost the only references to
date or period are the statements
that Joshua himself was 110 years old at the
time of his death (24 29), and that his wars
lasted ‘‘a long time” (11 18; cf 23 1). Caleb also,
the son of Jephunneh, companion of J. in the
mission of the spies from Kadesh-barnea, describes
himself as 85 years old, when he receives Hebron
as hisinheritance (14 10; cf 16 13 ff); the inference
would be, assuming 40 years for the wanderings in
the desert, that 5 years had then elapsed since the
passage of the Jordan ‘‘on the tenth day of the first
month” (4 19). No indication, however, is given
of the chronological relation of this event to the
rest of the history; and 5 years would be too short
a period for the conquest of Pal, if it is to be under-
stood that the whole was carried out in consecutive
campaigns under the immediate command of J.
himself. On the other hand, “very much land”
remained still unsubdued at his death (13 1).
Christian tradition seems to have assumed that J.
was about the same age as Caleb, although no
definite statement to that effect is made in the book
itself; and that, therefore, a quarter of a century,
more or less, elapsed between the settlement of the
latter at Hebron and Joshua’s death (14 10; 24
29). The entire period from the crossing of the
Jordan would then be reckoned at from 28 to 30
years.


IV. Sources of the Written Narrative.—The attempt
to define the ‘‘sources’’ of Josh as it now exists, and to
disentangle them one from another, presents consider-
ahly more difficulty than is to be encountered for the
most part in the Pent. The distinguishing criteria upon
which scholars rely and which have led serious students
of the book to conclude that there may be traced here
also the use of the same ‘‘documents”’ or ‘“‘ documentary
sources’’ as are to be found in the Pent, are essentially
the same. Existing and traditional accounts, however,
have heen used apparently with greater freedom, and
the writer has allowed himself a fuller liberty of adapta-
tion and combination, while the personal element has
been permitted wider scope in molding the resultant
form which the composition should take. For the most
part, therefore, the hroad line of distinction hetween the
various “‘sources’’ which have been utilized may easily
be discerned on the ground of their characteristic traits,
in style, vocabulary or general conception; in regard to
detail, however, the peace point at which one ‘‘source”’
has been abandoned for another, or the writer himself
has supplied deficiencies and bridged over gaps, there is
frequent uncertainty, and the evidence available is in-
sufficient to justify an absolute conclusion. The fusion
of material has been more complete than in the 5 hooks
of the law, perhaps because the latter were hedged about
with a more reverential regard for the letter, and at
an earlier period attained the standing of canonicity.

_A, detailed analysis of the sources as they have been
distinguished and related to one another by scholars is
here unnecessary. A complete discussion of the snb-
ject will be found in Dr. Driver's LOTS, 105 ff, in other
Introductions, or in the Comms. on Josh. Not seldom
in the ultimate detail the distinctions are precarious,
and there are differences of opinion among scholars
themselves as to the precise limit or limits of the use made


of any given source, or at what point the dividing line
should be drawn. It is only in a hroad and general
sense that in Josh esp. the literary theory of the use of
‘‘documents,’’ as generally understood and as inter-
preted in the case of the Pent, can be shown to be well
founded. In itself, however, such a theory is eminently
reasonable, and is both in harmony with the general
usage and methods of ancient composition, and affords
ground for additional confidence in the good faith and
reliability of the narrative as a whole.


V. Relation to the Book of Jgs.—A comparison
moreover of the history recorded in Josh with
the brief || account in Jgs furnishes
1. Parallel ground for believing that a detailed or
Narratives chronological narrative was not con-
templated by the writer or writers
themselves. The introductory vs of Jgs (1 1—
2 5) are in part a summary of incidents recorded
in Josh, and in part supply new details or present
a different view of the whole. The original notices
that are added relate almost entirely to the invasion
and conquest of Southern Pal by the united or
allied tribes of Judah and Simeon and the destruc-
tion of Bethel by the “house of Joseph.” The
action of the remaining tribes is narrated in a few
words, the brief record closing in each case with a
reference to the condition of servitude to which the
original inhabitants of the land were reduced. And
the general scheme of the invasion as there repre-
sented is apparently that of a series of disconnected
raids or campaigns undertaken by the several
tribes independently, each having for its object the
subjection of the territory assigned to the mdivid-
ual tribe. A general and comprehensive plan of
conquest under the supreme leadership of Joshua ap-
pears to be entirely wanting. In detail, however, the
only real inconsistency between the two narratives
would appear to be that in Jgs (1 21) the failure to
expel the Jebusites from Jerus is laid to the account
of the Benjamites, while in Josh (15 63) it is charged
against the children of Judah. The difficulties in
the way of the formation of a clear conception of
the incidents attending the capture of Jerus are
perhaps insuperable upon any hypothesis; and the
variation of the tribal name in the two texts may be
no more than acopyist’serror. |
A perhaps more striking omission in both narra-
tives is the absence of any reference to the conquest
of Central Pal. The narrative of the
2. Omis- overthrow of Bethel and Ai (6 1—8
sions in the 29) is followed immediately by the
History record, of the building of an altar on
Mt. Ebal and the recitation of the Law
before the people of Israel assembled in front of Mts.
Ebal and Gerizim (8 30ff). Joshua then turns
aside to defeat at Beth-horon the combination of
the Amorite kings, and completes the conquest of
the southern country as far south as Kadesh-barnea
(10 41). Immediately thereafter he is engaged
in overthrowing a confederacy in the far north
(11 1-15), a work which clearly could not have
been undertaken or successfully accomplished,
unless the central region had been already subdued;
but of its reduction no account is given. It has
been supposed that the silence of the narrator is
an indication that at the period of the invasion this
district was in the occupation of tribes friendly or
even related to the Israelite clans; and in support
of the conjecture reference has been made to the
mention of Israel on the stele of Merenptah, the
Egyp ruler in whose reign, according to the most
probable view, the exodus took place. In this
record the nation or a part thereof is regarded
as already settled in Pal at a date earlier by half
a century than their appearance under Moses and
Joshua on the borders of the Promised Land. The
explanation is possible, but perhaps hardly probable.
The defects of the historical record are irremediable
at this distance of time, and it must be acknowl-


1751


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA aa Book of


edged that with the available material no complete
and consistent narrative of the events of the Israel-
ite conquest of Pal can be constructed.


VI. Place of Josh in the Heb Canon.—In the
Heb Canon Josh is the first in order of the propheti-
cal books, and the first of the group of 4, viz. Josh
Jgs, S, K, which form the ‘Earlier Prophets’!
{nebhi'tm rishonim). These books, the contents
of which are history, not prophecy in the ordinary
sense of the term, were assigned by the Jews to the
2d division of their sacred Canon, and found a place
by the side of the great writings of the ‘Later
Prophets” (n‘bhi’im ‘ahdrénim). This position
was given to them in part perhaps because they
were believed to have been written or composed by
prophets, but mainly because Jewish history was
regarded as in purpose and intent “prophetic,”
being directed and presided over by Jeh Himself,
and conveying direct spiritual instruction and
example. The Canon of the Law, moreover, was
already closed; and however patent and striking
might be the resemblance of Josh in style and
method of composition to the books of the Pent,
it was impossible to admit it therein, or to give a
place within the Torah, a group of writings which
were regarded as of Mosaic authorship, to a narra-
tive of events which occurred after Moses’ death.
Later criticism reviewed and reversed the verdict
as to the true character of the book. In every
Canon except the Heb, its historical nature was
recognized, and the work was classified accordingly.
Modern criticism has gone further, and, with in-
creasing consciousness of its close literary relation-
ship to the books of the Law, has united it
with them in a Hexateuch, or even under the
more comprehensive title of Octateuch combines
together the books of Jgs and Ruth with the pre-
ceding six on the ground of similarity of origin
and style.


VI. Greek and Other Ancient Versions.—In
the ancient VSS of Josh there is not much that is
of interest. The Gr tr bears witness
1. The to a Heb original differing little from
Greek the MT. In their renderings, how-
ever, and general treatment of the
Heb text, the translators seem to have felt them-
selves at liberty to take up a position of greater
independence and freedom than in dealing with the
5 books of the Law. Probably also the rendering
of Josh into Gr is not to be ascribed to the same
authors as the tr of the Pent. While faithful to the
Heb, it is less constantly and exactly literal, and
contains many slight variations, the most important
of which are found in the last 6 chs.


Ch 19: The LXX transposes vs 47.48, and, omitting
the first clause of ver 47, refers the whole to the sons of
Judah, without mention of Dan; it further adds vs 47a.
48a on the relation between the Amorites and Ephraim,
and the Amorites and the Danites respectively. With
ver 47a cf 16 10 and Jgs 1 29, and with ver 48a cf 19
47 (Heb) and Jgs 1 34.

Ch 20: Vs 4-6 inclusive are omitted in B, except a
clause from ver 6; A, however, inserts them infull. Cf
Driver, LOT8, 112, who, on the ground of their Deuter-
onomic tone, regards it as probable that the verses are
an addition to P, and therefore did not form part of the
original text as-used hy the Gr translators.

Ch 21: Vs 36.37, which give the names of the Levitical
cities in Judah, are omitted in the Heh printed text
although found in many Heb MSS. _ Four vs also are
added after ver 42, the first three of which repeat 19 50f,
and the last is a reminiscence of § 3. .

Ch 24: Vs 29f which narrate the death and burial of
J. are placed in the Gr text after ver 31; and a verse is
inserted after ver 30 recording that the stone knives
used for the purposes of the circumcision (5 2 ff) were
buried with Joshua in his tomb (cf 21 42d). After ver
33 also two new verses appear, apparently a miscellany
from Jgs 2 6.11-15: 3 7.12.14, with a statement of the
death and burial of Phinehas, son and successor of Fleazar,
of the idolatrous worship by the children of Israel of
Astarte and Ashtaroth, and the oppression under Eglon,
king of Moab.


London.


The other VSS, with the exception of Jerome’s tr from
the Heb, are secondary, derived mediately through the
Gr. The Old Lat is contained in a manu-


2. Other script at Lyons, Cod. Lugdunensis, which
Ancient is referred to the 6th cent. Of the Coptic

1e . version only small portions are extant;
Versions they have been published by G. Maspero,


Mémoires dela mission archéologique fran-
gates, tom. VI, fase. 1, le Caire, 1892,and elsewhere. A
am tr also is known, for parts of which at least an early
origin and an independent derivation from the Heb have
been claimed. The ancient character of the version, how-
ever, is contested, and it has been shown that the argu-
ments ou which reliance was placed are insufficient to
justify the conclusions drawn. The tr appears to be in
reality of quite recent date, and to have been made
origlnally from the Arab., perhaps in part compared with
and corrected by the MT. The subject was fully and
conclusively discussed hy Dr. Yehuda of Berlin, at the
Orlental Congress in the summer of 1908, and in a sepa-
rate pompales subsequently published. It was even
stated that the author of the version was still living, and
his name was given. Dr. Gaster, the original discoverer
of the Sam M§, in various articles and letters maintains
his contentlon that the tr is really antique, and therefore
of great value, but he has failed to convince scholars.
(See M. Gaster in JRAS [1908], 795 ff, 1148 ff; E. N.
Adler, ib, 1143 ff. The text of the MS was published
by Dr. Gaster in ZDMG [1908], 209 ff, and a specimen
ch with Eng. rendering and notesin PSBA, XX XI (1909),
115 ff, 149 ff.)

VUI. Religious Purpose and Teaching.—As a
whole, then, Josh is dominated by the same reli-
gious and hortatory purpose as the earlier writings
of the Pent; and in this respect as well asin anthor-
ship and structure the classification which assigns
to it a place by the side of the 5 books of Moses and
gives to the whole the title of Hexateuch is not un-
justified. The author or authors had in view not
merely the narration of incident, nor the record of
events in the past history of their people of which
they judged it desirable that a correct account
should be preserved, but they endeavored in all to
suhserve a practical and religious aim. The his-
tory is not for its own sake, or for the sake of the
literal facts which it enshrines, but for the sake of
the moral and spiritual lessons which may be eluci-
dated therein, and enforced from its teaching. The
Divine leading in history is the first thought with
the writer. And the record of Israel’s past presents
itself as of interest to him, not because it is a record
of events that actually happened, but because he
sees in it the ever-present guidance and overruling
determination of God, and would draw from it
instruction and warning for the men of his own time
and for those that come after him. Not the history
itself, but the meaning and interpretation of the
history are of value. Its importance lies in the
illustrations it affords of the controlling working of
a Divine Ruler who is faithful to His promises,
loving righteousness and hating iniquity, and sway-
ing the destinies of men in truth. Thus the selection
of materials, and the form and arrangement of the
book are determined by a definite aim: to set forth
and enforce moral lessons, and to exhibit Israel’s
past as the working out of a Divine purpose which
has chosen the nation to be the recipient of the Di-
vine favor, and the instrument for the carrying
forward of His purposes upon earth.

Litgeraturn.—aA complete bibliography of the lit. up
to date will be found in the dictionaries, s.v. ‘‘ Joshua,’’
DB?, 1893, HDB, II, 1899, EB, II, 1901; cf W. H. Ben-
nett, '' The Book of Josh,"’in SBOT, Leipzig, 1895; W.G.
Blaikie, ‘‘Joshua,’’ in Ezpositor’s Bible, 1893; A. Dill-
mann, Nu, Dt u. Josua?, Leipzig, 1886; H. Holzinger,
"Das Buch Josua,” in Kurzer Hand-Comm. zum AT, Tii-
hingen, 1901; C. Steuernagel, ‘‘Josua,’’ in Nowack’s
Handcommentar zum AT, 1899; S. Oettli, ‘’ Dt, Josua u.
Richter,’’ in Kurzgef.Komm, Miinchen, 1893; W. J. Deane,
Joshua, His Life and Times, in ''Men of the Bible Series,”


es A A. 8. GepEn
JOSIAH, jé-si'a (PUN, yo’shiyaha, “Jeh
supports him”; "Iwoelas, Jéseias; AV Josias [q.v.]):
J. Sources ror H1s Lirt ann Times
1. Annalistic
2. Prophetic
3. Memorial


Josiah


Jot


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1752


Ii. Traits or His Reren
1. Situation at the Beginning
2. Finding of the Law
3. The Great Reform
4. Disaster at Megiddo
The name given 6 years before the death of his
grandfather Manasseh resumes the Judaic custom,
suspended in the case of that king and Amon, of
compounding royal names with that of Jeh; per-
haps a hint of the time, when, according to the
Chronicler, Manasseh realized Jeh’s claim on his
realm (2 Ch 33 12.13). One of the most eminent
of the kings of Judah; came to the throne at 8 years
of age and reigned c 637-608 BC.
I. Sources for His Life and Times.—The earliest
history (2 K 22 1—23 30) is dispassionate in tone,
betraying its prophetic feeling, how-
1. Annal- ever, in its acknowledgment of Jeh’s
istic wraith, still menacing in spite of Jo-
siah’s unique piety (2 K 23 26.27).
For “‘the rest of his acts” (to which the rather bald
account of his death is relegated as a kind of appen-
dix), it refers to “‘the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Judah.” In the later history (2 Ch 34,
36), written from the developed ecclesiastical pomt
of view, he is considerably idealized: the festal and
ceremonial aspects of his reform are more fully de-
tailed, and the story of his campaign and death is
more sympathetically told in the sense of it as a
great national calamity. oes.
For the spiritual atmosphere of his time and the
prophetic consciousness of a day of wrath impend-
ing, the prophet Zephaniah is illu-
2. Prophetic minating, esp. for the first half of the
reign. Jeremiah, born at about the
same time as J., began prophesying in the 13th year
of the reign (Jer 1 2). His intimate connection
with state affairs, however, belongs to succeeding
reigns; but some prophecies of his, notably those
revealing his attitude toward the temple misuse
(7 1-15) and toward the Deuteronomic reform
(11 1-13), throw much light on the prevailing con-
ditions. Nahum, writing near the end of the reign,
and from an outlying village, is less concerned with
home affairs than with the approaching end of
Nineveh (fell 606 BC).
In Jesus Sirach’s Praise of Famous Men there is
a passage (Sir 49 1-4), wholly eulogistic of J., on
the score that ‘in the days of wicked
3. Memorial men he made godliness to prevail”;
and along with David and Hezekiah he
is one of the three who alone did not ‘‘commit tres-
pass.” Jeremiah’slamentation for J., mentioned in
2 Ch 85 25, is not preserved to us; instead there
is only an allusion (Jer 22 10), naming his successor
Shallum (Jehoahaz) as a fitter subject. The lamen-
tations which became ‘an ordinance in Israel” (2
Ch 365 25) are not to be referred to the Scripture
book of that name; which has no hint of J., unless
Lam 4 20 be so construed.
I. Traits of His Reign.—Until his 18th year 2 K
gives no events of J.’s reign; 2 Ch, however, relates
that in his 8th year (at 16 years of
1. Situation age) he “began to seek after the God
at Begin- of David his father,’ and that in the
ning 12th year he began the purgation of
Judah and Jerus. The Chronicler
may be mistaken in putting the completion of this
work before the finding of the law (2 Ch 34 8),
but of his disposition and of his beginning without
documentary warrant on a work which Hezekiah
had attempted before him, there is no reason to
doubt. And indeed various influences were work-
ing together to make his procedure natural. The
staunch loyalty to the Davidic house, as empha-
sized by the popular movement which seated him
(see under Amon), would in itself be an influence to
turn his mind to the God of David his father.


Manassech’s all-embracing idolatry had indeed
reduced his aristocracy to a people “settled on their
lees, that say in their heart, Jeh will not do good,
neither will he do evil’? (Zeph 1 12); but these
represented merely the inertia, not the intelligence,
of the people. Over against them is to be reckoned
the spiritually-minded “remnant” with which since
Isaiah the prophets had been working; a remnant
now seasoned by persecution, and already com-
mitted to the virtue of meekness (Zeph 2 3) and
the willing acceptance of affliction as their appointed
lot, as against the arrogance of the “‘prondly exult-
ing ones” (Zeph 3 11-13). To such courage and
hope the redeeming element of Israel had grown in
the midst of a blatant infidelity and worldliness.
Nor were they so unconnected with the established
order as formerly. The ministers of the temple-
service, if not subjected to persecution, had been
ranked on a level with devotees of other cults, and
so had a common cause which would work to unite
the sympathies of priests and prophets in one
loyalty to Jeh. All this is adduced as indicating
how the better elements of the nation were ripen-
ing for a forward step in enlightened religious
progress.
The providential moment arrived when in the
18th year of his reign J. sent Shaphan the scribe
to the temple to arrange with Hilkiah
2. Finding the high priest for the prescribed
of the Law temple repairs. On giving his account
of the funds for that purpose, Hilkiah
also delivered to Shaphan a book which he had
found in the “house of Jeh,” that is, in the temple
proper; which book, when Shaphan read there-
from to the king, caused the latter to rend his robe
in dismay and consternation. It was a book in
which were commands of Jeh that had long been
unknown or disregarded, and along with these,
fearful curses to follow the imfraction of them.
Such a discovery could not be treated lightly, as
one might spurn a prophet or priest; nay, 1t imme-
diately called the authority of the prophet into
requisition. The king sent a deputation to Huldah
the prophetess for her verdict on the book; and she,
whether aware of its contents or not, assured him
that the curses were valid, and that for impieties
against which the prophets continually warned, all
the woes written in the book were impending. One
of the most voluminous discussions of Bib. scholar-
ship has centered round the question what this
book was, what its origin, and how it came there
in the temple. The Chronicler says roundly it was
“the book of the law of Jeb by the hand of Moses.”
That it was from the nation’s great first. prophet
and lawgiver was the implicit belief of the king and
all his contemporaries. There can be little doubt,
judging from the nature of the reforms it elicited
aud the fact that the curses it contained are still
extant, that this “book of the law’’ was virtually
identical with our Book of Dt. But is this the work
of Moses, or the product of a later literary activity?
In answer, it is fair to say that it is so true to the
soundest interpretation of the spirit and power of
Moses that there need be no hesitation in calling
it genuinely Mosaic, whatever adaptations and
supplementations its laws received after his time.
Its highly developed style, however, and its imper-
feet conformity to the nomadic conditions of Moses’
time, make so remote an origin of its present form
very doubtful. It comes to us written with the
matured skill of Israel’s literary prime, in a time
too when, as we know (see under HezEKIAH), men
of letters were keenly interested in rescuing and
putting to present use the literary treasures of their
past. As to how it came to be left in the temple at
a tme so much before its discovery that none
questioned its being what it purported to be, each


1753


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Josiah
Jot


scholar must answer for himself, Some have con-
jectured that it may have been a product of Solo-
mon’s time, and deposited, according ta immemorial
custom in temple-building, in the foundation of
Soalomon’s temple, where it was found when certain
ruins made repairs necessary. To the present
writer it seems likelier that it was one of the literary
products of Hezekiah’s time, compiled from scat-
tered statutes, precedents, and customs long in the
keeping—or neglect—of priests and judges, put
inte the attractive form of oratory, and left for its
providential moment. See further, DrutnRoNnomy;
WRITING.

J.’s immediate procedure was to call to the temple
a representative assemblage—elders, prophets,


priests, populace—and to read to
3. The them this “book of the covenant”
Great (2 K 23 2). Then he made a solemn
Reform covenant before Jeh to obey it, and


all the people stood to the covenant.

So, perhaps for the first time, the people of Judah
and Jerus had for their guidance not only the case
decisions of judges and priests, nor only the emer-
gency warnings and piedictions of prophets, but
a written and accessible document, covering in a
large and liberal way the duties of their civic, social
and religious life. One of the most momentous
productions of all history, the book became the
constitution of the Jewish race; nor were its noble
provisions superseded when, centuries later, the
tethers of race were broken and a Christian civiliza-
tion came into its heritage. But the book that was
destined to have so large a significance in all coming
history had its immediate siguificance too, and never
had this been so pressing. J.’s consternation arose
from the sense of how much of the nation’s cbvious
duty had been left undone and unregarded. First
of all, they had through heedless years and ages
drifted into a medley of religious ideas and customs
which had accumulated until all this lumber of
Manasseh’s idolatry was upon them. Hezekiah
had tried to clear away some of its most crude and
superstitious elements (see under Hezexran), but
e was handicapped by the lack of its clear issue and
objective, which now this book supplied. Zepha-
niah too was showing what Jeh’s will was (Zeph 1
2-6); there must be a clean sweep of the debasing
and obscuring cults, and the purgation must be
done to stay. So J.’s first reforming step was to
break up the high places, the numerous centers of
the evil, to destroy the symbols and utensils of the
idolatrous shrines and rites, and to defile them past
resuscitation. His zeal did not stop with Jerus and
Judah; he went on to Bethel, which had been the
chief sanctuary of the now defunct Northern King-
dom, and in his work here was recognized the ful-
filment of an old prophecy dating from the time of
its first king (2 K 23 17; ef 1 K 13 1.2). This
necessitated the concentration of public worship
in the temple at Jerus, and in Dt was found the
warrant for this, in the prescript, natural to Moses’
point of view, that the worship of Israel must have
a single center as it had in the wilderness. From
this negative procedure he went on to the positive
measure of reviving the festival services inseparable
from a religion requiring pilgrimage, instituting
a grand Passover on a scale unheard of since the
time of the Judges (2 K 23 21.22), a feature of his
reform on which the Chronicler dwells with peculiar
zest (2 Ch 36 1-15). Thus both in the idolatries
they must abolish and in the organized worship that
they must maintain, the people were committed
to a definite and documented issue; this it was
which made J.’s reform so momentous. That the
reform seemed after J.’s untimely death to have
been merely outward, is what might reasonahly be
expected from the inveteracy of the unspirituality


that it must encountcr. Jeremiah had small faith
in its saving power against the stubborn perversity
of the people (Jer 11 1-14); and the historian of
2 K intimates that more than the piety of a zealous
king was needed to turn away the stern decree of
Jeh’s anger (2 K 23 26.27). In spite of all hard-
ness and apostasy, however, the nation that had
once “stood to the covenant” of Dt could never
again be at heart the nation it was before.

Ardent and pious as he was, there seems to have
been a lack of balance in J.’s character. His ex-

treme dismay and dread of the curse
4. Disaster pronounced on the realm’s neglect of
at Megiddo the law seems to have been followed,
after his great reform had seemed to

set things right, by an excess of confidence in Jeh’s
restored favor which went beyond sound wisdom,
and amounted to presumption. The power of
Assyria was weakening, and Pharaoh-necoh of
Egypt, ambitious to secure control of Mesapotamia,
started on the campaign in which he was eventually
te suffer defeat at Carchemish. J., whose reform-
ing zeal had already achieved success in Northern
Israel, apparently cherished inordinate dreams of
invincibility in Jeh’s name, and went forth with a
little army to withstand the Egyp monarch on his
march through the northern provinces. At the
first onset he was killed, and his expedition came to
nothing. In his untimely death the fervid hopes
of the picus received a set-back which was long
lamented as one of the cardinal disasters of Israel.
It was a sore calamity, but also a stern education.
Israel must learn not only the enthusiasm but alsa
the prudence and wisdom of its new-found faith.

(2) A contemporary of Zechariah (Zee 6 10),
at whose house in Jerus the prophet met some re-
turned Jews from Babylon.

Joun FRANKLIN GENUNG

JOSIAS, jé-si’as (TR 'loctas, Jésias; WH 'Ie-
oelas, J dseias):

(1) Gr form in AV of Josiah (Mt 1 10.11; ef
1 Esd 1; Bar 1 8), king of Judah.

(2) In1 Esd 8 33 AV for JzEsras (q.v.).


OSIBIAH, jos-i-hi'a.
J a]


JOSIPHIAH, jos-i-fi'a (MEBON, ydsiphyah,
“Jeh adds’): Found in Ezr 8 10, where MT is
“and of the sons of ... . Shelomith the son of
Josiphiah.” With the help of LXX A and 1 Esd
8 36, the name “Bani” (which is the same in the
unpointed text as ‘‘the sons of” and was omitted
through haplography) can be supplied above be-
fore ‘“‘Shelomith.” J. is thus the father of Shelo-
mith, one of Ezra’s companions. 1 Esd 8 36 has
‘Josaphias.””


JOT, jot: “Jot” (RV, later edd of AV) is a cor-
ruption of tote (early edd of AV, Geneva, Rheims,
Bishops’—pronounced i-d’te), an Eng. translitera-
tion of lara, iota, the 9th letter of the Gr alphabet
(Mt 6 18 ||). “Iota,” in turn, is the nearest Gr
equivalent for the Heb yadh (7), the smallest letter
of the Heb alphabet, in NT times being little larger
than an Eng. accent ('). The tittle (q.v.) is the
smallest part of a letter (not part of a 7, however).
Consequently, thinking of the law as written out, the
sense of Mt 6 17, is: ‘‘From this code, so written,
not the smallest letter nor part of a letter—not an ‘i’
nor the crossing, of a ‘t’—shall be erased until all
things come to pass.” (For the meaning, see Law.)
The reference is to the synagogue rolls, which were
written in Heb, so that the passage has no bearing
ou the language used by Christ. For the form of
the ‘‘jot,” cf the tables in HDB, art. “Alphabet,”
more fully in Chwolson, Corp. Inscr. Heb. (1882).
See Trrrie. Burton Scorr Easton


See JosHrprag.


Peebad
ozabad


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1754


JOTAPATA, jé-tap’a-ta (BJ, III, ili, 7). See


JoTBATHAH.


JOTBAH, jot’ba (7307, yotbah, “pleasantness”’):
The home of Meshullemeth, the mother of King
Amon, daughter of Haruz (2 K 21 19). It may
be the same as JoTBATHAH (q.v.). :


JOTBATHAH, jot’ba-tha (IN20", yoibathah): A
desert camp of the Israelites between Hor-hagidgad
and Abronah (Nu 33 33.34; Dt 107). It was
“a land of brooks of water” (Dt 10 7). Site is
unknown. See WANDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


JOTHAM, jo’tham (Oh, ydtham, “Jeb is per-
fect’; ’"loa@dp, Ioathdm):

(1) The youngest son of Gideon-Jerubbaal, the
sole survivor of the massacre of his seventy brothers
by Abimelech (Jgs 9 5), and (by 8 22) the legiti-
mate ruler of Shechem after their death. Recog-
nizing, however, that he is powerless to assert his
claim, J. delivers from the summit of Gerizim his
famous fable (9 7-15), applies it to the situation in
hand, and then flees for his life to Beer (ver 21).
Nothing more is told of him, but the downfall of
Abimelech is referred in part to his “curse” (ver
57). The fable tells of the kingship of the trees
which, after having been declined by all useful
plants, was finally offered to the bramble. The
latter, inflated by its unexpected dignity, pom-
pously offers its “shade” to its faithful subjects,
while threatening all traitors with punishment
(brambles carry forest fires), quite in the manner of
an oriental monarch on assuming the throne.
Having thus parodied the relationship of the worth-
less Abimelech to the Shechemites, J. ironically
wishes both parties joy of their bargain, which will
end in destruction for all concerned. Otherwise
the connection between the fable and its appli-
cation is loose, for, while the fable depicts the king-
ship as refused by all properly qualified persons, in
the application the Shechemites are upbraided for
their treachery and their murder of the rightful
heirs. In fact, the fable taken by itself would seem
rather to be a protest against kings as a class (cf
18 8 10-18; 12 19, etc); so it is possible that either
the fable or its application has become expanded in
transmission. Or an older fable may have been
used for the sake of a single salient point, for nothing
is more common than such an imperfect reapplica-
tion of fables, allegories and parables.

Burton Scorr Easton

(2) Twelfth king of Judah, son of Uzziah and
Jerusha, daughter of Zadok (2 K 16 32-38; 2 Ch

27 1-9). J. was 25 years of age
1. Accession at the time of his father’s attack of
and leprosy, and was at once called upon
Regency to take the administration of the king-

dom (2 K 16 5; 2 Ch 26 21). In
doing this he not only judged the people of the land
by presiding at the administration of justice, but
also was over the household of the king, showing
how complete was the isolation of his father. He
was thus king in all but name, and is invariably
spoken of as reigning in Jerus. His reign lasted
for 16 years (2 K 15 33; 2 Ch 27 1), 759-744
(others put later). While the father loved hus-
bandry and had much cattle (2 Ch 26 10)—ex-
ternal affairs with which he could occupy himself
in his retirement—to the son fell the sterner duties
and heavier responsibilities of the state.

The relation between father and son is well
brought out in the Chronicler’s account of the Am-
monite war. In 2 Ch 26 8 we are told that “the
Ammonites gave tribute [AV “gifts’’] to Uzziah,”
such gifts being compulsory, and of the nature of
tribute. In 2 Ch 27 5 we are told that the actual


conquest of Ammon was made by J., and that
for 3 successive years he compelled them to pay
an annual subsidy of 100 talents of
2. The War silver and 10,000 “cors” each of wheat
with and barley (the cor [Heb kér] was
Ammon about 10 bushels). The campaign on
the E. of the Jordan was the only one
in which J. took part, but as the state suffered
no loss of territory during bis regency, the external
provinces must have been strongly held and well
governed. f
It is probable that before attempting to win any
extension of territory, J. had spent some years in
completing the unfinished building
3. Jotham’s schemes in which his father was en-
Building gaged at the time of his affliction.
Operations Like him, he became an enthusiastic
builder (2 Ch 27 3.4). He is re-
corded to have built towers, castles and cities, and
specifically to have completed the Ophel wall in
Jerus, which is still standing to the 8. of the Haram
area. But the crowning architectural glory of his
reign was the completion of the temple court by
erecting, or setting up, ‘‘the upper gate of the house
of Jeh” (ver 3; 2 K 15 35). This particular gate
was the entrance to, and exit from, the upper or
new court of the temple, which bad been begun so
long ago as the time of Asa (cf the writer’s Solomon’s
Temple, Part Il, ch viii). Its situation is perfectly
known, as it bore the same name and place in the
Herodian temple as in each of its predecessors. It
stood facing the 8., and was on higher ground than
any other of the temple gates. Henceitsname. It
gave entrance to that upper court of the temple,
mentioned in Jer 36 10, where it is spoken of as
“the new gate of Jeh’s house.” As Jeremiah began
his ministry about a century after J.’s death, Jere-
miah’s use of the name commemorates the fact that
the gate was not built till long after the other parts
of the structure.
During J.’s regency, a formidable combination of
the Northern Kingdom and the Syrian state, with
Damascus as capital, began to show


4. The signs of hostility to Judah. For 4
Syrian years before J.’s death, Pekah occu~
League pied the throne of Samaria. The


Assyr king, Tiglath-pileser III, was
then pushing his arms westward, and a Syrian
league was formed to oppose them. J. may have
refused to join this league. The political situation
at his death is thus described: ‘In those days Jeh
began to send against Judah Rezin the king of
Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah” (2 K 16 37).


_ J.’s character is represented in a moderately favorable
light, it being put to his credit that he did not enter the
temple (2 Ch 27 2). The wisdom and

6. Condition Vigor of his administration, and of his
t Tudah policy for the defence of the country, are
9 Ju recognized. It was owing to his com-
pletion of his father’s plans for the pro-
tection of Jerus, and of the building of country fortresses,
that Hezekiah, a few years afterward, was able to show
so stout a resistance to Sennacherib. But within the
state itself corruption and oppression were rife. The
great prophets, Isaiah, Hosea and Micah, exercised their
ministries in J.'s days, and in their pages we have a
graphic picture of the moral condition of the time. Isa
does not name J., except in the title (Isa 1 1; ef.7 1), but
chs 1-§ of his book were probably written in this reign.
Hosea’s writings go back to the last years of Jeroboam
Il, who died the year J. came to the throne. Micah's
evidence is valuable, telling us that Omri had formu-
lated and published rules for the cult of the Zidonian
Baal, and that these “‘statutes'’ were kept by some of
wigs of Samaria, and, possibly, of Jerus (Mic


J.’s name appears in the royal genealogical list
. 9 Ch 3 12, and in the genealogy of Jesus (Mt
(3) A Calebite (1 Ch 2 47 AY).
W. SHaw CaLpecotr


1755


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jotapata
Jozabad


JOURNEY, jar’ni.


} See Day’s Journey; San-
BatH Day’s JourNnEY.


Joy, Joi (OW , simhah; xapd, chard): The idea
of joy is expressed in the OT by a wealth of synony-
mous terms that cannot easily be
differentiated. The commonest is
5 ’ simhah (1 8 18 6, etc), variously tré
in EV “joy,” “gladness,” “mirth”; from saméh,
properly ‘‘to be bright,” “to shine’ (Prov 13 9,
“The light of the righteous rejoiceth,” lit. “is
bright’’), but generally used fig. “to rejoice,” “be
glad” (Lev 23 40 and very frequent).


Other nouns are mdsés and sdsén, both from sds,
properly ‘‘to spring,”’ ‘‘leap,."” hence ‘exult,"' rejoice’:
rinnah, “shouting,” joy"; gil, from yb. gil or gil, “to
go in a circle,” hence “be excited” (dancing round for
joy), “rejoice. In the NT, far the commonest are
chara, “joy, " chatré, “to rejoice’ (cf xdpis, chdris,
grace”), But we have also agalltasis, which expresses

exuberant joy,” ‘‘exultation”’ (not used in classical Gr,
but often in LXX; in the NT, Lk 1 14.44; Acts 2 46
Jude ver 24; He 1 9), and the corresponding yb. agal-
lidd (-domai), ‘to exult,” “rejoice exceedingly" (Mt 5
12, etc). In EV we have sometimes “to joy" (now
obsolete as a vb.), used in an intransitive sense =" to
rejoice’’ (Hab 3 18; 2 Cor 7 13, etc).


Besides joy in a general sense, as the response of
the mind to any pleasurable event or state (1 K
1 40; Est 8 17, ete), joy as a religious
2. In the
OT


1. Terms


emotion is very frequently referred to
in the OT. Religion is conceived of
: as touching the deepest springs of emo-
tion, including the feeling of exultant gladness
which often finds outward expression in such actions
as leaping, shouting, and singing. Joy is repeatedly
shown to be the natural outcome of fellowship with
God. ‘In thy presence is fulness of joy; in thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore” (Ps
16 11; cf vs 8.9). God is at once the source (Ps
47; 61 12) and the object (Ps 35 9; Isa 29 19)
of religious joy. The phrase ‘‘rejoice [be glad] in
Jeh”’ and similar expressions are of frequent occur-
rence (e.g. Ps 97 12; 149 2; Isa 61 10; Zec 10

Many aspects of the Divine character call forth
this emotion, such as His lovingkindness (Ps 21
6.7; 31 7), His salvation (Ps 211; Isa 25 9;
Hab $ 18), His laws and statutes (Ps 12; 119
passim), His judgments (Ps 48 11), His words of
comfort in dark days (Jer 16 15.16). The funda-
mental fact of the sovereignty of God, of the equity
of the Divine government of the world, gives to the
pious a joyous sense of security in life (Ps 93 11;
96 10; 97 1) which breaks forth into songs of
praises in which even inanimate Nature is poetically
called upon to join (Ps 96 11-13; 98 4-9). In the
case of those who held such views of God, it was
natural that the service of God should elicit a joy-
ous spirit (“I will offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of
joy,” Ps 27 6; cf 1 Ch 29 9), a spirit which is
abundantly manifest in the jubilant shouting with
which religious festivities were celebrated, and the
trumpet-sound which accompanied certain sacri-
fices (28 6 15; Ps 83 1-3; Nu 10 10; 2 Ch 29
27), and esp. in psalms of praise, thanksgiving and
adoration (Pss 47, 81, 100, etc). ‘Rejoice before
Jeh your God” is an oft-repeated phrase in Dt with
reference to the sacrificial feast (e.g. 12 12). But
joy ig a Divine, as well as a human, emotion; for
God Himself is represented in the OT, not as a rigid,
impassible Being, but as susceptible to pleasure and
pain. God may be conceived of as “rejoicing in
his works” (Ps 104 31; ef Gen 1 31), and over
His people “for good” (Dt 30 9). ‘He will rejoice
over thee [Zion] with joy; he will rest in his love;
he will joy over thee with singing’ (Zeph 3 17).
Such noble and vivid anthropomorphisms are a
nearer approach to the truth than the abstract doc-
trine of the impassibility of God which, owing to


Platonic influences, dominated the theology of the
early Christian centuries.

The element of joy in religion is still more promi-
nent in the NT. It is the appropriate response of

the believer to the “good tidings of
3. Inthe = great joy” which constitute the gospel
NT (Lk 2 10). In the four Gospels, esp.

Lk, this element is conspicuous. It
is seen in the canticles of Lk 1 and 2. It is both
exemplified in the life and character, and set forth
in the teaching of Jesus. There are many intima-
tions that, in spite of she rviound elements of grief
and tragedy in His life, His habitual demeanor was
gladsome and joyous, certainly not gloomy or
ascetic: such as, His description of Himself as
bridegroom, in defence of His disciples for not fast-
ing (Mk 2 18-20); thefact that He came “eating
and drinking,” giving occasion to the charge that
He was “a gluttonous man and a _ winebibber”’
(Mt 11 19); His “rejoicing in the Holy Spirit”
(Lk 10 21); the fact that His presence was found
to be congenial at social festivities (Mk 14 3; Lk
14 1; Jn 12 1), and at the wedding in Cana (Jn 2
1 ff); His mention of ‘my joy” (Jn 16 11; 17 18).
His teaching with reference to His followers har-
monizes with this. The Christian virtues confer
on those who attain them not only beatitude, a calm
and composed state of felicity (Mt 6 3-11), but
also a more exuberant state of joy, which is in sharp
contrast to the ‘‘sad countenance” of the hypocrites
(6 16) (‘Rejoice, and be exceeding glad,” 5 12).
This spirit is reflected in many of the parables. The
discovery of the true treasure of life brings joy
(Mt 18 44). The three parables in Lk 15 reveal
the joy of the Divine heart itself at the repentance
of sinners (see esp. vs 5-7.9.10.22-24.32). The
parable of the Talents lays stress on the ‘“‘joy of the
Lord”? which is the reward of faithfulness (Mt 25
21.23). Jesus confers on His followers not only
peace (Jn 14 27; 16 33), but participation in His
own fulness of joy (Jn 15 11; 16 24; 17 13), a
joy which is permanent, in contrast to the sorrow
which is transient (16 22). In the dark days of
disappointment that succeeded the crucifixion, the
joy of the disciples passed under a cloud, but at the
resurrection (Lk 24 41) and still more on the day
of Pentecost it emerged into light, and afterward
remained a marked characteristic of the early church
(Acts 2 461; 8 39; 13 52; 153). Paul speaks
of joy as one of the fruits of the spirit (Gal 5 22)
and of ‘‘joy in the Holy Spirit” as an essential mark
of the kingdom of God (Rom 14 17). This joy
is associated with faith (Phil 1 25), hope (Rom 5 2;
12 12), brotherly fellowship and sympathy (Rom
12 15; 2 Cor 7 13; Phil 21f). To “rejoice in
the Lord” is enjoined as a Christian duty (Phil
31; 44; ef 2 17f; 1 Thess 6 16). In Christ,
the Christian “rejoices with joy unspeakable and
full of glory’’ (1 Pet 1 8), in spite of his temporary
afflictions (ver 6). Christian joy is no mere gaiety
that knows no gloom, but is the result of the triumph
of faith over adverse and trying circumstances,
which, instead of hindering, actually enhance it
(Acts 5 41; Rom 6 3f; Jas 1 2.12; 6 11; 1 Pet
4 13; ef Mt 6 11.12). Even Our Lord Himself
“for the joy that was set before him endured the
cross, despising shame” (He 12 2).

D, Miaty Epwarps

JOZABAD, joz’a-bad (T3RT1, ydeabhadh, ‘‘Jeh
has bestowed”’):

(1) A Gederathite, and one of David’s recruits
at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 4 [Heb 5]). He is named
with the Benjamites, but possibly he was a native
of the town Gedara in Southern Judah. See Curtis,
Ch, 196.

(2), (3) Two Manassite captains who joined David
at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 20[Heb 21)).


Jozabdus
Judah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1756


(4) A Levite overseer in Hezekiah’s time (2 Ch


$1 13); may be the ancestor of the chief of the
priests in 2 Ch 35 9=‘‘Joram” of 1 Esd 1 9.

(5) A Levite (Ezr_8 33), mentioned again prob-
ably in Ezr 10 23; Neh 8 7; 11 16. The name
in 1 Esd 8 63 (=Ezr 8 33) is “Josabdus’” (AV
“Josabad’’).

(6) A priest who had married a foreign wife

Ezr 10 22)=“Ocidelus” of 1 Esd 9 22.


JOZABDUS, jé-zab’dus (IwtaBSés, [ézabdés):

(1) Son of Jeshua the Levite (1 Esd 8 63),
ealled “Jozabad” in Ezr 8 33.

(2) Son of Bebai (1 Esd 9 29), called ‘“Zabbai’’
in Ezr 10 28.


JOZACAR, joz’a-kar, j6-24/kar ((QTM, ydzakhar,
‘“‘Jeh has remembered”; AV Jozachar): Servant and
murderer (with Jehozabad) of Joash, king of Judah
(2 K 12 21 [Heb 22]); called “Zabad” in 2 Ch
24 26. Many MSS have ‘“‘Jozabad” in 2 K.


JOZADAK, joz’a-dak. See Jenozapax.


JUBAL, j60’bal Gam, yubhal; for meaning see
JaBaL): Son of Lamech by Adah, and inventor of
musical instruments (Gen 4 21).


JUBILEE, joo’bi-lé, ji’bi-lé, CYCLE OF THE.
See Luni-solar cycle, under Astronomy, I, 5.


JUBILEE YEAR =a MW, shenath ha-yobhel;
tros Tis adérews, élos tés aphéseds; annus jubi-
lacus, ‘‘year of jubilee” [Lev 25 13], or simply
Sahtnn , ha-yabhél, “the jubilee” [25 28; cf Nu 36 4],
AV and ERV Jubile): The Heb word yabhél stands
for keren ha-yobhél, meaning the horn ofaram. Now,
such a horn can be made into a trumpet, and thus
the word ydbhél came to be used as a synonym of
trumpet. According to Lev 25 9 a loud trumpet
should proclaim liberty throughout the country
on the 10th day of the 7th month (the Day of
Atonement), after the lapse of 7 sabbaths of years=
49 years: In this manner, every 50th year was
to be announced as a jubilee year. All real
property should automatically revert to its origi-
nal owner (25 10; cf ver 18), and those who,
compelled by poverty, had sold themselves as slaves
to their brothers, should regain their liberty (25 10;
cf ver 39).

In addition to this, the Jubilee Year was to be
observed after the manner of the sabbatic year, i.e.
there should be neither sowing nor reaping nor
pruning of vines, and everybody was expected to
live on what the fields and the vineyards produced
“of themselves,”’ and no attempt should be made
at storing up the products of the land (26 11f).
Thus there are three distinct factors constituting
the essential features of the Jubilee Year: personal
liberty, restitution of property, and what we might
eall the simple life.

The 50th year was to be a time in which liberty
should be proclaimed to all the inhabitants of the

country. We should, indeed, diminish
1. Personal the import of this institution if we


Liberty should apply it only to those who were
to be freed from the bonds of physical
servitude. Undoubtedly, they must have bcen the


foremost in realizing its beneficial effects. But the
law was intended to benefit all, the masters as well
as the servants. They should never lose sight of
their being brothers and citizens of the theocratic
kingdom. They owed their life to God and were
subject to His sovereign will. Only through loyalty
to Him were they free and could ever hope to be
free and independent of all other masters.


The institution of the Jubilee Year should become
the means of fixing the price of real property (25
15f; ef vs 25-28); moreover, it
2. Restitu- should exclude the possibility of selling
tion of, any picce of land permanently (25 23),
Property the next verse furnishing the motive:
“The land is mine: for ye are strangers
and sojourners with me.’’ The same rule was to be
applied to dwelling-houses outside of the walled
cities (25 31), and also to the houses owned by
Levites, although they were built within walled
cities (ver 32).

In the same manner the price of Heb slaves was
to vary according to the proximity of the Jubilee
Year (26 47-54). This passage deals with the
enslaving of a Hebrew by a foreigner livmg among
the Jews; it goes without saying that the same rule
would hold good in the case of a Hebrew selling him-
self to one of his own people.

In 27 17-25 we find a similar arrangement re-
specting such lands that were “sanctified unto Jeh.”
In all these cases the original owner was at liberty
to redeem his property at any time, or have it
redeemed by some of his nearest relatives (25 25-
27.29.48 ff; 27 19).

The crowning feature, though, was the full resti-
tution of all real property in the Jubilee Year. The
primary object of this regulation was, of course, the
reversion of all hereditary property to the family
which originally possessed it, and the reéstablish-
ment of the original arrangement regarding the di-
vision of the land. But that was not all; for this
legal disposition and regulation of external matters
was closely connected with the high calling of the
Jewish people. It was a part of the Divine plan
looking forward to the salvation of mankind. “The
deepest. meaning of it (the Jubilee Year) is to be
found in the dmroxardoracis ris Baocdelas rod Beoi,
apokatdstasis tés bastletas tov. theow, ie. in the re-
storing of all that which in the course of time was
perverted by man’s sin, in the removing of all
slavery of sin, in the establishing of the true liberty
of the children of God, and in the delivering of the
creation from the bondage of corruption to which.
it was subjected on account of man’s depravity”
(Rom 8 19 ff) (cf Keil, Manual of Bib. Archaeology).
In the Year of Jubilee a great future era of Jeh’s
favor is foreshadowed, that period which, according
to Isa 61 1-8, shall be ushered in to all those that
labor and are heavy Jaden, by Him who was anointed
by the spirit of the Lord Jehovah.

The Jubilee Year, being the crowning point of all
sabbatical institutions, gave the finishing touch as

it were to the whole cycle of sabbatic
3. The days, months and years. It is, there-
Simple Life fore, quite appropriate that it should

be a year of rest for the land like the
preceding sabbatic year (Lev 25 11f). It follows,
of course, that in this instance there were two years,
one after the other, in which there should be no
sowing or systematic ingathering. This seems to
be clear from Lev 25 18-22: ‘‘And ye shall sow
the eighth year, and eat of the fruits, the old store;
until the ninth year, until its fruits come in, ye
shall eat the old store.’ Thus in the 7th and 8th
years the people were to live on what the fields
had produced in the 6th year and whatever grew
spontaneously. This shows the reason why we
may say that one of the factors constituting the
Jubilee Year was the “simple life.’ They could
not help but live simply for two consecutive years,
Nobody can deny that this afforded ample oppor-
tunity to develop the habit of living within very
limited means. And again we see that this external
part of the matter did not fully come up to the
intention of the Lawgiver. It was not the simple
life as such that He had in view, but rather


1757


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jozabdus
Judah


the laying down of its moral and religious founda-
tions. In this connection we must again refer to
25 18-22, “What shall we eat the seventh year?’
The answer is very simple and yet of surpassing
grandeur: “Then I will command my blessing upon
you,” ete. Nothing was expected of the people but
faith in Jeh and confidence in His power, which was
not to be shaken by any doubtful reflection. And
right here we have found the root of the simple life:
no life without the true God, and no simplicity of
life without true faith in Him. ‘Man shall not
live by bread alone, but by every word that pro-
evi out of the mouth of God” (Mt 4 4; ef Dt

We may well ask: Did the Jewish people ever
observe the Jubilee Year? There is no reason why
they should not have observed it in preéxilic times
(cf Lotz in New Sch-Herz, X, s.v. ‘Sabbatical Year’’
and “Year of Jubilee’). Perhaps they signally
failed in it, and if so, we should not be surprised at
all. Not that the institution in itself was cumbered
with any obstacles that could not have been over-
come; but what is more common than unbelief and
unwillingness to trust absolutely in Jeh? Or, was
it observed in post-exilic times? Here, too, we are
in the dark. There is, indeed, a tradition accord-
ing to which the Jubilee Year has never been ob-
served—neither in the time of Ezra and Nehemiah
nor at any later period. The truth of this seems
to be corroborated by the silence of Jos, who, while
referring quite frequently to the sabbatic year,
never once mentions the Year of Jubilee.

WituiamM Baur

JUBILEES, BOOK OF. See Apocaryprtic Lit-

ERATURE,


JUCAL, joo'kal.


JUDA, j60’da: Lk 1 39 AV, see Jurran; 3 26,
see Jopa; 3 30, see Jupas.


DAEA, jo0-dé’a, jt-dé’a (lov8ala, Toudata):
The “land of the Jews,” the Gr-Rom equivalent of
Judah. As most of the Israelites returning from
the captivity belonged to the tribe of Judah, they
came to be called Jews and their land Judaea. In
Tob 1 18 the name is applied to the old kingdom of
Judah. For a general description of the physical
geography and early history of this region see Ju-
paH. The limits of this district varied greatly,
extending as the Jewish population increased, but
in many periods with very indefinite boundaries.

Under the Pers empire, Judaea (or Judah) was a
district administered by a governor who, like
Zerubbabel (Hag 1 14; 2 2), was probably usually
aJew. Even as late as Judas Maccabaeus, Hebron
and its surroundings—the very heart of old Judah—
was under the domination of the Edomites, whom,
however, Judas conquered (1 Macc 6 65); in the
time of his brother Jonathan (145 BC), three
tetrarchies of Samaria, Aphaerema, Lydda and
Ramathaim, were added to Judaea (1 Macc 10
30.38; 11 34); in some passages it is referred to at
this time as the “land of Judah” (’Iovéa) (1 Mace
10 30.33.37). The land was then roughly limited
by what may be called the ‘natural boundaries of
Judah” (see Jupaqg).

Strabo (xvi.11, 21) extends the name Judaea to in-
clude practically all Pal; as does Lk (4 44m; 23 5;
Acts 2 9; 10 37, etc). In several NT references
(Mt 425; Mk15; 37; Lk 5617; Jn 3 22;
Acts 1 8), Judaea is contrasted with its capital
Jerus. The country bordering on the shores of
the Dead Sea for some miles inland was known as
the Wilderness of Judaeca (see Jupan; JEsHIMON)
(Mt 8 1), or “the wilderness’ (Mk 1 4; Lk 3 2);
here John the Baptist appeared as a preacher.


See JEHUCAL.


According to Mt 19 1 (but cf Mk 10 1, where RV
has “Judaca and beyond Jordan’’), some cities be-
yond Jordan belonged to Judaea. ‘That this was an
actual fact we know from Ptolemy (v.16,9) and Jos
(Ant, XII, iv, 11).

According to Jos (BJ, III, iii, 5), Judaea ex-
tended from Anuath-Borkaeos (i.e. Khan Berkit
near Khan es Sdweh, close to the most northerly
frontier of Judah as described in Jupau [q.v.]}) to the
village Jordan, possibly Tell ‘Ardd, near Arabia in
the 5. Its breadth was from Joppa in the W. to


Wilderness of Judaca.


Jordan inthe E. The seacoast also ag far north as
Ptolemais (‘Akka), except Jamnia, Joppa and (ac-
cording to the Talm) Caesarea, belonged to this
province.

After the death of Herod the Great, Archelaus
received Judaea, Samaria and Idumaea as his
ethnarchy, but on his deposition Judaea was ab-
sorbed into the Rom province of Syria, the procura-
tor of which lived at Caesarea.

Of later history it is only necessary to notice that
in the 5th cent. Judaea became part of the land
known as Palaestina Prima; that at the time of the
Lat kingdom of Jerus (12th cent.) all the hill
country of Judah from Sinjil to Tekoa was the
royal domain, while the southern section to Beer-
sheba belonged to the Seigneur de St. Abraham (i.e.
of Hebron); and lastly that a district, the rough
equivalent of the kingdom of Judah, though larger,
and of the Judaea described by Jos (BJ, III, iii, 5),
though slightly smaller, forms today the Mutaserraflic
of el Kuds, an administrative area where more than
in any spot in the world the problem of the ‘land
of the Jews’’ is today increasingly acute.

. W. G. MasrerMan

JUDAEA, WILDERNESS OF (Mi 3 1). See
JUDAEA.


JUDAH, joo’da (TWN, yehadhah, “praised’’):

(1) 4th son of Jacob by Leah (see separate art.).

(2) An ancestor of Kadmiel, one of those who had
the oversight of the rebuilding of the temple (Ezr
39). He is the same as Hodaviah (Ezr 2 40),
and Hodevah (Neh 7 48).

(3) A Levite who had taken a strange wife (Ezr
10 23).

(4) A Levite who came up with Zerubbabel (Neh
12 8) i


(5) A priest and musician who took part in the
dedication of the wall of Jerus (Neh 12 36); (3),
(4) and (5) may be the same person.

(6) A Benjamite, the son of Hassenuah, who was
second over the city of Jerus in the days of Nehe-
miah (Neh 11 9).

(7) One of the princes of Judah who took part
in the dedication of the wall of Jerus (Neh 12 34).

8. F. Hunter


Judah
Judah, Kingdom


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1758


JUDAH (THM, yhudhah; in Gen 29 35 B,
‘Tovdav, lovidan, A, "lovSa, Jovda; elsewhere B and
A, *IotSas, Jovidas): The 4th son born
1. Jacob’s to Jacob by Leah in Paddan-aram
Son (Gen 29 35, etc). Of this patriarch’s
life only scanty details remain to us.
He turned his brethren from their purpose to slay
Joseph, persuading them to sell him to the Midian-
ites at Dothan (87 26 ff). A dark stain is left upon
his memory by the disgraceful story told in ch 38.
Reuben forfeited the rights of primogeniture by an
act of infamy; Simeon and Levi, who came next
in order, were passed over because of their cruel and
treacherous conduct at Shechem; to J., therefore,
were assigned the honors and responsibilities of the
firstborn (34; 35 22; 49 5ff). On the occasion
of their first visit to Egypt, Reuben acted as spokes-
man for his brethren (42 22.37). Then the leader-
ship passed to J. (43 3, etc). :
evidently looked askance upon J.’s promotion, and
their own claims to hegemony were backed by
considerable resources (49 22 ff). The rivalry
between the two tribes, thus early visible, culmi-
nated in the disruption of the kingdom. To J.,
the “lion’s whelp,” a prolonged dominion was
assured (49 9 ff). ‘
The tribe of Judah, of which the patriarch was
the name-father, at the first census In the wilder-
ness numbered 74,600 fighting men;
2. Tribe of at Sinai the number “from 20 years
Judah old and upward” was 76,500 (Nu 1 27;
26 22; see Numspsrs). The stand-
ard of the camp of J., with which were also the
tribes of Zebulun and Issachar, was to the E. of the
tabernacle “toward the sunrising,” the prince of J.
being Nahshon, the son of Amminadab (2 3).
Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, represented J. among
the spies (13 6); he also was told off to assist at the
future allocation of the tribal portions (34 19).
The land assigned to J. lay in the 8. of Pal (see
JupaH, TERRITORY OF), comprising part of the
mountain, the Shephelah, and the
8. Territory maritime plain. The information
given of its conquest is meager and
cannot be arranged in a self-consistent story. In
Josh 11 21 ff, the conquest is ascribed to Joshua.
Caleb is described as conquering at least a portion
in Josh 14 12; 15 13 ff; while in Jgs 1 the tribes
of J. and Simeon play a conspicuous part; and the
latter found a settlement in the 8. within the terri-
tory of J. The tribal organization seems to have
been maintained after the occupation of the land,
and J. was so loosely related to the northern tribes
that it was not expected to help them against
Sisera. Deborah has no reproaches for absent J.
It is remarkable that no judge over Israel (except
Othniel, Jgs 3 9-11) arose from the tribe of J.
The first king of all Israel was chosen from the tribe
of Benjamin. This made acquiescence on the part
of J. easier than it would have been had Saul sprung
from the ancient rival, Ephraim. But the dignity
of J. was fully vindicated by the splendid reigns of
David and Solomon, in lineal descent from whom
the Saviour of the world should come. The further
history of the tribe is merged in that of Israel.


W. Ewina
JUDAH, KINGDOM OF:


I. Canaan BEFORE THE MonarcHy
1. The Coming of the Semites
2. The Canaanites
8. The Israchite Confederacy
4. Migration into Canaan
5. The Bond of Union
6. Early Rulers
7. The Judges
. Hereditary Kings

II. Tue First Taree Krxos
1. The Benjamite King
2. Rachel and Leah Tribes
3. The Disruption


The sons of Joseph >


III. Tut Duat Monarcuy
War between Two Kingdoms
. First Reform of Religion
Two Kingdoms at Peace
Two Kingdoms Contrasted __
. Revolution in the Northern Kingdom
. Effect on the Southern Kingdom
Davidic House at Lowest Ebb
. Begins to Recover
9. Reviving Fortunes
10. Monarchy Still Elective
11. Government by Regents
12. Period of Great Prosperity
13. Rise of Priestly Caste
14. Advent of Assyria
15, Judah a Protectorate _
16. Cosmopolitan Tendencies
IV. Periop oF DECLINE
1. Judah Independent
2. Reform of Religion
3. Egypt and Judah
4. Traffic in Horses
5. Reaction under Manasseh
6. Triumph of Reform Party
7. Babylonia and Judah |
8. End of Assyrian Empire
9. After Scythian Invasion
10. Judah Again Dependent
11. Prophets Lose Influence
12. The Deportations
13. Summary


I, Canaan before the Monarchy.—Some 4,000 years
BC the land on either side of the valley of the Jordan
was peopled by a race who, to whatever
stock they belonged, were not Semites.


CONT Crim GON


1. The It was not until about the year 2500 BC
Coming that the tide of Sem immigration began
of the to flow from North Arabia into the coun-
Semites tries watered by the Jordan and the


Euphrates. One of the first waves in
this human tide consisted of the Phoeni-
cians who settled in the N.W., on the seashore; they were
closely followed by other Can. tribes who occupied the
country which long bore their name.

The Canaanites are known to us chiefly from the
famous letters found at Tell Amarna in Egypt which
describe the political state of the country


2. The during the years 1415-1360 BC—the
C: it! years of the reigns of Amenophis ITI and
anaamites [V. Canaan was at this time slipping out


‘ of the hands of Egypt. The native princes
were in revolt: tribute was withheld; and but few Egyp
garrisons remained. Meantime a fresh tide of invasion
was hurling its waves against the eastern frontiers of the
land. The newcomers were, like their predecessors, Sem
Bedawin from the Syrian desert. Among them the Am
Tab name the Chabiri, who are, no doubt, the people
known to us as the Hebrews.

The Hebrews are so named by those of other nation-
ality after one of their remoter ancestors soon 10 24),
or because they had come from beyond
8. The (Cébher) the Jordan or the Euphrates. Of
Israelite themselves they spoke collectively as
Israel. Israel was a name assumed by
Confederacy the eponymous hero of the nation whose
real name was Jacob. Similarly the
Arablan prophet belonged to the tribe called from its
ancestor Koraish, whose name was Fibr. The people of
Israel were a complex of some 12 or 13 tribes. These
12 trlbes were divided into two main sections, one sec-
tion tracing its descent from Leah, one of Jacob’s wives,
and the other section tracing its descent from Rachel, his
other wife. The names of the tribes which claimed to
be descended from Leah were Reuben, Simeon, Levi,
Judah, Issachar, Zebuiun, and, indirectly, Gad and
Asher; those which claimed to be descended from Rachel
were Joseph, which was divided into two clans; Eph-
raim_ and Manasseh, Benjamin, and, indirectly, Dan
and Naphtali. The rivalry between these two’ ercat
divisions runs all through the national history of the
Hebrews, and was only brought to anend by the annihi-
lation of one of the pppoatng tackions (Isa 11 13). But
not only was the Israelitish nation a combination of
many clans; it was united also to other tribes which
could not claim descent from Israel or Jacob. Such
tribes were the'Kenites and the Calebites. Toward
such the pure Israelite tribes formed asort of aristocracy,
very much as, to change the parallel, the tribe of Koraish
did among the Arabs. It was rarely that a commander
was appointed from the allied tribes, at least in the ear-
lier years of the national life,
We find exactly the same state of things obtaining in
the history of the Arabian conquests. All through that
history there runs the rivalry between the


4, Migra- South Arabian_ tribes descended from
tion into Kahtan (the Heb Joktan, Gen 10 25,

etc) ‘and the northern or Ishmaelite tribes
Canaan of Modar. It is often stated that the


2 OT contains two separate and irrecon-
cilable accounts of the ey ale of Canaan by the Is-
raeclites. According to the Book of Josh, it is’ said the


1759


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Judah
Judah, Kingdom


invaslon was a movement of the whole people of Israel
under the leadership of Joshua; aucordine PS the Book
of Jgs, It consisted of a series of expeditions made by
Individual tribes each on its own account (Jgs 1 2.10,
etc). But agaln, in the history of the Arabs we find
proces, the same apparent discrepancy. For Persia,

yria and Egypt were conquered by the Arabs as a whole;
but at the same tlme no tribe lost its Individuality; each
tribe made expeditions on Its own account, and turned
its arms agalnst rival tribes even in the enemy’s country.
On the confines of China in the E. and in Spain on the
W., the arms of the Yemen’s trlbes were employed in
the destruction of those of Modar as fiercely as ever
they had been within Arabia itself.

The bond which united the Israelite tribes, as well as
those of Kayin (the eponym of the Kenites) and Caleb,


was that of the common worship of Jeh.

5. The As Mohammed united all the Fribes of
Bond of Arabia into one whole by the doctrine of
Uni monotheism, so did Moses the Israclite
mon. tribes by giving them a common object


; of worship. And the sherifs or descend-
ants of ‘Ali today occupy a position very like what the
Levites and the descendants of Aaron must have maln-
tained in Israel. In order to keep the Israelite nation
pure, intermarriage with the inhabitants of the invaded
country was forbidden, though the prohibition was not
observed (Jgs 3 5f). So too, the Arab women were
not permitted to marry non-Arabs during the first years
of conquest.

It is customary to date the beginning of monarchy in
Israel from Saul the son of Kish, but in point of fact
many early leaders were kings in fact if


6. Early not in name, Moses and Joshua may be
Rul compared with Mohammed and his caliph
Le (properly khaltfa) or ‘‘successor,’’ Abu


Bekr. Their word was law; they reigned
supreme over a united nation. Moreover, the word
“king” (melekh) often means, both in Heb and Arab.,
nothing more than governor of a town, or local resident.
There was more than one ‘‘king’’ of Midian (Jgs 8 12).
Balak seems to have been only a king of Moab (Nu 22 4),

Before the monarchy proper, the people of Israel
formed, in theory, a theocracy, as did also the Arabs under


the caliphs. n reality they, were ruled
7. The by Temporary kings called judges (sho-
ud phét, the Carthaginian sufes), Their
Judges office was not hereditary, though there


were exceptions (cf Jgs 9). On the other
hand, the government of the Northern Kingdom of
Israel was practically an elective monarchy, so rarely
were there more than two of the same dynasty. The
judge again was usually appointed in order to meet some
special crises, and the theoretically ideal state of things
‘was one in which there was no visible head of the state—
a@ republic without a president. These intervals, how-
ever, always ended in disaster, and the eppelaiaaent ot
another judge. The first king also was elected to cope
with a specially serious crisis. The main distinction
between judge and king was that the former, less than
the latter, obscured the fact of the true King, upon the
recognition of whom alone the continued existence of the
uation depended. The rulers then became the ‘‘elders’’
or sheilchs of the tribes, and as these did not act in unison,
the nation lost its solidarity and became an easy prey to
any invader.
During the period of the Judges a new factor entered
into the disturbed politics of Canaan. This was an
invader who came not from the eastern


8. Heredi- 0d southern deserts, but from the west-
‘i ; ern sea. Driven out of Crete by invaders
tary Kings from the mainland, the last remnants ot


the race of Minos found refuge on the
shores of the country which ever after took from them
the name it still bears—Philistin or Palestine. At the
same time the Ammonites and Midianites were pee ne
into the country from the E. (i 8 11)... Caught between
these two opposing forces, the tribes of Israel were threat-
ened with destruction. It was felt that the temporary
sovereignty of the judge was no longer equal to the sit-
uation. The supreme authority must be permanent.
It was thus the monarchy was founded. Three motives
are given by tradition as leading ie to this step. The
pretext alleged by the elders or sheikhs is the worthless-
ness and incapacity of Samuel’s sons, who he intended
should succeed him (1 8 8). The immediate canse
was the double pressure from the Philis (1 S 9 16) and
the Ammonite king (12 12). The real reason was that
the system of government by elective kings or judges
had proved a failure and had completely broken down.
The times called for a hereditary monarchy.


‘IL The First Three Kings.—The most warlike
of the clans of Israel shortly before this had been
that of Benjamin—one of the Rachel


1. The tribes. The national sanctuary, with
Benjamite the ark and the grandson of Aaron as
King priest, was at Bethel in their territory.


Moreover, they had defeated the
combined forces of the other tribes in two pitched


battles. They had at last been defeated and almost
exterminated, but they had recovered much of their
strength and prestige (Jgs 20; 1S 4 12). From
this tribe the first king was chosen (see Sau). He,
however, proved unequal to his task. After some
years spent in war with the Philis and in repressing
euponed disloyalty at home, he was defeated and
illed.

Meantime, one of the less-known clans was
coming to the front. ‘The territory of the tribe of
J.layim the 8. After its occupation (ef Jgs 1 2.3),
the tribe of J. appears to have settled down to the
care of its flocks and herds. It is not mentioned
in the Song of Deborah. None of the judges be-
longed to it, unless Ibzan, who seems to have
been of little account (Jgs 12 8f). Under the
leadership of Davin (q.v.), this tribe now came
to the front, and proved in the end to be
endowed with by far the greatest vitality of all
the tribes. It outlived them all, and survives to
this day.

The Rachel tribes, led by Benjamin and Ephraim
(2 S 2,3), resisted for some time the hegemony

of J., but were obliged in the end to


2. Rachel submit. Under David Israel became
and Leah again a united whole. By making
Tribes Jerus his capital on the borders of J.


and Benjamin, he did much to insure
the continuance of this union (cf 1 Ch 9 3). The
union, however, was only on the surface. By play-
ing off the Rachel tribes, Benjamin and Ephraim,
against the rest, Absalom was able to bring the
whole structure to the ground (2 § 16 ff), the tribe
to which Saul belonged being esp. disloyal (2 §
16 5 ff). Nor was this the only occasion on which
the smoldering enmity between the two houses
burst out into flame (2 5 20). As soon as the
strong hand of David was removed, disaffection
showed itself in several quarters (1 K 11 14 ff),
and esp. the aspiration of the tribe of Ephraim,
after independence was fomented by the prophets
(11 26 ff). Egypt afforded a convenient asylum
for the disaffected until opportunity should ripen.
They had not long to wait.
Solomon was succeeded by Rehoboam, who found
it politic to hold a coronation ceremony at Shechem
as well, presumably, as at Jerus.
3. The Dis- The malcontents found themselves
ruption strong enough to dictate terms. These
Rehoboam rejected, and the northern
tribes at once threw off their allegiance to the
dynasty of David. The disruption thus created
in the Israelite nation was never again healed. The
secession was like that of the Moors in Spain from
the ‘Abb4sid caliphs. Henceforth “Israel,” except
in the Chronicler, denotes the Northern Kingdom
only. In that writer, who does not recognize the
kingdom of the ten tribes, it means Judah. It is
usual at the present day to recognize in the Northern
Kingdom the true Israelite kingdom. Certainly
in point of extent of territory and_in resources it
was far the greater of the two. But as regards
intellectual power and influence, even down to the
present day, not to mention continuity of dynasty,
the smaller kingdom is by far the more important.
It is, therefore, treated here as the true representa-
tive of the nation. Lying, as it did, in the imme-
diate vicinity of Jerus, the tribe of Benjamin could
hardly do otherwise than throw in its lot with that
of J. Bethel, which became one of the religious
capitals of the Northern Kingdom, although nomi-
nally within their territory, in fact belonged to
Ephraim (Jgs 1 22 ff). With this union of op-
posing interests may be compared that of the ‘Alids
and ‘Abbasids, both belonging to the house of Mo-
hammed and both aspirants to the caliphate,
against the house of Umeiya.


Judah, Kingdom THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1760


HI, The Dual Monarchy.—Rehoboam made no
decisive attempt to bring back the recalcitrant tribes
to their ‘allegiance (i K 12 21 ff),


1. War though the two countries made raids,
between one upon the other (14 30). For his
Two King- own security he built numerous for-
doms tresses, the remains of some of which


‘have, it is probable, been recovered
within recent years (2 Ch 11 5 ff). These excited
the suspicion of Shishak of Egypt, who invaded
the country and reduced it to vassalage (1 K 14
25 ff). Under Rehoboam’s son Abijah, actual war
broke out between the two kingdoms (165 6 as cor-
rected in ver 7; 2 Ch 13). The war was con-
tinued during the long reign of his son Asa, whose
opponent, Baasha, built a fort some 6 miles N.
of Jerus in order to cut off that city from com-
munication with the N. Asa confessed his weak-
ness by appealing for help to Ben-hadad of Damas-
cus. The end justified the means. The fort was
demolished.

The reign of Asa is also remarkable for the first
of those reformations of worship which recur at
intervals throughout the history of the
2. First Southern Kingdom. The high places
Reform of were not yet, however, considered ille-
Religion gitimate (1 K 165 14; but ef 2 Ch
14 5). He also, like his grandfather,
was a builder of castles, and with a similar, though
more fortunate, result (2 Ch 14 6.9ff). Asa’s old
age and illness helped to bring to the rival kingdoms
peace which lasted beyond his own reign (1 K
5 23).
An effect of this peace is seen in the expanding
foreign trade of the country under his successor


Jehoshaphat. He rebuilt the navy as
3. Two in the days of Solomon, but a storm
Kingdoms ruined the enterprise (i K 22 48f).
at Peace During this reign the two kingdoms


came nearer being united than they
had done since the disruption.
largely due to the Northern Kingdom having been
greatly weakened by the wars with Syria and
Assyria, and having given up the idea of annexing
the smaller country. Moreover, Jehoshaphat had
married his son Joram (Jehoram) to Ahab’s daughter
Athaliah. From a religious point of view, the two
states reacted upon one another. Jehoram of Israel
inaugurated a reformation of worship in the North-
ern Kingdom, and at the same time that of J. was
brought into line with the practice of the sister
kingdom (2 K 8 18). The peace, from a political
point of view, did much to strengthen both countries,
and enabled them to render mutual assistance
against the common foe.
Up to the death of Jehoram of Israel, which synchro-
nized with that of Joram and Ahaziah of J., 6 kings had


reigned In J. Of these the first 4 died in
their beds and were buried in their own


4, Two mausoleum. During the same period of
Kingdoms about 90 years there were in Israel 9 kings
Contrasted divided into 4 dynasties. The second


king of the Ist Dynasty was immediate]
assassinated and the entire family annihi-
lated. Precisely the same fate overtook the IId Dy-
nasty. Then followed a civil war in which two pre-
tenders were killed, one perishing by his own hand. ‘he
IIId Dynasty lasted longer than the first two and
counted 4 kings. Of these one was defeated and killed
in battie and another assassinated. The fate of the
kings of Israel is very like that of the middle and later
‘Abbasid caliphs. The murder of his brothers by the
Judaean Jehoram, a proceeding once regular with the
sultans of Turkey, must also be put down to the Influence
of his Israelite wife.


It was obvious that a crisis was impending.
Edom and Libnah had thrown off their allegiance,
and the Philis had attacked and plundered Jerus,
even the king’s sons being taken prisoners, with the
exception of the youngest (2 Ch 21 16). More-
over, the two kingdoms had become so elosely


This was no doubt .


united, not only by intermarriage, but also in
religion and politics, that they must stand and fall


together. The hurricane which swept
6. Revolu- away the northern dynasty also carried
tion in the off the members of the southern royal
Northern house more nearly connected with


Kingdom Ahab, and the fury of the queen-
mother Athaliah made the destruction

complete (2 K 11 1). ;
For 6 years the daughter of Ahab held sway in
Jerus. The only woman who sat on the throne of
David was a daughter of the hated


6. Effect Ahab. In her uniqueness, she thus
on the holds a place similar to that of Shejer
Southern ed-Durr among the Memldk sultans
Kingdom of Egypt. The character of her reign

is not described, but it can easily be
iapeined She came to her inevitable end 6 years
ater.


Successive massacres had reduced the descend-
ants of David until only one representative was left.
Jehoram, the last king but one, had
7. Davidic murdered all his brothers (2 Ch 21
House at 4); the Arab marauders had killed
Lowest Ebb his sons except the youngest (22 1;
ef 2117). The youngest, Ahaziah,
after the death of his father, was, with 42 of his
“brethren,” executed by Jehu (2 K 10 14). Fi-
nally, Athaliah “destroyed all the_seed royal.”
The entente with the Northern Kingdom had
brought the Davidic dynasty to the brink of
extinction.
But just as ‘Abd er-Rahm4n escaped from the
slaughter of the Umeiyads to found a new dynasty
in Spain, so the Davidic dynasty made
8. Begins a fresh start under Joash. The church
to Recover had saved the state, and naturally the
years that followed were years in
which the religious factor bulked large. The
temple of Baal which Athaliah had built and sup-
ported was wrecked, the idols broken, and the
priest killed: A fund was inaugurated for the repair
of the national temple. The religious enthusiasm,
however, quickly cooled. The priests were found
to be diverting the fund for the restoration of
the temple to their own uses. A precisely similar
diversion of public funds occurred in connection
with the Karawtyin mosque in Fez under the
Almoravids in the 12th cent. The reign which
had begun with so much promise ended in clouds
and darkness (2 K 12 17 ff; 2 Ch 24 17 ff; Mt
23 35), and Joash was the first of the Judaean
kings to be assassinated by his own people (2 K
12 20f).
By a curious coincidence, a new king ascended
the throne of Syria, of Israel and of Judah about
the same time. The death of: Hazael,
9. Reviving and accession of Ben-hadad III led
Fortunes _to a revival in the fortunes of both of
the Israelite kingdoms. The act of
clemency with which Amaziah commenced his
reign (2 K 14 5.6; Dt 24 16) presents a pleasing
contrast to the moral code which had come to pre-
vail in the sister kingdom; and the story of his
hiring mercenaries from the Ephraimite kingdom
(2 Ch 25 5-10) sheds a curious light on the relations
subsisting between the two countries, and even on
those times generally. It is still more curious to
find him, some time after, sending, without provoca-
tion, a challenge to Jehoash; and the capture and
release of Amaziah evinces some rudimentary ideas
of chivalry (2 K 14 8 ff). The chief event of the
reign was the reconquest of Edom and taking of
Petra (2 K 14 7).
The principle of the election of kings by the people
was in force in Judah, although it seemed to be in


1761


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Judah, Kingdom


abeyance since the people were content to limit
their choice to the Davidie line. But it was
exercised when occasion required.


10. Mon- Joash had been chosen by the popu-
archy Still lace, and it was they who, when the
Elective public discontent culminated in the


assassination of Amaziah, chose his
16-year-old son Uzziah (or Azariah) to succeed him.
The minority of the king involved something
equivalent to a regency. As Jehoiada at first
carried on the government for Joash,
11. Govern- so Uzziah was at first under the tutelage
ment by of Zechariah (2 Ch 26 5), and the
Regents latter part of his reign was covered
b _ by the regency of his son Jotham.
It is obvious that with the unstable dynasties of the
north, such government by deputy would have been
impracticable.
The reign of Uzziah (2 Ch 26) was one of the
most glorious in the annals of the Judacan king-
: dom. The Philis and southern Arabs,
12. Period who had been so powerful in the
of Great reign of Jehoram, were subdued, and
Prosperity other Bedawin were held in check.
The frontiers were strengthened with
numerous castles. Now that Edom was again
annexed, the Red Sea trade wasresumed. Irriga-
tion was attended to, and the agricultural resources
of the country were developed. Uazziah also estab-
lished a standing army, properly equipped and
trained. Artillery, in the shape of catapults and
other siege engines, was manufactured. It is ob-
vious that in this reign we have advanced far be-
yond the earlier and ruder times.
In this and the preceding reigns, we notice also
how the priests are becoming a distinct and power-
ful caste. Zadok and Abiathar were
18. Rise of no more than the domestic chaplains
Priestly of David. The kings might at pleasure
Caste discharge the functions of the priest.
But the all-powerful position of Je-
hoiada seems to have given the order new life; and
in the latter part of the reign of Uzziah, king and
priest come into conflict, and the king comes off
second-best (2 Ch 26 16 ff). ; ?
Uzziah is the first king of J. to be mentioned in the
Assyr annals. He was fighting against “Pul” in
the years 742-740. The advent of the
14. Advent great eastern power upon the scene of
of Assyria Judaean politics could end but in one
way—as it was soon to do with Israel
also. The reign of Jotham may be passed over as
it coincided almost entirely with that of his father.
But in the following reign we find J. already paying
tribute to Assyria in the year of the fall of Damas-
cus and the conquest of the East-Jordan land, the
year 734. .
During the regency of Jotham, the effeminacy
and luxury of the Northern Kingdom had already
begun to infect the Southern (Mic 1 9;
15. Judah a 6 16), and under the irresolute Ahaz
Protectorate the declension went on rapidly. This
rapprochement in morals and customs
did not prevent Israel under Pekah joining with
Rezin of Syria against J., with no less an object
than to subvert the dynasty by placing an Ara~
maean on the throne (Isa 7 6). What the result
might have been, had not Isaiah taken the reins
out of Ahaz’ hands, it is impossible to say. As it
was, J. felt the strain of the conflict for many a year.
The country was invaded from other points, and
many towns were lost, some of which were never
recovered (2 Ch 28 17 ff). In despair Ahaz placed
himself and his country under the protection of
Assyria (2 K 16 7 ff). : iy:
It was a part of the cosmopolitan tendencies of
the time that the worship became tarnished with


foreign innovations (2 K 16 10). The temple for
the first time in its history was closed (2 Ch 28 24).
Altars of Baal were set up in all the
16. Cosmo- open spaces of Jerus, each representing
politan some urban god (Jer 11 13). About
Tendencies the closing of the temple Isaiah would
not be greatly concerned. Perhaps it
was his suggestion (cf Isa 1). The priests who
were supreme in the preceding reigns had lost their
influence: their place had been taken by the
prophets. The introduction of Baalism, however,
was no doubt due to Ahaz alone.
IV. Period of Decline.—The following reign—
that of Hezekiah—was, perhaps as 2 result of the
disappearance of the Northern King-


1. Judah dom, a period of reformation. Isaiah
Inde- is now supreme, and the history of the
pendent times will be found in his biography.


It must have been with a sigh of relief
that Hezekiah saw the Northern Kingdom dis-
appear forever from the scene. The relations of
the two countries had been too uniformly hostile
to make that event anything but an omen for good.
It was no doubt due to Isaiah that Hezekiah sought
to recover the old independence of his country.
Their patriotism went near to be their own undoing.
Sennacherib invaded Pal, and Hezekiah found him-
self shorn of everything that was outside the walls
of Jerus. Isaiah’s patriotism rose to the occasion;
the invading armies melted away as by a miracle;
J. was once more free (2 K 18 13 ff).

A curious result of Sennacherib’s invasion was
the disappearance of the high places—local shrines
where Levitical priests officiated in

2. Reform opposition to those of the temple.
of Religion When the Judaean territories were
limited to the city, these of necessity

vanished, and, when the siege waa over, they were
not restored. They were henceforward regarded
as illegal. It is generally held by scholars that
this reform occurred later under Josiah, on the
discovery of the ‘‘Book of the Law” by Hilkiah in
the temple (2 K 22 8), and that this book was
Dt. The high places, however, are not mentioned
in the law book of Dt. The reform was probably the
work of Isaiah, and due to considerations of morals.
The Judaeans had always had a friendly feeling
toward Egypt. When the great eastern power
became threatening, it was to Egypt

3. Egypt they turned for safety. Recent exca-
and Judah vation has shown that the influence of

Egypt upon the life and manners of
Pal was very great, and that that of Assyria and
Babylonia was comparatively slight, and generally
confined to the N. In the reign of Hezekiah a
powerful party proposed an alliance with Egypt
with the view of check-mating the designs of Assyria
(2 K 17 4; Isa 30 2.3; 31 1). Hezekiah followed
Isaiah’s advice in rejecting all alliances.

The commercial and other ties which bound Pal to


Egypt were much stronger than those between Pal and
e East. One of the most considerable


4, Traffic of these was the trade in horses. This
ee traffic had been begun by Solomon (1 K
in Horses 10 28f). The chict seat of the trade in


Pal_was_Lachish (Mic 1 13). In their
nomadic state the Israelites had used camels and donkeys,
and the use of the horse was looked upon with suspicion
by the prophets (Dt 17 16; Zec 9 10). When the
horse is spoken of in the OT, it is as the chief weapon of
the enemies of the nation (Ex 15 1; Jgs 5 22, etc).


On the death of Hezekiah, the nation reverted
to the culture and manners of the time of Ahaz and
even went farther than he in corrupt

6. Reaction practices. Esp. at this time human
under sacrifice became common in Israel (Mic
Manasseh 6 7). The influence for good of the
prophets had gone (2 K 21). There

is a curious story in 2 Ch 33 11f that Manasseh


Judah, Kingdom [ym INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Judah, Territory


1762


was taken captive by the Assyrians, and, after
spending some time in eaptivity in Babylon, re-
formed and was restored to his throne. His son,
however, undid these reforms, and public discon-
tent grew to such an extent that he was assassinated
(2 KK 24 19 ff).
Once more the tide turned in the direction of
reform, and on this occasion it rose higher than ever
before. The reformation under Josiah
6. Triumph was never again wholly undone. The
of Reform enthusiasm of the iconoclasts carried
Party them far beyond the frontiers of Judah
(2 Ch 34 6), for on this oceasion they
were backed up by the newly found ‘Book of the
Law.” All boded well for a prosperous reign, but
unforeseen disasters came from without. The
Scythian invasion swept over Southwestern Asia
(Jer 1 14-16; 6 1, etc). The storm passed, and
hope rose higher than before, for the power of
Assyria had been shattered forever.
Already in 722, when Sargon seized the throne
on the death of Shalmaneser, Babylonia had re-
volted, and crowned Marduk-baladan


7. Baby- king (Isa 39 1). Hezekiah received
lonia and a deputation from Babylonia (2 K
Judah 20 12 ff), no doubt in the hope of


freeing himself from the Assyr danger
by such an alliance. The revolt of Merodach-
baladan was maintained for 12 years; then it was
suppressed. There was, however, a second revolt
of Babylonia on the accession of Sennacherib, Sar-
gon’s son, in 705, which went on till 691, and the
events referred to in 2 K 20 may have happened
at this time, for Hezekiah’s reign seems to have
ended prosperously.
Sennacherib was assassinated in 681 (Isa 87 38)
and was succeeded by his son Esar-haddon, who
rebuilt Babylon, razed to the ground


8. Endof by his father, and under whom the
Assyrian province remained quiet. In 674 hos-
Empire tilities with Egypt broke out, and that


country was overrun, and TirmaKan
(q.v.) was expelled in 670. Two years later,
however, occurred the revolt of Egypt and the
death of Esar-haddon. Assur-bani-pal succeeded,
and Egypt regained her independence in 660. The
revolt of Babylonia, the incursion of the Scythians
(Jer 1 14 ff) and the death of Assur-bani-pal fol-
lowed. Two more kings sat on the throne of
Assyria, and then Nineveh was taken by the com-
bined Scythians (Mandor) and Babylonians (Herod.
i.74; Nah; Zeph 2 13-15; Hab 1 5f).
The Seythian tempest passed quickly, and when
it was over the Assyr peril was no more. Pharaoh-
necoh seized the opportunity to avenge


9. After the injuries of his country by the inva-
Scythian sion of the erstwhile Assyr territories.
Invasion Josiah, pursuing the policy of alliance


with Babylonia inaugurated by Heze-
kiah, endeavored to arrest his progress. He was
aioe and mortally wounded at Megiddo (Zee
12 11).
By the foolhardy action of Josiah, J. lost its inde-
pendence. The people, indeed, elected Jehoahaz
(Shallum) king, but he was imme-
10. Judah diately deposed and earried to Egypt
Again De- by the Pharaoh (Jer 22 10 ff; Ezk
pendent 19 3f), who appointed Jehoiakim
(Eliakim) as vassal-king. After the
defeat of the Pharaoh at Carchemish, the old
Hittite stronghold, by Nebuchadrezzar, Jehoia-
kim submitted, and J. became a dependency of
Babylon. There must have been some return of
prosperity, for Jehoiakim is denounced for his
luxury and extravagance and oppressive taxation
(Jer 22 13 ff), but the country was raided by the


neighboring Bedawin (2 K 24 2), and Jehoiakim
came to an untimely end (Jer 22 19). ,
The prophets were no longer, as under Hezekiah,
all-powerfulin the state. The influence of Jeremiah
was no doubt great, but the majority
11. Prophets was against him. His program was
Lose In- both unpopular in itself and it had
fluence the fatal defect of being diametrically
opposed to that of Isaiah, the patriot-
politician (if such there be), who had saved the state
from shipwreck. Isaiah had preached reliance
upon the national God and through it the political
independence of the nation. It was the sad duty
of Jeremiah to advise the surrender of the national
independence to the newly risen power of Babylon.
(Jer 21 4.9; 38 2, etc). Isaiah had held that the
Holy City was impregnable (2 K 19 32); Jeremiah
was sure that it would be taken by the Chaldaeans
(Jer 32 24.43). Events proved that each prophet
was right for the time in which he lived.
Jehoiakim was the only Judaean king who was
a vassal first to one overlord and then to another.
J. took a step downward in his reign.


12. The It was under him also that the first
Deporta- deportation of the Judaeans oeeurred
tions (Dnl 1 1-17). He was succeeded by


his son Jehoiachin who, on account of
a rebellion which closed the reign of his father, was
ere long deported, along with the best of the nation
(Jer 22 24 ff; Ezk 19 5ff), A 3d son of Josiah,
Mattaniah, was set on the throne under the title of
Zedekiah. Against the advice of Jeremiah, this,
the last king of J., declared himself independent of
Babylon, and threw in his lot with Egypt under
Pharaoh Hophra (Apries), thus breaking his oath
of fealty (Ezk 17 15 ff). On the advance of the
Chaldaeans, J. was deserted by her allies, the Edom-
ites and Philis (see Boox or Os), and soon only
Lachish (Tell el-Hesy), Azekah (probably Tell Zaka-
rya) and Jerus remained in the hands of Zedekiah.
The siege of the city lasted two years. It was taken
on the fatal 9th of Ab in the year 586. Zedekiah’s
family was put to the sword, and he himself was
taken to Babylon. Egypt shared the fate of J.,
with whom she had been often so closely connected,
and Hophra was the last of the Pharaohs.
The kingdom of J. had lasted 480 years, counting
from its commencement, exactly twice as long as
the kingdom of Israel, counting from
13. Sum- the disruption. No doubt this longer
mary existence was due in the first place to
the religious faith of the people. This
is clear from the fact that the national religion not
only survived the extinction of the nation, but
spread far beyond its original territories and has
endured down to the present day. But there were
also circumstances which conspired to foster the
growth of the nation in its earliest and most critical
period. One of these was the comparative isola-
tion and remoteness of the country. Neither the
kingdom of Israel nor that of Judah is for a moment
to be compared to those of Egypt and Assyria.
Even the combined kingdom under David and Sol-
omon hardly deserves that comparison; and sepa-
rate, the Northern Kingdom would be about the size
of New Hampshire and the Southern Kingdom about
that of Connecticut. Thesmaller kingdom survived
the larger because it happened to be slightly farther
removed from the danger zone. Even had the two
kingdoms held together, it is impossible that they
could have withstood the expansion of Assyria and
Babylonia on the one side and of Egypt on the
other. The Egyp party in Judaean polities in the
times of Isaiah and Jeremiah were so far in the
right, that, if J. could have maintained her inde-
pendence in alliance with Egypt, these two countries
combined might have withstood the power of


1763


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Judah, Kingdom
Judah, Territory


Assyria or Babylon. But it is because this ancient
race, tracing its descent from remote antiquity,
preserved its religious, at the expense of its national,
independence, that its lit. continues to mold much
of the thought of Europe and America today. See
Isrant, Kinepom or, Tsomas Hunter WEIR


JUDAH, TERRITORY OF (TAM, yehadhah):
I. Grooraraicat Data
1. The Natural Boundaries
2. The Natural Divisions of Judah
(1) The Maritime Plain
(2) The Shephelah
(3) The Hill Country of Judah
II. Tue Tries or Jupau anv Its Territory
III. Tse Bounparins or tun Kinepom or Jupan
Literature
I. Geographical Data.—Although the physical
conformation of Western Pal divides this land into
very definite areas running longitudinally N. and §.,
yet all through history there has been a recognition
of a further—and politically more important—
division into 3 areas running transversely, known in
NT times as Galilee, Samaria and Judaea. These
districts are differentiated to some extent by dis-
tinctive physical features which have in no small
degree influenced the history of their inhabitants.
The southernmost of these regions possesses on 3 sides


very definite natural boundaries: to the W. the Medi-
terranean, to the E. the Dead Sea, aud


1. The the Jordan, and to the S. 60 miles, N. to 8.,
Natural of practically trackless desert, a frontier

at as secure as sea or mountain range. On
Boundaries the N. no such marked “‘scientific frontier”


exists, and on this the one really accessible
side, history bears witness that tho frontier has heen
pushed backward and forward. The most ideal natural
northern frontier, which only became the actual one com-
paratively late in Heb times (see Jupana), is that which
passes from the river ‘Aujeh in the W., up the Wady Deir
Balat, by the wide and deep Wdady Ishar to' Akrabbeh and
thence E. to the Jordan. A second natural frontier com-
mences at the same line on the W., but after following
the Wady Deir Baldt, branches off southward along the
Wady Nimr (now traversed by the modern carriage road
frem Jerus to Nablés), crosses the water-parting close to
thelofty Tell Asha@r, and runs successively down the Wddy
Sanieh and the W ddy' Aujeh and hy the eastern river‘ Aujeh
to the Jordan. This division-line is one conformahle to
the physical features, hecause north of it the table-lands of
“*Judaea”’ give place to the more broken mountain groups
of * Samaria.”’ Auother less natural, though much more
historic, frontier is that which traverses the Valeof Ajalon,
follows the Beth-horon pass, and, after crossing the cen-
tral plateau near el Jib (Gibeon) and er Ram (Ramah of
Benjamin), ruus down the deep and rugged Waddy
Suweintt, between Jeba' (Geha) and Mukhmas (Mich-
mash), to Jericho and the Jordan. It_was along this
line that the great frontier fortresses, Bethel, Gibeon,
Ramah, Adasa, Geba and_Michmash, were erected.
Such, on the N., S., E., and W., were the natural bound-
aries of the southern third of Pal; yet in all history the
laud thus inclosed scarcely ever formed a homogeneous
whole.


Within these boundaries lay four very different
types of land—the maritime plain, the “lowland”
or Shephelah, the “hill country” and,

2. The Nat-included usually with the last, the


ural Divi- desert or Jeshimon. :
sions of (1) The maritime plain, the “land
Judah of the Philis’ (1 $8 61; 271; 2K


8 2; Zeph 2 5), was ideally though
never actually, the territory of Judah (cf Josh 15
45-47); it may have been included, as it is by some
modern writers, as part of the Shephelah, but this
jg not the usual use of the word. It is a great
stretch of level plain or rolling downs of very fertile
soil, capable of supporting a thriving population
and cities of considerable size, esp. near the sea-


coast. , b:

(2) The Shephelah (sh¢phelah), or “lowland” of
Judah (Dt 17; Josh 91; 112.16; 15 33-44;
1K 10 27; 1 Ch 27 28; Jer 17 26).—In_ these
references the word is variously rendered in AV,
usually as ‘‘vale” or ‘valley,’ sometimes, as in the
last two, as “plain.” In RV the usual rendering is
“lowland.” In 1 Macc 12 38, AV has ‘“Shephela”’


| and R


“plain country.’ The word ‘Shephelah”
appears to survive in the Arab. Sifla about Beti
Jebrin.

This is a very important region in the history of Judah.
It ls a district consisting mainly of rounded hills, 500-
800 ft. high, with fertile open valleys full of corn flelds;
caves abound, and there are abundant evidences of a
once crowded population. Situated as it is between the
‘hill country ’’ and the maritime plaln, it was the scene
of frequent skirmishes between the Hebrews and_ the
Philis; Judah failed to hold it against the Philis who kept
it durlng most of their history. © Shephelah Is some-
what sharply divided off from the central mountain mass
by a remarkable series of palleve running N. and 8.
Commencing at the Vale of Ajalon and passing 8., we
have in succession the Wddy el Ghurdb and, after crossing
the Wddy es Siwdn, the Wddy en Najil, the Wady es
Sunt (Elah) and the Wady es Sar. It 1s noticeable that
the western extremity of the most historic northern
frontier of ancient Judah—that limited hy the Vale of
Ajalon in the W.—appears to have heen determined by
the presence of this natural feature. N, of this the hills
of Samaria flatten out to the plain without any such
intervening valleys.

(3) The hill country of Judah is by far the most
characteristic part of that tribe’s possessions;
it was on account of the shelter of these mountain
fastnesses that this people managed to hold their
own against their neighbors and hide away from the
conquering armies of Assyria and Egypt. No other
section of the country was so secluded and protected
by her natural borders. It was the environment
of these bare hills and rugged valleys which did
much to form the character and influence the lit.
of the Jews. The hill country is an area well
defined, about 35 miles long and some 15 broad, and
is protected on three sides by natural frontiers of
great strength; on the N. alone it has no “scientific
frontier.”’ On the 8. lay the Negeb, and beyond
that the almost waterless wilderness, a barrier con-
sisting of a series of stony hills running E. and W.,
difficult for a caravan and almost impracticable
for an army. On the W. the hills rise sharply from
those valleys which delimit them from the Shephe-
lah, but they are pierced by a series of steep and
rugged defiles which wind upward to the central
table-land. At the northwestern corner the Beth-
horon pass—part of the northern frontier line—
runs upward from the wide Vale of Ajalon; this
route, the most historic of all, has been associated
with a succession of defeats inflicted by those hold-
ing the higher ground (see Bretu-HoRon). 8S. of
this is the Wady ‘Ali, up which runs the modern
carriage road to Jerus, and still farther S. lies the
winding rocky defile, up part of which the railway
from Jaffa is laid, the Wady es Surdr. A more im-
portant valley, because of its width and easier
gradient, is the great Vale of Hlah (Waddy eg Sunt),
to guard the highest parts of which (now the Wady
es Sar) was built the powerful fortress of Beth-zur
(2 Ch 11 7, etc), which Jos (Ani, XIII, v, 6) de-
scribes as ‘‘the strongest place in all Jndaea’’ (see
Bets-zur). Up this pass the Syrians successfully
with the aid of elephants (Ant, XII, ix, 4) invaded
Judaea. The eastern frontier of the hill country
is one of extraordinary natural strength. Firstly,
there were the Jordan and the Dead Sea; then along
all but the northernmost part of the eastern frontier
lay a long line of semi-precipitous cliffs, in places
over 1,000 ft. high, absolutely unscalable and
pierced at long intervals by passes all steep and
dangerous. Within this again came a wide area of
waterless and barren desert, the Wilderness of
Judah (or Judaea) known in EV as Jgsuimon
(q.v.). To the northeasterly part of the frontier,
where the ascent from the Jericho plain to the
mountains presents no special difficulty in gradation,
the waterless condition of the Jeshimon greatly
restricted the possible routes for an enemy. The
natural position for the first line of defence was the
fortified city of Jericho, but as a froutier fortress


Judah, Territory
Judas Iscariot


she failed from the days of Joshua onward (see
JerIcHo). From Jericho four roads pass upward
to the plateau of Judah; unlike the corresponding
passes on the western frontier, they do not traverse
any definite line of valley, but in many places run
actually along the ridges.

These roads are: (a) The earllest historically, though
now the least frequented, is the most northerly, which
passes westward at the back of ancient Jericho (near
‘Ain es Sultan) and ascends by Michmash and Ai to
Bethel; (+) the route traversed by the modern Jerus-
Jericho road; (c) the more natural route which enters the
hills by Wdady Joreif Ghasal and runs hy Nebi Misa,
joining the line of the modern carriage road a mile or so
after passing the deserted ruin of the Saracenic Khan
el Ahmar. ere runs the road for the thousands of pil-
grims who visit the shrine of Nebi Masa in the spring.
(d) The most natural pass of all is hy way of Wddy el
Kuneiterah, across the open plateau of el Bukeia‘' and over
the shoulder of Jebel ef Muntdr to Bethlehem. From
‘Ain Feshkhah @ very steep road, probably ancient,
ascends to join this last route in el Bukeia'. From En-
gedi (‘Ain Jidy) a steep ascent—almost a stairway—
winds ahruptly to the plateau above, whence a_road
passes northwesterly hy the Wddy Husaseh past Tekoa
to Bethlehem and Jerus, and another branch goes west
to Hebron and Juttah.

Somewhere along these routes must have lain the
“Ascent of Ziz’’ and the “Wilderness of Jeruel,’’ the
scene of the events of 2 Ch 20. The hill country
of Judah is distinguished from other parts of Pal
by certain physical characteristics. Its central part
is a long plateau—or really series of plateaus—
running N. and S., very stony and barren and sup-
plied with but scanty springs: “‘dew’’ is less plenti-
ful than in the north; several of the elevated plains,
e.g. about Bethlehem, Beit Jéla and Hebron, are
well suited to the growth of corn and olive trees; in
the sheltered valleys and on the terraced hillsides
to the W. of the water-parting, vines, olives, figs
and other fruit trees flourish exceedingly. There
is evidence everywhere that cultivation was far
more highly developed in ancient times; on most
of the hill slopes to the W. traces of ancient ter-
races can still be seen (see Botany). This district
in many parts, esp. on its eastern slopes, is preémi-
nently a pastoral land, and flocks of sheep and goats
abound, invading in the spring even the desert
itself. This last is ever in evidence, visible from the
environs of all Judah’s greater cities and doubtless
profoundly influencing the lives and thonghts of their
inhabitants.

The altitude attained in this “hill country” is
usually below 3,000 ft. in the north (e.g. Ramallah,
2,850 ft., Nebi Samwil, 2,935 ft.), but is higher near
Hebron, where we get 8,545 ft. at Ramet el Khulil.
Many would limit the term “hill country of Judaea”’
to the higher hills centering around Hebron, but
this is unnecessary. Jerus is situated near a lower
and more expanded part of the plateau, while the
higher hills to its north, are, like that city itself, in
the territory of Benjamin.

IL, The Tribe of Judah and Its Territory. —In Nu
26 19-22, when the tribes of the Hebrews are
enumerated “in the plains of Moab by the Jordan
at Jericho” (ver 3), Judah is described as made up
of the families of the Shelanites, the Perezites, the
Zerahites, the Hezronites and the Hamulites,
“These are the families of Judah according to those

‘that. were numbered of them,” a total of 76,500
(ver 22). In Jgs 1 16 we read that the Kenites
united with the tribe of J., and from other references
(Josh 14 6-15; 15 13-19; Jgs 1 12-15.20) we
learn that the two Kenizzite clans of Caleb and
Othniel also were absorbed; and it is clear from
1S 27 10; 30 29 that the Jerahmeclites—closely
connected with the Calebites (cf 1 Ch 2 42)—also
formed a part of the tribe of J. The Kenizzites
and Jerahmeelites were probably of Edomite origin
(Gen 36 11; cf 1 Ch 2 42), and this large admix-
ture of foreign blood may partly account for the com-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1764


parative isolation of J. from the other tribes (e.g. she
is not mentioned in Jgs 5).


The territory of the tribe of J. is described ideally in
Josh 15, but it never really extended over the maritime
plait to the W. ‘The natural frontiers to the W. and E.

ave already been descrihed as the frontiers of the “hill
country"; to the 8. the houndary is descrihed as going
“even to the wilderness of Zin southward, at the utter-
most part of the south,” i.e. of the Negeb (ver 1), and
(ver 3) as far south as Kadesh-barnea, i.e. the oasis of
Ain Kadis, 50 miles 8. of Beersheha, far in the desert; the
position of the ‘‘ Ascent of Akrabhbim,”’ i.e. of scorpions,
is not known. The “Brook of Egypt’ is generally
accepted to he the Wadyel'Arish, The factis, the actual
frontier shaded off imperceptibly into the desert—varying
perhaps with the possibilities of agriculture and depend-
ing therefore upon the rainfall. The cities mentioned as
on the boundaries, whose sites are now lost, prohably
Neen) marked the edge of the habitable area (see

EGEB),

The northern boundary which separated the land of
J. from that of Benjamin requires brief mention. The
various localities mentioned in Josh 1§ 5-12 are dealt
with in separate articles, but, omitting the very doubtful,
the following, which are generally accepted, will show
the general direction of the boundary line: The horder
went from the mouth of the Jordan to Beth-hoglah (‘Ain
Hajlah), and from the Valley of Achor (Wddy Kelt) by
the ascent of Adummin ( Tdla‘at ed Dumm) to the waters
of En Shemesh Qrobanly ‘Ain Haud), En Rogel (Bir
Eyy@b), aud the Valley of Hinnom (Wddy er Rabdébi).
The line then crossed the Vale of Rephaim (el Bukeia')
to the waters of Nephtoah (Lifta), Kiriath-jearim
peers, el ‘Enab), Chesalon (Kesla), Beth-shemesh

‘Ain Shems), Ekron (‘Akir), and Jabneel (Yebnah), ‘‘and
the goings out of the horder were at the sea.’ Accord-
ing to the above line, Jerus lay entirely within the hounds
of Benjamin, though, according to a tradition recorded
in the Talm, the site of the altar was in a piece of land
helonging to Judah. The above frontier line can be
followed on any modern map of Pal, and if it does not
In many parts describe a natural frontier, it must be
remembered that the frontiers of village and town pos-
sessions in modern Pal are extremely arhitrary, and
though undetermined by any natural limits such as
streams or mountain summits, they persist from gen-
eration to generation, and this too during periods—not
long past—when there was constant warfare between
different clans. ae

The territory of J. was small; even had it included all
within its ideal boundaries, it would have heen no more
than 2,000 sq. miles; actually it was nearer 1,300 sq.
miles, of which nearly half was desert.


Ill, The Boundaries of the Kingdom of Judah.—
These were very circumscribed. In 2 Ch 11 5-12
there is a list of the cities—chiefly those on the
frontier—which Rehoboam fortified. On the E.
were Bethlehem, Etam and Tekoa; and on the
W. and 8.W. were Beth-zur, Soco, Adullam, Gath,
Mareshah, Ziph, Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah,
Zorah, Aijalon and Hebron. The sites of the great
majority of these are known, and they are all upon
the borders of the Shephelah or the hill country.
It will be seen too that the military preparation
then made was against an attack from the W. In
the 5th year of the reign of Rehoboam the expected
attack came, and Shishak (Sheshenq I) of Egypt
swept over the land and not only conquered all J.
and Jerus, but, according to the reading of some
authorities in the account of this campaign given
in the great temple of Karnak, he handed over to
Jeroboam of Israel certain strongholds of Judah.

The usual northern frontier between the two Heb
kingdoms appears to have been the southernmost
of the three natural lines described in I above,
namely by the Valley of Ajalon on the W. and the
Gorge of Michmash (Wady Suweini#) on the E.
Along the_central plateau the frontier varied.
Bethel (1 _K 12 29; 2 K 10 29; Am 3 14; 4 4;
7 10.13; Hos 10 15) belonged to Israel, though
once it fell to J. when Abijah took it and with it
Jeshanah (‘Ain Sinia) and Ephron (probably ef
Taiyibeh) (2 Ch 18 19). Geba (Jeba’), just to the

.of the Wady Suweinit, was on the northern frontier
of J., hence instead of the old term “from Dan to
Beer-sheba,” we read now of “from Geba to Beer-
sheba” (2 K 23 8). Baasha, king of Israel, went
S. and fortified Ramah (er Ram, but 4 miles from
Jerus) against J. (1 K 15 17), but Asa stopped his


1765


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Judah, Territory


Judas Iscariot


work, removed the fortifications and with the ma-
terials strengthened his own frontier at Geba and
Mizpah (1 K 16 21.22), In the Jordan valley
Jericho was held by Israel (1 K 16 34; 2 K 2 4).

After the Northern Kingdom fell, the frontier of
J. appears to have extended a little farther N., and
Bethel (2 K 23 15-19) and Jericho (to judge from
Ezr 2 34; Neh 3 2; 7 36) also became part of the
kingdom of J. For the further history of this dis-
trict see Jupama.


LirEraturE.—See esp. HGHL, chs viii-xv; PEF,
III, and Saunders, Intro to ‘he Survey of Western Pal.
H_


. W. G. Masterman

JUDAH AT (AV UPON) THE JORDAN
(FIV MW, yhidhah ha-yardén): A place mark-
ing the eastern limit of the territory of Naphtali
(Josh 19 34). It is generally thought among
scholars that the text is corrupt; but no very prob-
able emendation has been suggested. ‘Thomson
(LB, Il, 466) proposes to identify it with Seiyid
Jehida, a small white-domed sanctuary about 3
miles to the 8.E. of Tell el-Kady.


JUDAISM, joo’daé-iz’m. See Israzi, ReLicion
OF.


JUDAS, j60’das (’IovSas, Jotdas;
Heb ‘“‘Judah’’):
(1) A Levite mentioned in 1 Esd 9 23=Junag


Gr form of


(2) Judas Maccabaeus, 3d son of Mattathias
(1 Mace 2 4). See Maccasess.

(3) Judas, son of Chalphi, a Jewish officer who
supported Jonathan bravely at the battle of Hazor
(1 Mace 11 70; Ant, XIII, v, 7). :

(4) A person of good position in Jerus at the time
of the mission to Aristobulus (2 Macc 1 10); he
has been identified with Judas Maccabaeus and also
with an Essene prophet (Ant, XIII, xi, 2; BJ, TI,


5).
5) Son of Simon the Maccabee, and brother of


John Hyrcanus (1 Mace 16 2). He was wounded
in the battle which he fought along with his brother
against Cendebaeus (1 Macc 16 1 ff; Ant, XIII,
vii, 3), and was murdered by Ptolemy the usurper,
his brother-in-law, at Dok (1 Macc 16 11 ff).


J. Hurcaison

JUDAS, JUDA:

(1) The name of an ancestor of Jesus (Lk 3 30).
In AV it occurs also in Lk 3 26, but RV has “Joda”
(WH ‘Iwéd, Todd).

(2) Judas Iscariot (see separate art.).

(3) One of the brothers of Jesus (Mt 13 55;
Mk 6 3). See Jupz. .

(4) An apostle, “not Iscariot” (Jn 14 22). He
is generally identified with Lebbaeus (Mt 10 3)
and Thaddaeus (Mk 3 18). See Leppazvus; THap-
pagus. He is called Jupas or James (q.v.)
(Lk 6 16; Acts 1 13), which means ‘‘the son of
James,” not (AV) “the brother of James.” ,

(5) A Galilean who stirred up rebellion “in the
days of the enrolment” (Acts 6 87). See Jupas
oF GALILEE. .

(6) One with whom Paul lodged in Damascus,
whose house was in “the street which is called
Straight” (Acts 9 11). Nothing further is known
of him. A house is pointed out as his, in a lane off
the Straight Street.

(7) Judas Barsabbas (Acts 15 22.27.32; see
separate art.). 8. F. Hunter


JUDAS BARSABBAS, bdr-sab’as (‘IotSas Bap-
caBBas, Jovdas Barsabbds): Judas was, with Silas,
a delegate from the church in Jerus to the gentile
Christians of Antioch, Syria and Cilicia. They
were appointed to convey the letter containing the
decision of “the apostles and the elders, with the


whole church” regarding the attitude to be taken
by gentile Christians toward the Mosaic law, and
also to explain ‘the same things by word of mouth.”
They accompanied Paul and Barnabas to Antioch,
and, ‘being themselves also prophets,” i.e. preachers
they not only handed over the epistle but stayed
some time in the city preaching and teaching. They
seem to have gone no farther than Antioch, for
‘they were dismissed in peace from the brethren
unto those that had sent them forth,” and it was
Paul and Silas who some time afterward strength-
ve ji churches in Syria and Cilicia (Acts 15
0.41),


According to ver 34 AV, Judas returned to Jerus
without Silas, who remained at Antioch and afterward
became Paul's companion (ver 40). The oldest MSS,
however, omit ver 34, and it is therefore omltted from

. It was probably a marginal note to explain ver
40, and in time it crept into the text. Judas and Silas
are called ‘‘chief men among the brethren” (ver 22),
probably elders, and ‘‘ prophets” (ver 32).

Barsabbas being a patronymic, Judas was prob-
ably the brother of Joseph Barsabbas. He cannot
be identified with any other Judas, e.g. “Judas not
Iscariot” (Jn 14 22). We hear no more of Judas
after his return to Jerus (Acts 16 22 ff).

S. F. Hunter

JUDAS ISCARIOT, is-kar’i-ot (Tot8as Iokapid-
tns, Iovidas Iskariétés, ie. “ish keriydth, ‘Judas,
man of Kerioth”’): One of the twelve apostles and
the hetrayer of Jesus; for etymology, etc, see
JUDAS. i

i. Life.—Judas was, as his second name indicates,
a native of Kerioth or Karioth. The exact locality
of Kerioth (cf Josh 15 25) is doubtful, but it lay
probably to the 8. of Judaea, being identified with
the ruins of el Karjetein (cf A. Plummer, art.
“Judas Iscariot” in HDB).

He was the son of Simon (Jn 18 2) or Simon
Iscariot (In 6 71; 13 26), the meaning of Iscariot

explaining why it was applied to his


1. Name father also. The first Scriptural refer-
and Early ence to J. is his election to the apostle-
History ship (cf Mt 10 4, Mk 319; Lk 6


16). He may have been present at
the preaching of John the Baptist at Bethany be-
yond Jordan (cf Jn 1 28), but more probably he
first met Jesus during the return of the latter through
Judaea with His followers (cf Jn 3 22). Accord-
ing to the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles (see
Simon THE Cananakan), J. was among those who
received the call at the Sea of Tiberias (cf Mt 4
18-22). :

For any definite allusion to J. during the interval
lying between his call and the events immediately
preceding the betrayal, we are in-


2. Before debted to St. John alone. These
the Be- allusions are made with the manifest
trayal purpose of showing forth the nefarious


character of J. from the beginning;
and in their sequence there is a gradual develop-
ment and growing clearness in the manner in which
Jesus makes prophecy regarding his future betrayer.
Thus, after the discourse on the Bread of Life in the
synagogue of Capernaum (Jn 6 26-59), when
many of the disciples deserted Jesus (ver 66) and
Peter protested the allegiance of the apostles (ver
69), Jesus answered, ‘Did not I choose you the
twelve, and one of you is a devil” (ver 70). Then
follows St. John’s commentary, “Now he spake of
Judas the son of Simon Iscariot, for he it was that
should betray him, being one of the twelve” (ver
71), implying that Judas was already known to
Jesus as being in spirit one of those who ‘went
back, and walked no more with him” (ver 66).
But the situation, however disquieting it must have
been to the ambitious designs which probably
actuated J. in his acceptance of the apostleship (cf


Judas Iscariot = THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Jude, Epistle o:


1766


below), was not sufficiently critical to call for imme-
diate desertion on his part. Instead, he lulled his
fears of exposure by the fact that he was not men-
tioned by name, and continued ostensibly one
of the faithful, Personal motives of a sordid na-
ture had also influence in causing him to remain.
Appointed keeper of the purse, he disregarded the
warnings of Jesus concerning greed and hypocrisy
(cf Mt 6 20; Lk 12 1-3) and appropriated the
funds to his own use. As a cloak to his avarice,
he pretended to be zealous in their administration,
and therefore, at the anointing of Jesns’ feet by
Mary, he asked “Why was not this ointment sold
for 300 shillings, and given to the poor? Now this
he said, not because he cared for the poor; but
because he was a thief, and having the bag took
away what was put therein” (Jn 12 5.6; cf also
Mt 26 7-13; Mk 14 3-8).
Yet, although by this craftiness J. concealed for
a time his true nature from the rest of the disciples,
and fomented any discontent that
3. The Be- might arise among them (cf Mk 14
trayal 4), he now felt that his present source
of income could not long remain secure.
The pregnant words of his Master regarding the
day of his burial (cf Mt 26 12; Mk 14 8; Jn 12
7) revealed to His betrayer that Jesus already knew
well the evil powers that were at work against Him;
and it is significant that, according to Mt and Mk,
who alone of the synoptists mention the anointing,
J. departed immediately afterward and made his
compact with the chief priests (cf Mt 26 14.15;
Mk 14 10.11; ef also LE 22 3-6). But his ab-
sence was only temporary. He was present at the
washing of the disciples’ feet, there to be differen-
tiated once more by Jesus from the rest of the
Twelve (cf “Ye are clean, but not all” and “He
that eateth my bread lifted up his heel against me,”
Jn 13 10.18), but again without being named.
It seemed as if Jesus wished to give Judas every
opportunity, even at this late hour, of repenting
and making his confession. For the last time,
when they had sat down to eat, Jesus appealed to
him thus with the words, ‘“‘One of you shall betray
me” (Mt 2621; Mk 1418; Lk 2221; Jn 13
21). And at the end, in answer to the anxious
queries of His disciples, ‘Is it I?’ He indicated his
betrayer, not by name, but by asign: “He it is, for
whom I shall dip the sop, and give it him” (Jn 13
26). Immediately upon its reception, J. left the
supper room; the opportunity which he sought for
was come (cf Jn 13 30; Mt 26 16). There is
some doubt as to whether he actually received the
eucharistic bread and wine previous to his departure
or not, but most modern commentators hold that
he did not. On his departure, J. made his way to
the high priests and their followers, and coming upon
Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane, he betrayed
his Master with a kiss (Mt 26 47-50; Mk 14 43.
44; Lk 22 47; Jn 18 2-5).
After the betrayal, Mk, Lk and Jn are silent as
regards J., and the accounts given in Mt and Acts
of his remorse and death vary in de-
4. His tail. According to Mt, the actual
Death condemnation of Jesus awakened Ju-
das’ sense of guilt, and becoming still
more despondent at his repulse by the chief priests
and elders, “he cast down the pieces of silver into
the sanctuary, and departed; and he went away
and hanged himself.” With the money the chief
priests purchased the potter's field, afterward called
‘the field of blood,” and in this way was fulfilled
the prophecy of Zechariah (11 12-14) ascribed by
Matthew to Jeremiah (Mt 27 3-10). The account
given in Acts 1 16-20 is much shorter. It men-
tions neither Judas’ repentance nor the chief priests,
but simply states that J. “obtained a field with the


reward of his iniquity; and falling headlong, he
burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels
gushed ont” (ver 18). The author of Acts finds
in this the fulfilment of the prophecy in Ps 69 25.
The Vulg rendering, ““When he had hanged himself,
he burst asunder,’”? suggests a means of reconciling
the two accounts. z

According to a legendary account mentioned by
Papias, the death of J. was due to elephantiasis (cf
Hennecke, Neutestamentliche Apokryphen, 5). A
so-called “Gospel of Judas’? was in use among the
gnostic sect of the Cainites.

HI, Character and Theories.—Much discussion and


controversy have centered, not_only around the dis-
crepancies of the Gospel narratives of J.,
1. Joined


but also around his character_and the
roblems connected with it. That. the
the Apostles betrayer of Jesus should also be one of the


to Betra’ chosen Twelve has given_opportunity for
Jesu y the attacks of the foes of Christianity from
esus the earliest times (cf Orig., Con. Cel., 11.12);


and the difficulty of finding any proper
solution has proved so great that some have been in-
duced to regard J. as merely a personification of the
spirit of Judaism. The acceptance of this view would,
however, invalidate the historical value of much of the
Scriptural writings. Other theories are put forward
in explanation, viz. that J. joined the apostolic band
with the definite intention of betraying Jesus. The aim
of this intention has again received two different inter-
pretations, both of which seek to elevate the character
of J., and to free him from the charge of sordid motives
and cowardly treachery. According to one, J. was @
strong patriot, who saw in Jesus the foe of his race and
its ancient creed, and therefore betrayed Him in the in-
terests of his country. This view is, however, irrecon-
cilable with the rejection of J. by the chief priests (cf
Mt 27 3-10). According to the other, J. regarded him-
self as a true servant of Christianity, who assumed the
réle of traitor to precipitate the action of the Messiah
and induce Him to manifest His miraculous powers
by calling down the angels of God from heaven to
help Him (cf Mt 26 53). His suicide was_further
due to his disappointment at the failure of Jesus to
fulfil his expectations. This theory found favor in
ancient times with the Cainites (cf above), and in
modern days with De Quincey and Bishep Whately.
But the terms and manner of denunciation employed
by Jesus in regard to J. (cf also Jn 17 12) render this
view also untenable.

Another view is that J. was foreordained to be the
traitor: that Jesus was conscious from the first that He
was to suffer death on the cross, and chose
J. because He knew that he should betray


2. Fore- = Him and thus fulfil the Divine decrees
ordained (cf Mt 26 54). Those holding this view
to Bea base their arguments on the omniscience
Traitor of Jesus implied in Jn 2 24, Jesus ‘‘knew

all men’; Jn 6 64, ‘‘Jesus knew from the


beginning who should betray him," and
Jn 18 4, ‘‘knowing all the things that were coming
upon him."’ Yet to take those texts lit. would mean a


’ too rigid application of the doctrine of predestination.


It would treat J. as a mere instrument, as a means and
not an end in the hands of a higher power; it would
render meaningless the appeals and reproaches made
to him by Jesus and deny any real existence of that per-
sonal responsibility and sense of guilt which it was Our
Lord’s very, purpose to awaken aud stimulate in the
hearts of His hearers. John himself wrote after the
event, but in the words of Our Lord there was, as we
have seen, a growing clearness in the manner in which
He foretold His betrayal. The omniscience of Jesus was
greater than that of a mere clairvoyant who claimed to
foretell the exact course of future events. It was the
oemniscience of one who knew on the one hand the ways
of His Eternal Father among men, and who, on the
other, penetrated into the deepest recesses of human
character and beheld there all its secret feelings and
motives and tendencies.


Although a full discussion of the character of J.
would of necessity involve those ultimate problems
of Free Will and Original Sin (West-

3. Betrayal cott) which no theology can ade-
the Result quately solve, the theory which re-
of Gradual gards the betrayal as the result of a
Develop- gradual development within the soul
ment of J. seems the most practical. It is
an. significant that J. alone among the
disciples was of southern extraction; and the differ-
ences in temperament and social outlook, together
with the petty prejudices to which these generally
give rise, may explain in part, though they do not


1767


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Judas Iscariot


Jude, Epistle of


justify, his after treachery—that lack of inner
sympathy which existed between J. and the rest
of the apostles. He undoubtedly possessed a
certain business ability, and was therefore appointed
keeper of the purse. But his heart could not have
been clean, even from the first, as he administered
_ even his primary charge dishonestly. The cancer
of this greed spread from the material to the spirit-
ual. To none of the disciples did the fading of the
dream of an earthly kingdom of pomp and glory
bring greater disappointment than to J. The cords
of love by which Jesus gradually drew the hearts
of the other disciples to Himself, the teaching by
which He uplifted their souls above all earthly
things, were as chafing bonds to the selfishness of J.
And from his fettered greed and disappointed am-
bition sprang jealousy and spite and hatred. It
was the hatred, not of a strong, but of an essentially
weak man. Instead of making an open breach
with his Lord, he remained ostensibly one of His
followers: and this continued contact with a good-
ness to which he would not yield (cf Swete on Mk
14 10), and his brooding over the rebukes of his
Master, gave ready entrance for “Satan into his
soul.” But if he “knew the good and did not do
it” (ef Jn 13 17), so also he was weak in the carry-
ing out of his nefarious designs. It was this hesi-
tancy, rather than a fiendish cunning, which induced
him to remain till the last moment in the supper
room, and which prompted the remark of Jesus
‘What thou doest, do quickly” (Jn 13 27). Ofa
piece with this weak-mindedness was his attempt
to cast the blame upon the chief priests and elders
(cf Mt 27 3.4). He sought to set himself right,
not with the innocent Jesus whom he had betrayed,
but with the accomplices in his crime; and because
that world which his selfishness had made his god
failed him at the last, he went and hanged himself.
It was the tragic end of one who espoused a great
cause in the spirit of speculation and selfish ambi-
tion, and who weighed not the dread consequences
to which those impure motives might lead him (cf
also Bruce, Training of the Twelve; Latham, Pastor
Pastorum; Stalker, Trial and Death of Jesus Christ).
C. M. Kerr
JUDAS ISCARIOT, GOSPEL OF: A ‘Gospel
of Judas” is mentioned by Irenaeus (Adv. Haer.,
1.81), Epiphanius ( Haer., xxxviii.1), Theodoret, etc,
as current in the gnostic sect of the Cainites, to
whom Judas was a hero. It must have been in
existence in the 2d cent., but no quotation is given
from it (see Baring-Gould, Lost and Hostile Gospels,
III, ch v).


JUDAS, NOT ISCARIOT (‘TotSas, otx 6 Ioka-
ptdrys, Todas ouch ho Iskaridtés): One of the
Twelve Apostles (Jn 14 22). See Jupas oF
James; Lepparus; THADDAEUS.


- JUDAS MACCABAEUS. See MaccaBazus.
JUDAS OF DAMASCUS. See Jupas, (6).


JUDAS OF GALILEE (6 Tadudatos, ho Gali-
lafos): Mentioned in Acts 6 37 as the leader of an
insurrection occasioned by the census of Quirinius
in 7 AD (see Quirinius). He, and those who
obeyed him, it is said, perished in that revolt. Jos
also repeatedly mentions Judas by this same name,
“the Gahlean,’ and speaks of his revolt (Ant,
XVIII, i, 6; XX, v,2; BJ, I, viii, 1; xviii,8, VIL,
viii, 1), but in Ant, XVII, i, names him a Gaulo-
nite, of the city of Gamala. As Gamala was in Gau-
lonitis, not far from the eastern shore of the Sea of
Galilee, it may he regarded as belonging to that
province. The party of Judas seems to have been
identified with the Zealots. James ORR


JUDAS OF JAMES (‘IotSas *IaxéPov, Ioidas
Iakodbou): One of the twelve apostles (Lk 6 16;
Acts 1 13; for etymology, etc, see Jupas), AV has
the reading ‘‘brother of James,” and RV reads “‘son
of James.’’? The latter is to be preferred. In Jn
14 22 heis described as ‘Judas (not Iscariot).’”’ The
name corresponds with the ‘“Thaddaeus” or ‘‘Leb-
baeus whose surname was Thaddaeus” of Mt 10 3
AV and Mk 3 18 (cf Tuannarvs). The identifica-
tion of Thaddaeus with Judas is generally accepted,
though Ewald and others hold that they were
different. persons, that Thaddaeus died during
Christ’s lifetime, and that Judas was chosen in his

lace (cf Bruce, Training of the Twelve, 34). If the

V is accepted as the correct rendering of Lk 6 16
and Acts 1 13, this Judas cannot be identified
either with the Juda (Mk 6 3 AV), Judas (Mk 6
3 RV), or Judas (Mt 13 55), the brother of Jesus;
or with the Judas (Jude ver 1 RVm) or Jude (Jude
ver 1 AV), the bréther of James, whether these two
latter Judases are to be regarded as the same or
not. The only incident recorded of Judas of James
isin Jn 14 22, where during Christ’s address to the
disciples after the last supper he put the question,
“Lord, what is come to pass that thou wilt manifest
thyself unto us, and not unto the world?”

C. M. Kerr

JUDAS, THE LORD’S BROTHER. See Junz.


JUDDAG, jud’a. See Jurran.


JUDE, jodd (‘Iev8as, Jovdas): Brother of the
Lord, and author of the Ep. of Jude. See Jupas
or James and following article.


JUDE, THE EPISTLE OF:
The Writer
I. Jupz’s Position 1n THE CANON
II. Tas Occasion or Its Composition
III. Description or THE LIBERTINES AND APOSTATES
IV. Rexatron or Jupe To THe Seconp EristiE oF
Prerer
1. Resemblances
2. Differences
3. Further Contrasts
4. Summary
5. Evidence of Priority of Peter
6. Confirmatory References
VY. Dares or THE Epistle
VI. Tuas Lisertines or Jupe’s Hristie
Literature
The writer of this short ep. calls himself Jude or
Judas ( Iovéas, Joudas). His name was a common
one among the Jews: there were few
The Writer others of more frequent use. Two
among the apostles bore it, viz. Judas,
mentioned in Jn 14 22 (cf Lk 6 16), and Judas
Iscariot. . Jude describes himsclf as ‘‘a servant of
Jesus Christ, and brother of James” (ver 1). The
James here mentioned is no doubt the person who
is called ‘‘the Lord’s brother’ (Gal 119), the
writer of the ep. that bears his name. Neither of
the two was an apostle. The opening sentence of
Jude simply affirms that the writer is a ‘servant
of Jesus Christ.”” This, if anywhere, should be the
appropriate place for the mention of his apostle-
ship, if he were an apostle. The appellation ‘‘serv-
ant of Jesus Christ” ‘‘is never thus barely used in
an address of an ep. to designate an apostle’
(Alford). Phil 1 1 has a similar expression, ‘‘Paul
and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ,” but ‘“the
designation common to two persons necessarily
sinks to the rank of the inferior one.” In other in-
stances “servant” is associated with ‘apostle’
(Rom 11; Tit 11), Jude vs 17.18 speaks of the
“apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; that they said
to you”’—language which an apostle would hardly
use of his fellow-apostles.
In MK 6 3 are found the names of those of whom
Jesus is said to be the brother, namely, James and


Jude, Epistle of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Joses, and Judas and Simon. It is quite generally
held by writers that the James and Judas here men-
tioned are the two whose epp. are found in the NT.
It is noteworthy, however, that neither of them
hints at his relationship with Jesus; their unaffected
humility kept them silent. Jude mentions that he
is the ‘‘brother of James,” perhaps to give authority
and weight to his words, for James was far more
distinguished and influential than he. The infer-
ence seems legitimate that Jude addresses Chris-
tians among whom James was highly esteemed, or,
if no longer living, among whom his memory was
sacredly revered, and accordingly it is altogether
probable that Jude writes to the same class of read-
ers as James—Jewish Christians. James writes
to the ‘Twelve Tribes of the Dispersion.” Jude
likewise addresses a wide circle of believers, viz. the
“called, beloved in God the Father, and kept for
Jesus Christ” (ver 1). While he does not desiguate
aspecial and distinct class, yet as James’s ‘“‘brother,”’
as belonging to the family of Joseph, and as in some
true sense related to the Lord Jesus Himself, it
seems probable, if not certain, that his Ep. was
intended for Christian Hebrews who stood in urgent
need of such testimony and appeal as Jude offers.

I. Jude’s Position in the Canon.—It is now and
for a long while has been an assured one. Its rank,
though not altogether that of 1 Pet and 1 Jn, is
high, for centuries indeed undoubted. Almost
from the beginning of the Christian era men every
way qualified to speak with authority on the ques-
tion of genuineness and authenticity indorsed it as
entitled to a place in the NT Scriptures. Origen
repeatedly quotes it, in one place describing it as
an “ep. of but few lines, but full of powerful words
of heavenly grace” (Matt., tom. X,17). But Origen
knew that it was not universally received. Clement
of Alexandria ‘‘gave concise expositions of all the
canonical Scriptures, not omitting the controverted
books—the Ep. of Jude and the other Catholic epp.”’
(quoted by Westcott, Can., 322-23 and Salmon,
Intro, 493). Tertullian (Cult. Fem.i.3) in striving
to establish the authority of the Book of Enoch
urges as a crowning argument that it is quoted by
“the apostle Jude.” _‘‘We may infer that Jude’s Ep.
was an unquestioned part of Tertullian’s Canon.”
Athanasius inserted it in his list of NT books, but
Eusebius placed it among the disputed books in his
classification. The Canon ‘of Muratori includes
Jude among the books of Scripture, though it omits
the Epp. of Jas, Pet and He. This is one of the
carliest documents coutaining a list of the NT books
now known. By the great majority of writers the
date of the fragment is given as c 170 AD, as it
claims to have been written not long after Pius was
bishop of Rome, and the latest date of Pius is 142-
57 AD. The words of the document are, ‘The
Shepherd was written very recently in our own time
by Hermas, while his brother Pius sat in the chair
of the Church of Rome.” Twenty or twenty-five
years would probably satisfy the period indicated
by the words, ‘‘written very recently in our own
time,”’ which would fix the date of the fragment at
c170 AD. Salmon, however, strongly inclines to a
later date, viz. ¢ 200-210 AD, as does Zahn.

Zahn (Intro to the NT, 11,259, ET), and Professor Chase
(HDB) are of the decided opinion that the Didache, Il.
7: “Thou shalt not hate anyone, but some thou shalt
rebuke, and for some thou shalt pray, and some thou
shalt love above thine own soul [or life],’’ is founded on
Jude ver 22. Dr. Philip Schaff dates the Didache be-
tween 90-100 AD. L’Abbé E. Jacquier (La doctrine des
Douze Apotres, 1891) is persuaded that the famous
document was written not later than 80 AD. It appears,
therefore, more than probable that the Ep. of Jude was
known and referred to as Scripture some time before the
end of the 1st cent. From the survey _we have thus
rapidly taken of the field in which the Ep. circulated,


we may couclude that in Pal, at Alexandria, in North
Africa, and at Rome, it was received as the veritable letter


1768


oF Jude, ‘‘the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of
ames.””

The chief reason why it was rejected by some and re-
garded with suspicion by others in primitive times is its
quotation from the apocryphal Book of Enoch, so Jerome
informs us (Vir. Iil., 4). It is possible that Jude had
in mind another spurious writing, viz. the Assumption
of Moses, when he spoke of the contention of Michael
the archangel with the devil about the body of Moses
(ver 9). This, however, is not quite certain, for the date
assigned to that writing is c 44 AD, and although Jude
might have seen and read it, yet its composition is so
near his own day that it could hardly have exerted much
influence on his mind. Besides, the brevity of the ED:
and its dealing with a special class of errorists would
limit to a certain extent its circulation among Christians,
All this serves to explain its refusal by some and the
absence of reference to it by others.


Il. The Occasion of Its Composition.—Jude, after
his brief introduction (vs 1.2), explains very defi-
nitely why he writes as he does. He indicates dis-
tinctly his anxiety on behalf of the saints (ver 3):
‘Beloved, while I was giving all diligence to write
unto you of our common salvation, I was con-
strained to write unto you exhorting you to contend
earnestly for the faith which was once for all de-
livered unto the saints.”’ He had received very
distressing knowledge of the serious state into which
the Christian brotherhood was rapidly drifting,
and he must as a faithful servant of Jesus Christ
exhort them to stedfastness and warn them of their
danger. He had in mind to write them a doctrinal
work on the salvation common to all Christians.
Perhaps he contemplated the composition of a
book or treatise that would have discussed the
great subject in an exhaustive manner. But in
face of the perils that threatened, of the evils
already present in the community, his purpose was
indefinitely postponed. We are not told how he
became acquainted with the dangers which beset
his fellow-believers, but the conjecture is probably
correct that it was by means of his journeys as an
evangelist. At any rate, he was thoroughly con-
versant with the evils in the churches, and he deals
with them as befitted the enormities that were
practised and the ruin that impended.

The address of the Ep. is remarkable for the
affection Jude expresses for these saints. Obvious-
ly they are distinct from the libertines of whom he
speaks with such solemn condemnation. They
were the faithful who kept aloof from the ungodly
that surrounded them, and who held fast to the
truth they had been taught. Jude describes them
as those ‘‘that are called, beloved in God the Father,
and kept for Jesus Christ: Mercy unto you and
peace and love be multiplied.” At the close of the
Ep. he commends them “unto him that is able to
guard you from stumbling, and to set you before
the presence of his glory without blemish in exceed-
ing joy.”” A separated and devoted band they cer-
tainly were, a noble and trustworthy company of
believers for whose well-being Jude was supremely
anxious.

HI. Description of the Libertines and Apostates.
—It is needful to gaze with steady vision on the
hideous portrait Jude furnishes of these depraved
foes, if we are to appreciate in any measure the force
of his language and the corruption already wrought
in the brotherhood. Some of their foul teachings
and their vicious practices, not all, are here set
down.

(1) Surreptitious foes.—For there are certain men
crept In privily .... ungodly men” (ver 4). They
are enemies who felgn to be friends, and hence In reallty


are sples and traitors; like a stealthy beast of prey the
creen inke the company of the godly, actuated by evil
. (2) Perverters of grace and deniers of Christ.—'' Turn-
ing the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying
our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ” (ver 4). They
are those who by a vile perverseness turn the grace and
the liberty of the Gospel into a means for gratifylng their
Peo eeiens: and who in doctrine and life repudiate
their Master and Lord.


1769


,__ (3) Censorious and arrogant detractors.—‘'In thelr dream-
ings defile the flesh, and set at nought dominion, and
rail at dignities"’ (ver 8). Destitute of true reverence,
they raii at the holiest and best things, and sit in judg-
ment on aii rule and all authority. They have the proud
tongue of the iawiess: ‘‘Our lips are our own: who is
iord over us?" (Ps 12 4).

Ane Ignorant calumniators and brutish sensualists.—
“These raii at whatsoever things they know not: and
what they understand naturaliy, like the creatures with-
out reason, in these things are they destroyed"' (ver 10).
What they do not know, as something lofty and nobis,
they deride and denounce; what they know is that which
mabavers to their disordered appetites and their dehased

astes.

(5) Hypocrites and deceivers.—'‘These are they who
are hidden rocks in your iove-feasts when they feast with
you, shepherds that without fear feed themselves; clouds
without water.... autumn trees without fruit....
wild waves of the sea... . wandering stars, for whom
the biackness of darkness hath been reserved forever”
(vs 12.13). A most graphic picture of the insincerity,
the depravity, and the doom of these insoients! And
yet they are fonnd in the bosom of the Christian body,
even sitting with the saints at their iove-feasts!

(6) Grumblers, fault-finders, pleasure-seekers, boasters,
parasites.—'' These are murmurers, complainers, waiking
after their own lusts . . . . showing respect of persons
for the sake of advantage” (vcr 16). They impeach
Divine wisdom, are tho foesof peace and quietness, boast
of thelr capacities to manage things, and yet they can
he serviie, even sycophants, when thereby advantage is
secured.

(7) Schismatics and sensualists—‘‘These are they
who make separations, sensuai, having not the Spirit”
(ver 19). It was characteristic of the faise teachers and
mockers who had invaded the Christian church that they
drew lines of demarkation between themseives and others,
or between different ciasses of believers, which the Holy
Spirit did not warrant, hut which was the product of
their own crafty and wicked wills. There seems to be
a hint in these words of incipient Gnosticism, that fatal
heresy that hoasted of a recondite knowledge, a deep
mystery which oniy the initiated possessed, of which the
great mass of Christians were ignorant, Jude brands
the pretension as the offspring of their own sensuality,
not at all of God's Spirit.


Such is the forbidding portrait drawn of the
libertinesin the Ep. But Jude adds other and eveu
darker features. He furnishes a number of exam-
ples of apostates and of apostasy which disclose
even more strikingly the spirit and the doom of
them that pervert the truth, that deny the Lord
Jesus Christ, and that mock at the things of God.
These all mark a fatal degeneracy, a “‘falling away,”
which bodes nothing but evil and_ judgment.
Against the corrupters and skeptics Jude writes
with a vehemence that in the NT is without a
parallel. Matters must have come to a dreadful
pass when the Spirit of God is compelled to use
such stern and awful language.

IV. Relation of Jude to the Second Epistle of
Peter.—The relation is confined to 2 Pet 2—3 4.
A large portion of Peter’s Ep., viz.
ch 1 and 3 5-18, bears no resemblance
to Jude, at least no more than does
Jas or 1 Pet. Between the sections
of 2 Pet indicated above and Jude the parallelism
is close, both as to the subjects treated and the
historical illustrations introduced, and the lan-
guage itself to some considerable extent is common
to both. All readers must be impressed with the
similarity. Accordingly, it is very generally held
by interpreters that one of the writers copied from
the other. There is not entire agreement as to
which of the two epp. is the older, that is,
whether Peter copied from Jude, or Jude from
Peter. Perhaps a majority favor the former of the
two alternatives, though some of the very latest
and most learned of those who write on Intro-
ductions to the NT hold strongly to the view that
Jude copied from 2 Pet. Reference is made particn-
larly to Dr. Theodore v. Zahn, whose magnificent
work on Introduction has been but recently trd
into Eng., and who argues convincingly that Jude
copied from 2 Pet. ,

However, it must be admitted that there are in
the two epp. as pronounced differences and diver-


1. Resem-
blances


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Jude, Epistle of


gences as there are resemblances. If one of the
two did actually copy from the other, he was care-

ful to add, subtract, and change what
2. Differ- he found in his “source’’ as best suited
ences his purpose. A servile copyist he cer-
tainly was not. He maintained his
independence throughout, as an exact comparison
of the one with the other will demonstrate.

If we bring them into close proximity, following
the example of Professor Lumby in the ‘‘Bible
Comm.” (Intro to 2 Pet), we shall discover a marked
difference between the two pictures drawn by the


writers.


darker and more sinister is that of Jude. i
certainly in Peter, becomes appalling in
ubjoined are proofs of the fact above stated:


alarmin
Jude.


2 Pet 21


But there arose faise
prophets also among the
peopie, as among you aiso
there shali be false teachers


2 Pet 21
who shaii privily bring in
destructive heresies, deny-
ing even the Master that
bonght them... .


2 Pet 23
And in covetousness shaii
they with feigned words
make merchandise of you


We cannot fail to perceive how much


The evil,


Jude ver 4


For there are certain
men creptin privily....


Jude ver 4


.... ungodly men, turnin
the grace of God into iasci-
viousness, and denying our
only Master and Lord,
Jesus Christ.


Jude ver 16
..... « Murmurers, com-
plainers, walking after their
own lusts (and their mouth
speaketh great swelling


words), showing respect of
persons for the sake of ad-
vantage.


These contrasts and comparisons between the
two epp. prove (1) that in Jude the false teachers
are worse, more virulent than in Peter, and (2) that
in Peter the whole description is predictive, whereas
in Jude the deplorable condition is actually present.
If 2 Pet is dependent on Jude, if the apostle cited
from Jude, how explain the strong predictive ele-
ment in his opening verses (2 Pet 2 1-3)? If as
Peter wrote he had lying before him Jude’s letter,
which represents the corrupters as already within
the Christian community and doing their deadly
work, his repeated use of the future tense is ahso-
lutely inexplicable. Assuming, however, that he
wrote prior to Jude, his predictions become per-
fectly intelligible. No doubt the virus was working
when he wrote, but it was latent, undeveloped;
far worse would appear; but when Jude wrote the
poison was widely diffused, as vs 12.19 clearly show.
The very life of the churches was endangered.


2 Pet 2 4.5 Jude vs 5.6


For if God spared not ....The Lord, having
theangeis when theysinned saved a peopie out of the
.... and spared not the land of Egypt, afterward
ancient world, but pre- destroyed them... . and
served Noah with seven angelsthat... . left thelr
others...-+ proper habitation ....


Peter speaks of the angels that sinned, Jude of
their apostasy. Peter makes prominent the sal-
vation of Noah and his family when
8. Further the flood overwhelmed the world of the
Contrasts ungodly, while Jude tells of those who,
delivered from bondage, afterward
were destroyed because of their unbelief. He
speaks of no rescue; we know of but two who sur-
vived the judgments of the wilderness and who
entered the Land of Promise, Caleb and Joshua.
Peter mentions the fate of the guilty cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah, but he is careful to remind us of the
deliverance of righteous Lot, while Jude makes
prominent their nameless crimes and consigns them
to ‘the punishment of eternal fire,’ but he is silent
on the rescue of Lot. Manifestly Jude’s illustra-
tions are darker and more hopeless than Peter’s.


Jude, Epistle of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Judge


1770


Peter instances Balaam as an example of one who
loved the hire of wrongdoing and who was rehuked
for his transgression. But Jude cites three notable
instances in the OT to indicate how far in apostasy
and rehellion the libertines had gone. Three words
mark their course, rising into a climax, “way,”
“error,” ‘‘gainsaying.’’? They went in the way of
Cain, i.e. in the way of self-will, of hate, and the
spirit of murder. Moreover, they “ran riotously
in the error of Balaam for hire.’”’ The words denote
an activity of viciousness that enlisted all their
eagerness and all their might. Balaam’s error was
one that led into error, one that seduced others
into the commission of the like sins. _The reference
seems to be to the whole career of this heathen
prophet, and includes his betrayal of the Israelites
through the women of Moah (Nu 31 16). Balaam
is the prototype of Jude’s libertines, hoth in_his
covetousness and his seductive counsel. Further-
more, they “perished in the gainsaying of Korah.”
This man with 250 followers rehelled against the
Divinely appointed leaders and rulers of Israel,
Moses and Aaron, and sought to share their author-
ity in Israel, if not to displace them altogether.
Comparable with these rehels in ancient Israel are
the treacherous and malignant foes whom Jude so
vigorously denounces.

Peter speaks of them as “daring, self-willed, they
tremble not to rail at dignities: whereas angels,
though greater in might and power, bring not a rail-
ing judgment against them before the Lord’ (vs
10.11). Jude is more specific: These dreamers
“defile the flesh, and set at. nought dominion, and
rail at dignities.” They repudiate all authority,
despise every form of lordship, and revile those in
positions of power. He cites the contention of
Michael the archangel with the devil about the hody
of Moses, and yet this lofticst of the heavenly
spirits brought no railing judgment against the ad-
versary. Jude’s description is more vivid and
definite: he describes an advanced stage of apostasy.

Very noteworthy is Jude vs 22.23. He here turns
again to the loyal and stedfast believers whom he
addresses at the beginning of his letter, and he gives
them directions how they are to deal with those who
were ensnared by the wily foes. (The text in ver
22 is somewhat uncertain, but the revision is fol-
lowed.) There were some who were “in doubt.”
They were those who had been fascinated hy the
new teaching, and although not captured by it, they
were engaged in its study, were drawn toward it
and almost ready to yield. On these the faithful
were to have mercy, were to convince them of their
danger, show them the enormities to which the false
system inevitably leads, and so win them back to
Christ’s allegiance. As if Jude said, Deal with the
wavering in love and fidelity; but rescue them if
possible.

There were others whose peril was greater: “And
some save, snatching them out of the fire.’ These
were identified with the wicked, were scorched hy
the fires of destruction and hence almost beyond
reach of rescue; hut if possible they are to he saved,
however scathed and blackened. Others still there
were who were in worse state than the preceding,
who were polluted and smirched hy the foul con-
tamination of the guilty seducers, and such were to
he saved, and the rescuers were to fear lest they
should he soiled by contact. with the horrible defile-
ment. This is Jude’s tremendous summary of the
shameful work and frightful evils wrought in the
bosom of the church hy the libertines. He dis-
closes in these trenchant verses how deeply sunk
in sin the false teachers were, and how awful the
ruin they had wrought. The description is quite
unparalleled in 2 Pet. The shadings in Jude are
darker and deeper than those in 2 Pet.


The comparison between the two writings war-

rants, we believe, the following conclusions: (1)

that Peter and Jude have in view the

4, Summary same corrupt parties; (2) that Peter

paints them as godless and extremely

dangerous, though not yet at their worst; while

Jude sets them forth as depraved and as lawless as

they can well he; (3) that Peter’s is the older writing

and that Jude was acquainted with what the apostle
had written.

Stronger evidence than any yet produced of
Peter’s priority is now to be submitted, and here
hi avail ourselves in part of Zahn’s array of evi-

ence.

Jude asserts with great positiveness that (ver 4)
certain men had crept in privily into the Christian

fold, “even they who were of old


5. Evi- written of beforehand unto this con-
dence of | demnation, ungodly men.” Obviously
Priority of Jude is here speaking of the enemies
Peter whom he afterward goes on to describe


and denounce in his Ep. He dis-
tinctly affirms that these foes had been of old written
of and beforehand designated unto ‘this condem-
nation.” He clearly has in mind an authoritative
writing that spoke of the identical parties Jude
himself deals with. He does not tell us whose
writing it is that contains the ‘‘condemnation” of
the errorists; he only declares that there is such a
Scripture existing and that he is acquainted with it.
Now, to what writing does he refer? Not to any
OT prophecy, for none can be found that answers
to the words. Nor yet to the prediction of Enoch
(va 14.15), for it speaks of the advent of the Lord
in judgment at the last day, whereas Jude applies
his reference to the ungodly who were then present
in the Christian assemblies, corrupting the churches
with their wicked teaching and practices. “In
2 Pet 2—3 4, we have a prophecy which exactly
suits, namely, the announcement that false teachers
whose theory and practice exactly correspond to
those godless hearers of the Christian name in Jude
will appear among a certain group of Jewish Chris-
tian churches’? (Zahn). Peter’s account of them
is so particular that Jude would encounter no diffi-
culty in identifying them, He is furnished hy the
apostle with such characteristics of them, with
such illustrations and even words and phrases that
he has only to place the description alongside of
the reality to see how completely they match.

It may be objected that the words, ‘‘were of old
written of heforehand,”’ denote a long period, longer
than that which elapsed between the two epp.
But the ohjection is groundless. The original term
for “of old” (pdlat) sometimes indicates but a brief
space of time, e.g. Mk 16 44 (according to the text
of Weymouth aud Nestle, and RV) relates that
Pilate asked the centurion if Jesus had been “any
while” (palat) dead, which limits the term to a few
hours. In 2 Cor 12 19 the word occurs, and there
it must be restricted to Paul’s self-defence which
occupies the part of the Ep. preceding, and hence
does not extend beyond a day or two. Probably
some years lie hetween the composition of these two
epp., ample time to justify Jude’s use of the word
if he is referring to 2 Pet 2—3 4, as we certainly
believe he is,

This interpretation of Jude ver 4 is confirmed by
Jude vs 17.18. These verses are intimately con-

nected with 2 Pet 32-4. Jude’s

6. Confirm readers are told to keep in remem-
atory brance the words spoken by the apos-
References tles of Christ, namely, ‘‘In the last
_ time there shall he mockers, walking

after their own ungodly lusts.” Peter writes, ‘that
in the last days mockers shall come with mockery,
walking after their own lusts.” The resemblance


1771


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA yaaee Epistle of


of the one passage to the other is very close, indeed,
they are almost identieal. Both urge their readers
to remember what had been said by the aposiles
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and both speak of the
immoral scoffers who would invade or had invaded
the Christian brotherhood. But Peter distinctly
asserts that these mockers shall appear in the last
days. His words are, ‘“‘Knowing this first, that in
the last days mockers shall eome with mockery,
walking after their own lusts.’ Jude writes that
“in the last time there shall be mockers, walking
after their own ungodly lusts.’? The phrases, ‘‘the
last days,”’ and ‘‘the last time,” denote our age, the
dispensation in which we live, as He 1 2 proves.
Peter puts the appearance of the scoffers in the
future, whereas Jude, after quoting the words, sig-
nificantly adds, “These are they who make separa-
tions, sensual, having not the Spirit.” He means,
of course the mockers just mentioned, and he affirms
they are now present. With Peter they are yet to
eome when he wrote, but with Jude the prediction
is already fulfilled, so far as the seoffers are con-
eerned. Therefore Jude’s writing is subsequent
to Peter’s, and if there be copying on the part of
either, it is Jude who copies.

Peter mentions “your aposties,’’ including himself in
the phrase, but Jude does not employ the pl. pronoun,
for he was not_of the apostolic body. But why the pl.,
“apostles”? Because at least one other apostle had
spoken of the perilous times which were coming on the
church of God. Paul unites his testimony with that of
Peter, and writes, ‘‘ But know this, that in the last days
grievous times shall come" (2 Tim 3 1-5). His pre-
diction is near akin to that of Peter; it belongs apparent-
y to the same historic time and to_the same perilous
class of evil-doers aud corrupters. In 2 Pet 3 15 the
apostle lovingly and tenderly speaks of_his ‘‘ brother
Paul,’’ and says suggestively that in his Ep. he speaks
of these things—no doubt about the scoffers of the last
days amoug the rest. He certainly seems to have Paul
in mind when he penned the words, ‘‘ Knowing this first,
that in the last days mockers shall come."

Hecre, then, is positive ground for the reference in Jude
ver 4 to a writing concerning those who had crept into
the fold and who were of old doomed to this condemna-
tion, with which writing his readers were acquainted;
they had it in the writing of the apostles Peter and Paul
both, and so were forewarned as to the impending danger.
Jude’s Ep. is subsequent to Peter's.

V. Date of the Epistle.—There is little or no
agreement as to the year, yet the majority of writers
hold that it belongs to the latter half of the 1st cent.
Zahn assigns it to 70-75 AD; Lumby, e¢ 80 AD;
Salmon, before the reign of Domitian (81 AD);
Sieffert, shortly prior to Domitian; Chase, not later
than 80 AD, probably within a year or two of the
Pastoral Epp. Zahn strongly insists on 64 AD as
the date of Peter’s death. If the 2d Ep. bearing his
name is authentic, the apostle eould not possibly
have eopied from Jude, for Jude’s letter was not in
existence when he died. Even on the supposition
that he suffered death 65-66 AD, there could have
been no copying done save by Jude, for it is almost
demonstrable that Jude was written after the de-
struction of Jerusin 70 AD. If 2 Pet is pseudony-
mous and written about the middle of the 2d cent.,
as some confidently affirm, it has no right to a place
in the Canon nor any legitimate relation to Jude.
If genuine, it antedates Jude.

VI. The Libertines of Jude’s Epistle.—Their
character is very forcibly exhibited, but no informa-
tion is given us of their origin or to what particular
region they belonged. They bore the Christian
name, were of the loosest morals, and were guilty
of shameful excesses. Their influence seems to
have been widespread and powerful, else Jude
would not denounee them in such severe language.
Their guilty departure from the truth must not be
confounded with the Gnosticism of the 2d cent.,
though it tended strongly in that direetion; 11 was
a Ist-cent. defeetion. Were they newly risen sen-
sualists, without predecessors? To some extent


their forerunners had already appeared. Sensuality
in some of its grosser forms disgraced the church at
Corinth (1 Cor 5 1-13; 6 138-20). Inthe eommon
meals of this congregation which ended in the
eclebration of the Lord’s Supper, they indulged in
revelry and gluttony, some of them even being
intoxicated (1 Cor 11 17-22). Participation in a
heathen festival exposed the Christians to the danger
of sharing in idolatry, and yet some of the Corin-
thians were addicted to it (1 Cor 8; 10 14-32).
In reading of the state of things in the church at
Colosse, one perceives how fatal certain views and
practices there would soon become if suffered to
grow (Col 2 16-23; 3 5-11). Twenty years after
the probable date of Jude, in some of-the churches
of Asia Minor, wieked parties flourished and domi-
nated Christian assemblies that were closely allied
in teaching and conduct with the ungodly of Jude.
The Nicolaitans, and the ‘woman Jezebel, who
calleth herself a prophetess; and she teacheth and
seduceth my servants to commit fornication, and to
eat things sacrificed to idols’ (Rev 2 20) belong
to the same company of libertines as those of Jude.
It should be no surprise to us with these examples
before us, that according to Jude there were found
in the bosom of the Christian community moral
delinquents and shameless profligates whose con-
duet shocks our sense of propriety and decency, for
the like evils, though not so flagrant, troubled the
churches in Paul’s lifetime.

Jude brands them as enemies and apostates. He
pronounces their doom in the words of Enoch:
“Behold, the Lord came with ten thousands of
his holy ones, to execute judgment upon all” (vs
14.15). It is generally believed that this prophecy
of Enoch is quoted by Jude from the apocryphal
Book of Enoch. Granting such quotation, that
fact does not warrant us to affirm that he indorsed
the book. Paul cites from three Gr poets: from
Aratus (Acts 17 28), from Menander (1 Cor 15
33; see Earle, Euripides, ‘‘Medea,” Intro, 30,
where this is attributed to Euripides), and from
Epimenides (Tit 1 12). Does anyone imagine that
Paul indorses all that these poets wrote? To the
quotation from Epimenides the apostle adds, ‘‘This
testimony is true’ (Tit 1 18), but no one imagines
he means to say the whole poem is true. So Jude
cites a potee from a non-eanonical book, not
because he accepts the whole book as true, but this
particular predietion he receives as from God.
‘Whence the writer of Enoeh derived it is unknown.
It may have been cherished and transmitted from
generation to generation, or in some other way
faithfully preserved, but at any rate Jude aceepted
it as authentic. Paul quotes a saying of the Lord
Jesus (Acts 20 35) not recorded in the Gospels, but
whence he derived it is unknown. As much may
be said of this of Enoch which Jude receives as true.


Lirsraturs.—Zahn, Intro ta NT; Salmon, Intro to
NT; Westcott, Canon of NT; Purves, Apostolic Age;
Alford, Gr Test.; Plumptre, Comm., ‘‘Cambridge Bible
Series’’; Lillie, Comm. on 1 and 2 Pet; Bigg, ICC; Vincent,
Word Studies.

Wiiuram G. Mooreseap

JUDEA, j66-dé’a: In Ezr 5 8 for “Judah”; thus


RV. In the NT the form is Jupaza (q.v.).


JUDGE, juj (WNW, shophet; NT 8ixa0cris, dikas-
tés, kpiths, krités): In the early patriarchal times
the heads of families and the elders of the tribes
were the judges (cf Gen 38 24), and their authority
was based on custom. In the wilderness Moses
alone was the judge until Jethro suggested a scheme
of devolution. On his advice Moses divided the
people into groups of thousands, hundreds, fifties,
and tens, and over each group a wise and good man
was set as a judge. Thereafter only the most im-
portant cases were brought before Moses (Ex 18


Judges, Book of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1772


13-26; Dt 19-17). This arrangement ceased to
be practicable when the children of Israel settled
down in Canaan. Although David took counsel
with the heads of thousands and hundreds (1 Ch
13 1), it need not be assumed that this was a con-
tinuation of the plan adopted by Moses. Probably
the local courts were not organized till the time of
David. In the days of the Judges justice was ad-
ministered by those who had risen by wisdom or
valor to that rank (Jgs 4 5). An organized cir-
cuit court was established by Samuel, who judged
cases himself, and also made his sons judges (1 S
716; 81). After the monarchy was instituted,
the king tried all cases, when requested to do so by
the wronged person, in the palace gate (1 K 7 7;
Prov 20 8). There was no public prosecutor
(2 § 14 4; 15 2-6; 1 Ch 18 14; 1 K 3 16; 2K
15 5). Under David and Solomon there were
probably local courts (1 Ch 23 4; 26 29). Je-
hoshaphat organized a high court of justice (2 Ch
19 8). The prophets often complain bitterly that the
purity of justice is corrupted by bribery and false
witness (Isa 1 23; 65 23; 101; Am 5 12; 6 12;
Mic 3 11; 7 3; Prov 6 19; 12 17; 18 5). Even
kings sometimes pronounced unjust sentences, esp.
in criminal cases (1 S 22 6-19; 1 K 22 26; 2 K
21 16; Jer 36 26). An evil king could also bend
local courts to do his will, as may be gathered from
the case of Naboth’s vineyard (1 K 21 1-18).

The first duty of a judge was to execute absolute
justice, showing the same impartiality to rich and
poor, to Jew and foreigner. He was forbidden to
accept bribes or to wrest the judgment of the poor
(Ex 23 6-8; Dt 16 19). He must not let himself
be swayed by popular opinion, or unduly favor the
poor (Ex 23 2.3).

The court was open to the public (Ex 18 13;
Ruth 4 1.2). Each party presented his view of the
case to the judge (Dt 1 16; 25 1). Possibly the
accused appeared in court clad in mourning (Zec
38). The accuser stood on the right hand of the
accused (Zec 8 1; Ps 109 6). Sentence was pro-
nounced after the hearing of the case, and the
judgment carried out (Josh 7 24.25). The only
evidence considered by the court was that given
by the witnesses. In criminal cases, not less than
two witnesses were necessary (Dt 19 15; Nu 36
30; Dt 17 6; ci Mt 18 16; 2 Cor 13.1; 1 Tim
6 19). In cases other than criminal the oath (see
OaTH) was applied (Ex 22 11; cf He 6 16). The
lot was sometimes appealed to (Josh 7 14-18),
esp. in private disputes (Prov 18 18), but this was
exceptional. When the law was not quite definite,
recourse was had to the Divine oracle (Lev 24 12;
Nu 16 34). Pau, LEVERTOFF


JUDGES, juj’iz, BOOK OF:


1. Title
2. Place in the Canon
3. Contents
( Introductory, 1—2 5
(2) Central and Main Portiou, 2 6—16

(3) An Appendix, 17-21
. Chronology
. Authorship and Sources
. Relation to Preceding Books
. Relation to LXX aud Other VSS
. Religious Purpose and Valne
LITERATURE

The Eng. name of the Book of Jgs is a tr of the
Heb title (D°ODW, shdphetim), which is reproduced
in the Gr Kprral, Kritai, and the Lat
Liber Judicum. In the list of the
: canonical books of the OT given by
Origen (epud Euseb., HE, VI, 25) the name
is transliterated Zagparetu, Saphateim, which repre-
sents rather ‘judgments’ (sh*phdtim; xpluara,
krimata) than “judges.” A passage also is quoted
from Philo (De Confus. Linguarum, 26), which


ONO


1. Title


indicates that he recognized the same form of the
name; compare the Gr title of “Kingdoms” (Ba-
oirelat, Basiletat) for the four books of § and K.
In the order of the Heh Canon the Book of Jgs in-

variably occupies the 7th place, folowiug immediately

upon Josh and preceding 8S and K. With
2. Place in these it formed the group of the four
the Canon ‘“‘earlier prophets” (O°7WN" DN).

nebhi'im ri’shénim), the first moiety of the
2d great_division of the Heb Scriptures. As such the
Book of Jgs was classified and regarded as ‘“‘ prophetical,
equally with the other historical books, on the grouud
of the religious and spiritual teaching which its history
conveyed. In the rearrangement of the books, which
was yndertaken for the purposes of the Gr tr and Canon,
Jgs maintained its posaer as 7th in order from the he-
ginning, but the short historical Book of Ruth was
removed from the place which it held among the Rolls
(meghilloth) in the 3d division of the Jewish Canon, and
attached to Jgs as a kind of appendix, prohably hecause
the narrative was understood to presuppose the same
conditions and to have reference to the same period of
time. The Gr order was followed in all later VSS, and
has maintained itself in modern Bibles. Origen (loc.
cit.) even states, prohably hy a mere misunderstanding,
that Jgs and Ruth were comprehended hy the Jews under
the one title Saphatetm.


The Book of Jgs consists of 3 main parts or

divisions, which are readily distinguished.
(1) Introductory (1—2 &).—A brief
3. Contents summary and recapitulation of the
events of the conquest of Western Pal,
for the most part parallel to the narrative of Josh,
but with a few additional details and some diver-
gences from the earlier account, in particular
emphasizing (1 27-36) the general failure of the
Israelites to expel completely the original inhabit-
ants of the land, which is described as a violation
of their covenant with Jeh (2 1-3), entailing upon
them suffering and permanent weakness. The
introductory ver (1 1), which refers to the death of
Joshua as having already taken place, seems to be
intended as a general indication of the historical
period of the book as a whole; for some at least of
the events narrated in 1—2 5 took place during
Joshua’s lifetime.

(2) The central and main portion (2 6—16).—
A series of narratives of 12 “judges,” each of whom
in turn, by his devotion and prowess, was enabled
to deliver Israel from thraldom and oppression, and
for a longer or shorter term ruled over the people
whom he had thus saved from their enemies. Each
successive repentance on the part of the people,
however, and their deliverance are followed, on the
death of the judge, by renewed apostasy, which
entails upon them renewed misery and servitude,
from which they are again rescued when in response
to their prayer the Lord “raises up” for them another
judge and deliverer. Thus the entire history is set
as it were in a recurrent framework of moral and
religious teaching and warning; and the lesson is
enforced that it_is the sin of the people, their
abandonment of Jeh and persistent idolatry, which
entails upon them calamity, from which the Divine
long-suffering and forbearance alone makes for
them a way of escape.

(a) 2 6—8 6: A second brief introduction, con-
ceived entirely in the spirit of the following narra-
tives, which seems to attach itself to the close of the
Book of Josh, and in part repeats almost verbally
the account there given of the death and burial of
Israel’s leader (Jgs 2 6-9 || Josh 24 28-31), and
proceeds to describe the condition of the land and
people in the succeeding generation, ascribing their
misfortunes to their idolatry and repeated neglect
of the warnings and commands of the judges;
closing with an enumeration of the peoples left in
the land, whose presence was to be the test of
Israel’s willingness to obey Jeh and at the same
time to prevent the nation from sinking into a con-
dition of lethargy and ease.


1773


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Judges, Book of


(b) 3 7—3 11: Judgeship of Othniel who de-
livered Israel from the hand of Cushan-rishathaim.

(c) 3 12-30: Victory of Ehud over the Moabites,
to whom the Israelites had been in servitude 18
years. Ehud slew their king Eglon, and won for
the nation a long period of tranquillity.

(d) 3 31: Ina few brief words Shamgar is named
as the deliverer of Israel from the Philis. The title
of “judge” is not accorded to him, nor is he said to
have exercised authority in any way. It is doubt-
ful, therefore, whether the writer intended him to be
regarded as one of the judges.

(e) Chs 4,5: Victory of Deborah and Barak
over Jabin the Can. king, and death of Sisera, cap-
tain of his army, at the hands of Jael, the wife of a
Kenite chief; followed by a Song of Triumph, de-
scriptive and commemorative of the event.

(f) Chs 6-8: A 7-year oppression at the hands
of the Midianites, which is described as peculiarly
severc, so that the land became desolate on account
of the perpetual raids to which it was subject.
After a period of hesitation and delay, Gideon de-
feats the combined forces of the Midianites and
Amalekites and the “‘children of the east,” i.e. the
wandering Bedawin bands from the eastern deserts,
in the valley of Jezreel. The locality and course of
the battle are traced by the sacred writer, but it
is not possible to follow his account in detail because
ef our inability to identify the placesnamed. After
the victory, Gideon is formally offered the position
of ruler for himself and his descendants, but refuses;
nevertheless, he seems to have exercised a measure
of restraining influence over the people until his
death, although he himself and his family apparently
through covetousness fell away from their faithful-
ness to Jch (8 27.33).

(g) Ch 9: Episode of Abimelech, son of Gideon
by a concubine, who by the murder of all but one
of his brethren, the legitimate sons of Gideon,
secured the throne at Shechem for himself, and for
3 years ruled Israel. After successfully stamping
out a revolt at Shechem against his authority, he is
himself killed when engaged in the sicge of the
citadel or tower of Thebez by a stone thrown by a


woman.

(h) () 10 1-5: Tola and Jair are briefly named
as successive judges of Israel for 23 and 22 years
respectively. ;

(j) 10 6—12 7: Oppression of Israel for 18 years
by the Philis and Ammonites. The national de-
liverance is effected by Jephthah, who is described
as an illegitimate son of Gilead who had been on
that account driven out from his home and had
become the captain of a band of outlaws. Jeph-
thah stipulates with the elders of Gilead that if he
undertakes to do battle on their behalf with the
Ammonites, he is afterward to be recognized as their
ruler; and in accordance with the agreement, when
the victory has been won, he becomes judge over
Israel (11 91; 12 7). See JmpurHag.

(k) @) (m) 12 8-15: Three of the so-called
“minor”? judges, Ibzan, Elon and Abdon, judged
Israel in succession for 7, 10 and 8 years respectively.
As they are not said to have delivered the nation
from any calamity or oppression, it is perhaps to
be understood that the whole period was a time of
rest and tranquillity. .

(n) Chs 18-16: The history of Samson (see
separate art.). ;

13) An Disa chs 17-21.—The final section,
in the nature of an appendix, consisting of two nar-
ratives, independent apparently of the main portion
of the book and of one another. They contain no
indication of date, except the statement 4 t repeated
that “in those days there was no king in Israel” (17
6; 18 1; 19 1; 21 25). The natural inference is
that the narratives were committed to writing in


; site and renaming it ‘“‘Dan.”


the days of the monarchy; but the events themselves
were understood by the compiler or historian to
have taken place during the period of the Judges,
or at least anterior to the establishment of the king-
dom. The lawless state of society, the violence and
disorder among the tribes, would suggest the same
conclusion. No name of a judge appears, however,
and there is no direct reference to the office or to
any central or controlling authority. Jos also
seems to have known them in reverse order, and in
a position preceding the histories of the judges
themselves, and not at the close of the book (Ant,
V, ii, 8-12; iii, 1; see E. Konig in HDB, II, 810).
Even if the present form of the narratives is thus
late, there can be little doubt that they contain
elements of considerable antiquity.

(a) Chs 17-18: The episode of Micah the
Ephraimite and the young Levite who is conse-
crated as priest in his house. A war party, how-
ever, of the tribe of Dan during a migration north-
ward, by threats and promises induced the Levite
to accompany them, taking with him the priestly
ephod, the household goods of his patron, and a
costly image which Micah had caused to be made.
These Micah in vain endeavors to recover from the
Danites. The latter sack and burn Laish in the
extreme N. of Pal, rebuilding the city on the same
There they set up
the image which they had stolen, and establish a
rival priesthood and worship, which is said to have
endured ‘‘all the time that the house of God was in
Shiloh” (18 31).

(b) Chs 19-21: Outrage of the Benjamites of
Gibeah against the concubine of a Levite lodging
for a night in the city on his way from Bethlehem
to the hill country of Ephraim. The united tribes,
after twice suffering defeat at the hands of the men
of Benjamin, exact full vengeance; the tribe of Ben-
jamin is almost annihilated, and their cities, includ-
ing Gibeah, are destroyed. In order that the tribe
may not utterly perish, peace is declared with the
600 survivors, and they are provided with wives
by stratagem and force, the Israelites having taken
a solemn vow not to permit intermarriage between
bles own daughters and the members of the guilty
tribe.

The period covered by the history of the Book of
Jgs extends from the death of Joshua to the death

of Samson, and adds perhaps a later
4. Chro- reference in 18 31, “all the time that
nology the house of God was in Shiloh” (cf
1813). It is, however, difficult,
perhaps impossible, to compute in years the length
of time that the writer had in mind. That he pro-
ceeded upon a fixed chronological basis, supplied
probably by tradition but modified or arranged on
@ systematic principle, seems evident. The diffi-
culty may be due in part to the corruption which the
figures have suffered in the course of the transmis-
sion of the text. In 1 K 6 1 an inclusive total of
480 years is given as the period from the Exodus
to the building of the Temple in the 4th year of the
reign of Solomon. This total, however, includes
the 40 years’ wandering in the desert, the time occu-
pied in the conquest and settlement of the Promised
Land, and an uncertain period after the death of
Joshua, referred to in the Book of Jgs itself (2 10),
until the older generation that had taken part in the
invasion had passed away. There is also to be
reckoned the 40 years’ judgeship of Eli (1 S 4 18),
the unknown length of the judgeship of Samuel
(7 15), the years of the reign of Saul (cf 1 S 13 1,
where, however, no statement is made as to the
length of his reign), the 40 years during which David
was king (1 K 2 11), and the 4 years of Solomon
before the building of the Temple. The recurrence
of the number 40 is already noticeable; but if for


Judges, Book of
Judges, Period of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1774


the unknown periods under and after Joshua, of
Samuel and of Saul, 50 or 60 years be allowed—a
moderate estimate—there would remain from the
total of 480 years a period of 300 years in round
numbers for the duration of the times of the Judges.
It may be doubted whether the writer conceived of
the period of unsettlement and distress, of alternate
oppression and peace, as lasting for so long a time.


The chronological data contained in the Book of Jgs


itself are as follows:
Years


Oppression of Cushan-rishathaim, king of Meso-

POUCA S?:S) cares seas heed eohtas seat b Sueuiente Sa
Deliverance by Othniel and rest (3 11)..
Oppression of Eglon, king of Moab (3 14
Deliverance hy Ehud and rest (3 30)....
Oppression of Jahin, king of Canaan (4 3)


Deliverance hy Barak and rest (5 31) 40
Oppression of Midian (6 1).........-......00. 7
Deliverance hy Gideon and rest (8 28)......... 40
Rule of Abimelech (9 22)...........00 00 ce euee 3
Judgeship of Tola (10 2).........--...2.00008 23
Judgeship of Jair (10 3)... 2... cee eee eee 22


Oppression of the Philis and Ammonites (10 8)..18
Deliverance by Jephthah, aud his judgeship (12 7) 6
Judgeship of Ibzan (12 9). ets


Judgeship of Elon (12 11) .10
Judgeship of Abdon (12 14) 1. 8
Oppression of the Philis (13 1)................ 40
Judgeship of Samson (15 20; 16 31)........... 20


Atotal of 410 years, or, if the years of foreign oppression
and of the usurpation of Abimelech are omitted, of 296.

It has been supposed that in some instances the
rule of the several judges was contemporaneous,
not successive, and that therefore the total period
during which the judges ruled should be reduced
accordingly. In itself this is sufficiently probable.
It is evident, however, that this thought was not
in the mind of the writer, for in each case he de-
scribes the rule of the judge as over “Israel” with
no indication that ‘Israel’ is to be understood in a
partial and limited signification. His words must
therefore be interpreted in their natural sense, that
in his own belief the rulers whose deeds he related
exercised control in the order named over the entire
nation. Almost certainly, however, he did not
intend to include in his scheme the years of oppres-
sion or the 3 years of Abimelech’s rule. If these
be deducted, the resultant number (296) is very
near the total which the statement in 1 K 6 1
suggests.

No stress, however, must be laid ypon this fact. The
repeated occurrence of the number 40, with its double and
half, can hardly he accidental. The same fact was noted
above in connection with earlier and later rulers in
Israel. It suggests that there is present an element of
artificiality and conscious arrangement in the scheme of
chronology, which makes it impossible to rely upon it
as it stands for any definite or reliable historical con-
clusion.

Within the Book of Jgs itself no author is named,
nor is any indication given of the writer or writers

who are responsible for the form in


6. Author- which the book appears; and it would
ship and seem evident, also, that the 3 parts or
Sources divisions of which the book is com-


posed are on a different footing as
regards the sources from which they are drawn.
The Talmudic tradition which names Samuel
as the author can hardly be seriously regarded.
The historical introduction presents a form_of
the traditional narrative of the conquest of Pal
which is parallel to but not identical with that
contained in the Book of Josh. Brief and discon-
nected as it is, it is of the greatest value as a his-
torical authority, and contains elements which in
origin, if not in their present form, are of consider-
able antiquity. The main portion of the book,
comprising the narratives of the judges, is based
upon oral or written traditions of a local and perhaps
a tribal character, the value of which it is difficult
to estimate, but which undoubtedly in some in-
stances have been more carefully preserved than


in others. In particular, around the story of Sam-
son there seem to have gathered elements derived
from the folklore and the wonder-loving spirit of
the countryside; and the exploits of a national hero
have been enhanced and surrounded with a glamor
of romance as the story of them has passed from
lip to lip among a people who themselves or their
forefathers owed so much to his prowess. Of this
central part of Jgs the Song of Deborah (ch 5) is
the most ancient, and bears every mark of being a
contemporary record of a remarkable conflict and
victory. The text is often difficult, almost unin-
telligible, and has so greatly suffered in the course
of transmission as in some passages to be beyond
repair. As a whole the song is an eloquent and
impassioned ode of triumph, ascribing to Jeh the
great deliverance which has been wrought for His
people over their foes. :

The narratives of Jgs, moreover, are set InN a
framework of chronology and of ethical comment
and teaching, which are probably independent of one
another. The moral exhortations and the lessons
drawn from hardships and sufferings, which the
people of Israel incur as the consequence of their
idolatry and sin, are conceived entirely in the spirit
of Dt, and even in the letter and form bear a con-
siderable resemblance to the writings of that book.
In the judgment of some scholars, therefore, they are
to be ascribed to the same author or authors. Of
this, however, there is no proof. It is possible, but
perhaps hardly probable. They certainly belong to
the same school of thought, of clear-sighted doctrine,
ofreverent piety, and of jealous concern for the honor
of Jeh. With the system of chronology, the figures
and dates, the ethical commentary and inferences
would seem to have no direct relation. The former
is perhaps a later addition, based in part at least
upon tradition, and applied to existing accounts, in
order to give them their definite place and succes-
sion in the historical record. Finally, the three
strands of traditional narrative, moral comment, and
chronological framework were woven into one whole
by a compiler or reviser who completed the book in
the form in which it now exists. Concerning the
absolute dates, however, at which these processes
took place very little can be determined.

The two concluding episodes are distinct, both in form
aud character, from the rest of the book. They do not
relate the life or deeds of a judge, nor do they, explicitly
at least, convey any moral teaching or warning. They
are also mutually independent. It would seem there-
fore that they are to be regarded as accounts of national
events or experiences, preserved by tradition, which,
because they were understood to have reference to the
period of the Judges, were included in this book. The
internal nature of the narratives themselves would sug-
gest that they belong rather to the earlier than the later
part of the time during which the judges held rule; and
their ancient character is similarly attested. There is
no clue, however, to the actual date of their composition,


or to the time or circumstauces under which they were
incorporated in the Book of Jgs.


The discussion of the relation of the Book of Jgs
to the generally recognized sources of the Pent and
to Josh has been in part anticipated in

6. Relation the previous paragraph. In the earliest
to Preced- introductory section of the book, and
ing Books in some of the histories of the judges,
esp. in that of Gideon (chs 6-8), it
is not difficult to distinguish two threads of nar-
rative, which have been combined together in
the account as it now stands; and by some
scholars these are identified with J and E in the
Pent. The conclusion, however, is precarious and
uncertain, for the characteristic marks of the Pent
‘sources’ are in great measure absent. There is
more to be said for the view that regards the intro-
duction (1—2 5), with its verbal parallels to Josh
as derived ultimately from the history of JE, from
which, however, very much has been omitted,


1775


and the remainder adapted and abbreviated. Eveu
this moderate conclusion cannot be regarded as
definitely established. The later author or com-
piler was in possession of ancient documents or
traditions, of which he made use in his composite
narrative, but whether these were parts of the same
historical accounts that are present in the books of
Moses and in Josh must be regarded as_undeter-
mined. There is no trace, moreover, in Jgs of ex-
tracts from the writing or school of P; nor do the
two concluding episodes of the book (chs 17-21)
prea any features which would suggest an identi-
noation with any of the leading ‘‘sources” of the
ent.

The moral and religious teaching, on the other
hand, which makes the varied national experiences
in the times of the Judges a vehicle for ethical in-
struction and warning, is certainly derived from the
same school] as Dt, and reproduces the whole tone
and spirit of that book. There is no evidence,
however, to identify the writer or reviser who thus
turned to spiritual profit the lessons of the age of
the Judges with the author of Dt itself, but he was
animated by the same principles, and endeavored
in the same way to expound the same great truths
of religion and the Providence of God.

There are two early Gr tr: of the Book of Jgs, which


seem to be on the whole independent of one another.
These are Peprescuied hy the two great


. uncial MSS, (Vatican) and A (Alexan-
7. Relation drine). With the former is associated a
to LXX group of cursive MSS and the Sahidic or
and Other Upper Egyp VS. It is therefore probahle
Versions that the tr is of Egyp origin, and by some


it has heen identified with that of He-
5 sychius. It has heen shown, moreover,
that in this hook, and probably elsewhere, the ancient
character of the text of B is not always maintained,
but in parts at least betrays a later origin. The other
VS is contained in A and the majority of the uncial
and cursive MSS of the Gr texts, and, while certainly
a real and independent tr from the original, is thought
hy some to show acquaintance with the VS of B. There
is, however, no definite evidence that B's tr is really older.
Some of the cursives which agree in general with A form
sub-groups; thus the recension of Lucian is believed to he
represented by a small number of cursives, the text of
which is printed by Lagarde (Librorum VT Canonicorum,
Pars Prior, 1883), and is substantially identical with that
in the “Complutensian Polyglot'’ (see G. F. Moore,
Critical and Exegetical Comm. on Jgs, Edinhurgh, 1895,
xllii ff). Itis probable that the true original text of the
LXX is not represented completely either by the one or
the other VS, but that it partially underlies both, and
may be traced in the conflicting readings which must he
judged each on its own merits.

Of the other pEnee VSS, the Old Lat and the Hexa-
plar Syr, together with the Armenian and the Ethiopic,
attach themselves to a sub-group of the MSS associated
with A. The Bohairic VS of the Book of Jgs has not
hitherto been published, but, like the rest of the OT, its
text would no doubt he found to agree substantially with
B. Jerome's tr follows closely the MT, and is independent
of hoth Gr VSS; and the Pesh also is a direct rendering
from the Heh.


Thus the main purpose of the Book of Jgs in
the form in which it has been preserved in the OT
is not to record Israel’s past for its

8. Religious own sake, or to place before the writer’s
Purpose contemporaries a historical narrative
and Value of the achievements of their great men
and rulers, but to use these events and

the national experiences of adversity as a text from
which to educe religious warning and instruction.
With the author or authors spiritual edification is
the first interest, and the facts or details of the his-
tory, worthy of faithful records, because it is the
history of God’s people, find their chief value in
that they are and were designed to be admonitory,
exhibiting the Divine judgments upon idolatry and
sin, and conveying the lesson that disobedience and
rebellion, a hard and defiant spirit that was for-
getful of Jeh, could not fail to entail the same
disastrous consequences. The author is preémi-
nently a preacher of righteousness to his fellow-
countrymen, and to this aim all other elements in


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Judges, Book of


Judges, Period of


the book, whether chronological or historical, are
secondary and subordinate. In his narrative he
sets down the whole truth, so far as it has become
known to him through tradition or written docu-
ment, however discreditable it may be to his nation.
There is no ground for believing that he either ex-
tenuates on the one hand, or on the other paints in
darker colors than the record of the transgressions
of the people deserved. Neither he nor they are
to be judged by the standards of the 20th cent.,
with its accumulated wealth of spiritual experience
and long training in the principles of righteousness
and truth. But he holds and asserts a lofty view
of the character of Jeh, of the immutability of His
wrath against obstinate transgression and of the
certainty of its punishment, and yet of the Divine
pitifulness and mercy to the man or nation that
turns to Him with a penitent heart. The Jews were
not mistaken when they counted the Book of Jgs
among the Prophets. It is prophecy, more than
history, becanse it exhibits and enforces the per-
manent, lessons of the righteousness and justice and
loving-kindness of God.

Lirerature.—A complete hibliography of the lit. up
to date will he found in the Dicts. s.v. Cay DB,
1893; HDB, II, 1899; EB, II, 1901; cf G. F. Moore,
Critical and Exegetical Comm. on Jgs, Edinhurgh, 1895;
SBOT, Leipzig, 1900; R. A. Watson, “ Jgs"' and ‘‘Ruth,"’
in Exposttor’s Bible, 1889: G. W. Thatcher, ‘‘Jgs’’ and
“Ruth,"' in Century Bible; 8. Oettli, ‘‘ Das Deuteronomium
und die Biicher Josua und Richter,"" in Kurzgefasster
Kommentar, Miinchen, 1893; K. Budde, ‘‘Das Buch
der Richter,’ in Kurzer Hand-Kommentar zum AT,
Tubingen, 1897; W. Nowack, ‘'Richter,"’ in Hand-
kommentar zum AT, 1900.

A. 8. GEDEN


JUDGES, PERIOD OF:


I. Sources
Ii. CuHronoiooy
III. Generar Pourrticat Situation
1. The Canaanites
2. Foes Without
IV. Main Events
1. Struggles of Individual Trihes
2. Civil Strife.
3. The Six Invasions
4. Need of Central Government
V. Reuoious ConpitTions
VI. TuroLooicaAl INTERPRETATION
LiTERATURS


I. Sources.—Our chief sources of information are
the Book of Jgs and 1 § 1-12. The material con-
tained in these is not all of the same age. The
oldest part, by common consent, is the Song of
Deborah (Jgs 8). It is a contemporaneous docu-
ment. The prose narratives, however, are also
early, and are generally regarded as presenting a
faithful picture of the times with which they deal.
The Book of Ruth, which also refers to this period,
is probably in its present form a later composition,
but there is no adequate ground for denying to it a
historical basis (Kénig, Finleitung, 286 ff; Kent,
Student's OT, I, 310 f).


Il. Chronology.—The period of the Judges extends
from the death of Joshua to the estahlishment of the
monarchy. How long a time elapsed hetweeu these
limits is'a matter of wide difference of opinion. The
chronological data in the Book of Jgs, i.e. omitting Eli
and Samuel, make a total of 410 years. But this is in-
consistent with 1 K 6 1, where the whole period from
the Exodus to the 4th year of Solomon is reckoned at
480 years. Various attempts have been made to har-
monize these divergent figures, e.g. hy eliminating the
70 years attributed to the Minor Judges (10 1-5;
7-15), hy not couuting the 71 years of foreign domina-
tion, and by the theory that some of the judges were
contemporaneous. It is probable that the 480 years
of 1 K 6 1 was a round numher and did not rest on
exact records. Indeed, it is douhtful if there was any
fixed calendar in Israel before the time of the mouarchy.
The only way then to determine the length of the period
of the Judges is from the date of the Exodus. The com-
mon view is that the Exodus took place during or just
after the reign of Merenptah in the latter half of the 13th
cent. BC. This, however, leaves hardly more than
150 years to the period of the Judges, for Saul's reign
fell in the 2d half of the 11th cent. BC. Hence some,
to whom this seems too short, assign the Exodus to the


Judges, Period of
Judgment, Last


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1776


reign of Amenophis II, about 1450 BC. This harmon-
izes with the 480 years of 1 K 6 1, and is supported by
other considerations (POT, 422-24), Still others have
connected the Exodus with the expulsion of the Hyksos
about 1580 BC (G. A. Pare and this would fit in
very well with the chronological data in the Book of Jgs.
The objection to the last two views is that they require
a rather long period of snbjection of the Israelites in
Canaan to Egypt, of which there is no trace in the Book
of Jgs. See, further, Jupoxzs, Boox or, IV.


III. General Political Situation.—The death of
Joshua left much land yet to be possessed by the
Israelites. The different tribes had
1. The received their respective allotments
Canaanites (Jgs 1 3), but the actual possession
of the territory assigned each still lay
in the future and was only gradually achieved. The
Canaanites remained in the land, and were for a
time a serious menace to the power of Israel. They
retained possession of the plains and many of the
fortified cities, e.g. Gezer, Harheres, Aijalon, Shaal-
bim, and Jerus on the northern border of Judah
(Jga 1 21.29.35), and Bethshean, Ibleam, Taanach,
Megiddo, and Dor along the northern border of
Manasseh (Jgs 1 27.28).

Besides these foes within Canaan, the Israelites
had enemies from without to contend with, viz. the
Moabites, Midianites, Ammonites, and
Philis. The danger from each of these
quarters, except that from the Philis,
was successfully warded off. The
conflicts in which the Israelites were thus involved
were all more or less local in character. In no ease
did all the tribes act together, though the duty of
such united action is clearly taught in the Song of
Deborah, at least so far as the 10 northern tribes
are concerned. The omission of Judah and Simeon
from this ancient song is strange, but may not be
so significant as is sometimes supposed. The
judges, who were raised up to meet the various
emergencies, seem to have exercised jurisdiction
only over limited areas. In general the different
tribes and clans acted independently of each other.
Local home rule prevailed. ‘Every man did that
which was right in his own eyes” (Jgs 17 6).

That Canaan was not during this period subdued
and kept in subjection by one of the great world-
powers, Egypt or Babylonia, is to_be regarded as
providential (HPM, I, 214f). Such subjection
would have made impossible the development of a
free national and religious life in Israel. The
Cushan-rishathaim of Jgs 8 7-10 was more likely
a king of Edom than of Mesopotamia (Paton,
Early History of Syria and Palestine, 161-62).

IV. Main Events.—Much of what took place
during this period is unrecorded. Of the struggles

through which the individual tribes
1. Struggles passed before they succeeded in estab-


2. Foes
Without


of Indi- lishing themselves in the land, little
vidual is known. One interesting episode
Tribes is preserved for us in Jgs 17,18. A


considerable portion of the tribe of

Dan, hard pressed by the Amorites (Jgs 1 34f),
migrated from their allotted home W. of Judah to
Laish in the distant north, where they put the
inhabitants to the sword, burnt the city and then
rebuilt it under the name of Dan. This took place
early in the period of the Judges, apparently during
the first generation after the conquest (Jgs 18 30).
At about the same time also (Jgs 20 28) seems
to have occurred the war with Benjamin (Jgs 19-
21), which grew out of an outrage per-

2. Civil petrated at Gibeah and the refusal
Strife of the Benjamites to surrender the
ee guilty parties for punishment. The
historicity of this war has been called in question,
but it seems to be attested by Hos 99; 10 9.
And that civil strife in Israel was not otherwise
unknown during this period is clear from the expe-


riences of Gideon (Jgs 8 1-3) and Jephthah (Jgs
12 1-6), not to mention those of Abimelech (Jgs
9). It is a current theory that the tribes of Simeon
and Levi early in this period suffered, a serious
reverse (Gen 49 5-7), and that a reflection of this
event is to be found in Gen 34; but the data are
too uncertain to warrant any confidence in this view.

Six wars with other nations are recorded as taking
place in this period, and each called forth its judge

or judges. Othniel delivered the Is-
3. The Six raelites from the Mesopotamians or
Invasions Edomites (Jgs 3 7-11), Ehud from

the Moabites (3 12-30), Deborah and
Barak from the Canaanites (chs 4, 5), Gideon from
the Midianites (chs 6-8), and Jephthah from the
Ammonites (10 6-12.17). In the strife with the
Philis, which was not terminated during this period,
Samson (Jgs 13-16), Eli (1 8 4-6), and Samuel
(18 73-14; 9 16) figure. Of these six wars
those which brought Othniel, Ehud and Jephthah
to the front were less serious and significant than
the other three. The conflicts with the Canaanites,
Midianites and Philis mark distinct stages in the
history of the period. Aas

After the first successes of the Israelites in Canaan
a period of weakness and disintegration set in.
The Canaanites, who still held the fortified cities
in the plain of Esdraelon, banded themselves
together and terrorized the region round about.
The Hebrews fled from their villages to the caves and
dens. None had the heart to offer resistance (Jgs
5 6.8). It seemed as though they were about to
be subdued by the people they had a short time
before dispossessed. Then it was that Deborah
appeared on the scene. With her passionate ap-
peals in the name of Jeh she awakened a new sense
of national unity, rallied the discouraged forces of
the nation, and administered a final crushing defeat
upon the Ganaanites in the plain of Megiddo.

But the flame thus kindled after a time went out.
New enemies came from without. The Midianites
invaded the land year after year, robbing it of its
produce (Jgs 6 1.3). This evil was suddenly put
an end to by the bold stroke of Gideon, whose vic-
tory was long treasured in the public memory (Isa
9 4; 10 26; Ps 83 9-12). But the pees at
least of Manasseh and perhaps also of Ephraim,
now realized that it was no longer safe to depend
upon such temporary leadersbip. They needed
a permanent organization to ward off the dangers
that beset them. They therefore offered the king-
ship to Gideon. He formally declined it (Jgs 8
22.23), but still set up a government at Ophrah
which the people looked upon as hereditary (Jgs
9 2). He was succeeded by his son Abimelech,
who, after slaying all but one of his 70 brothers,
assumed the title of king. The new kingdom, how-
ever, was of short duration. It ended after three
years with the ignominious death of the king.

A great danger was needed before the people of
Israel could be welded into unity and made to see

the necessity of a strong central gov-
4. Need of ernment. This came eventually from
Central the Philis, who twice defeated the
Government Israelites in battle, captured the ark,

and overran a large part of the country
(1 8 4-6). In the face of such a foe as this it was
clear that only a strong and permanent leadership
of the whole people would suffice (1 S 9 15; 10 1);
and thus the rule of the Judges gave way to the
monarchy.

V. Religious Conditions.—The Heb mind to
which Moses addressed himself was not a tabula
rasa, and the Palestinian world into which the
Israelites entered was not an intellectual blank.
Formative influences had for ages been at work on
the Heb mind, and Pal had long been inhabited by


1777


dges, Period of
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA ti aerien Last


a people with fixed institutions, customs and ideas.
When then Israel settled in Canaan, they had both
a heathen inheritance and a heathen environment
to contend with, It should therefore occasion no
surprise to find during this period such lapses from
the purity of the Mosaic faith as appear in the
ephod of Gideon (Jgs 8 24-27), the images of
Micah (Jgs 17-18), and the sacrifice of Jephthah’s
daughter (11 34-40). In the transition from a
nomadic to an agricultural life it was inevitable
that the Hebrews with their native heathen pro-
clivities would adopt many of the crude and even
immoral religious customs and beliefs of the people
among whom they settled. But the purer Mosaic
faith still had its representatives. The worship of
the central sanctuary at Shiloh remained imageless.
Leaders like Deborah and Samuel revived the spirit
of Moses. And there can hardly be a doubt that
in many a quiet home a true and earnest piety was
cultivated like that in the home of Elimelech and
Naomi.

VI. Theological Interpretation.—The Bib. his-
torian was not content simply to narrate events.
What concerned him most was the meaning lying
back of them. And this meaning he was interested
in, not for its own sake, but because of its appli-
cation to the people of his own day. Hence inter-
mingled with the narratives of the period of the
Judges are to be found religious interpretations of
the events recorded and exhortations based upon
them. The fundamental lesson thus inculcated
is the same as that continually insisted upon by the
prophets. The Divine government of the world
is based upon justice. Disobedience to the moral
law and disloyalty to Jeh means, therefore, to Israel
suffering and disaster. All the oppressions of the
period of the Judges arose in this way. Relief and
deliverance came only when the people turned unto
Jeh. This religious pragmatism, as it is called,
does not lie on the surface of the events, so that a
naturalistic historian might see it. But itis a corre-
late of the ethical monotheism of the prophets, and
constitutes the one element in the OT which makes
the study of Israel’s history supremely worth while.

Lirerature.—Jos, Ant, V, ii-vi, 5; Ottley, Short His-
tory of the Hebrews, 101-24: Kittel, History of the Hebrews,
II, 60f, 2d Ger. ed, II, 52-135.

ALBERT CorNELIUS Knupson

JUDGING, juj'ing, JUDGMENT, juj’ment:
Often in the OT for “to act as a magistrate’ (Kx
18 13; Dt 116; 16 18, etc), justice being ad-
ministered generally by “elders” (Ex 18 13-27),
or “kings” (1 8 8 20) or “priests” (Dt 18 15);
applied to God as the Supreme Judge (Ps 9 7.8;
10 18; 96 13; Mic 4 3, ete; Ps 7 8: “Jeh min-
istereth judgment,” vividly describes a court scene,
with Jeh as Judge). .

Often in the NT, ethically, for (1) “to decide,”
“sive a verdict,” “declare an opinion” (Gr krind);
(2) “to investigate,” “scrutinize” (Gr anakrin6) ;
(3) “to discriminate,” “distinguish” (Gr diakriné).
For (1), see Lk 7 43; Acts 15 19; for (2) see 1 Cor
2 15; 4 3; for (3) see1 Cor 11 31; 14 29m. Used
also forensically in Lk 22 30; Acts 26 10; and
applied to God in Jn 6 22; He 10 30. The judg-
ments of God are the expression of His justice, the
formal declarations of His judgments, whether em-
bodied in words (Dt 6 1 AV, RV “statutes”’), or
deeds (Ex 6 6; Rev 16 7), or in decisions that are
yet to be published (Ps 36 6). Man’s consciousness
of guilt inevitably associates God’s judgments as
declarations of the Divine justice, with his own con-
demnation, i.e. he knows that a strict exercise of
justice means his condemnation, and thus “judg-
ment” and “condemnation” become in his mind
synonymous (Rom & 16); hence the prayer of Ps


143 2, “Enter not into judgment’; also, Jn 6 29,


“the resurrection of judgment” (AV “damnation’’);
1 Cor 11 29, ‘eateth and drinketh judgment” (AV
“damnation”’). ; H. E. Jacogs


JUDGMENT, DAY OF. See Jupement, Last.


JUDGMENT HALL, juj’ment hél (rd rpavradprov,
6 prattérion, ‘Then led they Jesus . . . . unto the
hall of judgment . . . . and they themselves went
not into the judgment hall” [Jn 18 28 AV]; ‘Then
Pilate entered into the judgment hall again’ [18
33. AV]; “[Pilate] went again into the judgment
hall” [19 9]; “He commanded him to be kept in
Herod’s judgment hall” [Acts 23 35]):

“Judgment hall” is one of the ways in which AV
translates praitdrion, which it elsewhere renders
“Praetorium” (Mk 15 16); ‘the common hall”
(Mt 27 27). In this passage ERV_ renders it
“palace”; in Jn 18 33; 19 9; Acts 23 35, “pal-
ace’’ is also given by ERV; in Phil 1 13, AV renders
““palace,’”’ while RV gives “the praetorian guard.”
Praitérion accordingly is tr¢ in all these ways,
“Praetorium,” “the common hall,” ‘the judgment
hall,” “the palace,” “the praetorian guard.” In
the passages in the Gospels, ARV renders uni-
formly ‘‘Praetorium.”’

The word originally meant the headquarters in
the Rom camp, the space where the general’s tent
stood, with the camp altar; the tent of the com-
mander-in-chief. It next came to mean the military
council, meeting in the general’s tent. Then it
came to be applied to the palate in which the Rom
governor or procurator of a province resided. In
Jerus it was the magnificent palace which Herod the
Great had built for himself, and which the Rom proc-
urators seem to have occupied when they came from
Caesarea to Jerus to transact public business.

Praitérion in Phil 1 13 has heen variously ren-
dered, ‘“‘the camp of the practorian soldiers,’ ‘the
praetorian guard,” ete. For what is now believed
to be its true meaning, see PRAETORIUM.

JoHN RUTHERFURD

JUDGMENT, LAST: In Christian theology the
Last Judgment is an act in which God interposes

directly into human history, brings
1. A Tran- the course of this world to a final close,
scendental determines the eternal fate of human


Doctrine —_ beings, and places them in surround-
ings spiritually adapted to their final
condition. The concept is purely transcendental,


and is to he distinguished from the hope that. God
will interfere in the history of this world to deter-
mine it undeviatingly toward good. The tran-
scendental doctrine is possible only when an exalted
idea of God has been attained, although it may after-
ward be united with crasser theories, as in certain
naive conceptions of Christianity at the present day.
In the religion of Israel, the doctrine of the Last
Judgment arose from “transcendentalizing’ the
concept of the ‘Day of the Lord.”

2. The Just as hope of immortality replaced
Doctrine in desire for length of days on earth, just
the Religion as for ‘‘the rejuvenation of Pal’’ was
of Israel substituted “an eternal abode in a new
earth,” so the ideal of a military vic-

tory over Israel’s enemies expanded into God’s
solemn condemnation of evil. The concept thus
strictly defined is hardly to be sought in the OT, but
Dnl 12 1-3 may contain it. The first unequivocal
assertion would appear to be in En 91 17, where
the final state is contrasted with a preceding reign
of earthly happiness. (If there has been no redac-
tion in the latter part of this section, its date is
prior to 165 BC.) Hereafter the idea is so preva-
Jent in the Jewish writings that detailed reference
is needless. But itishy no means universal. Writ-
ings touched with Gr thought (En 108; 4 Mace;


Judgment Seat
Judith, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1778


Philo) are content with an individual judgment at
death. A unique theory is that of the Test. XII P
(Levi 18 8-14, e.g.), where the world grows into final
blessedness without catastrophe. But much more
common is the persistence of the non-transcendental
ideas, ingrained as they were in the thought of the
people (even in Philo; cf his prophecy of national
earthly glory in Ezcr 9). This type of thought
was so tenacious that it held its own alongside of
the transcendental, and both points of view were
accepted by more than one writer. Then the
earthly happiness precedes the heavenly (as in En
91), and there are two judgments, one by the Mes-
siah and the other by God (2 Esd_7; Syr Bar 29,
30). So in Rev, where in ch 19 Christ overcomes
the enemies in battle-symbolism and establishes
the Millennium, while the Last Judgment is held
by God (20 11 ff). Otherwise the Messiah is never
the judge except in the Parables of Enoch, where
He appears as God’s vicar uniformly (in 47 3 God
fixes the time of judgment only). Possibly in Wisd
4 16; 5 1 menshare in the judgment-act but other-
wise they (and angels) appear only as “assessors”
or as executors of the sentence. In Wisd 3 8,
‘Sudging” is used in the OT sense of “rule” (Jgs
3 10, etc), as is the case in Mt 19 28 || Lk 22 30;
1 Cor 6 2.3 (in the last case with the word in two
senses). Further studies in the variation of the
(rather conventionally fixed) details of the judgment
will interest the special student only.

For discussions of the relevant Bib. passages,
see Day or THE Lorp; EscuatoLtocy; Parousia.
The doctrine has real religious value, for it insists
on a culmination in the evolution (or degeneration!)
of the race as well as of the individual. So it is
contrasted with the pessimism of natural science,
which points only toward the gradual extinction
of humanity through the cooling of the sun.


Literature.—The variations of the concept are
treated fully only in Volz, Jtidische Eschatologie. For
general lit. see EscoatTo.toar; Parovsta.

Burton Scotr Baston

JUDGMENT SEAT (Pipa, béma, “a raised
place,” “platform,” “tribune,” Mt 27 19; Jn 19
13; see GaBBATHA; Acts 12 21 m [text ‘‘throne’];
18 12.16 ff; 26 6.17): In Gr law courts, one béma
was provided for the accuser, another for the ac-
cused; but in the NT the word designates the official
seat of a judge, usually of the Rom governor; also
of the emperor (Acts 25 10); then of God (Rom
14 10), of Christ (2 Cor 5 10). The word xpirijpuwy»,
kritérion, “a tribunal,” “bench of judges” (Jas 2
6) occurs also in t Cor 6 2-4, and is there tr¢ in
RVm by “tribunals.” See also Junaz.


JUDICIAL, j66-dish’al,
BuinpNESss, JUDICIAL.


JUDICIAL COURTS. See Courts, Jupictau.


BLINDNESS. See


JUDICIAL HARDENING. See Happen.


JUDITH, joo’dith (for etymology,
article):

(1) A wife of Esau, daughter of Beeri the Hittite
(Gen 26 34).

(2) The heroine of the Book of Jth in Apoc—a
pious, wealthy, courageous, and patriotic widow
who delivered Jerus and her countrymen from the
assault of Holofernes, the general of Nebuchad-
nezzar who had arranged the expedition which
aimed at making Nebuchadnezzar the object of
universal human worship.

The 8th and following chapters of the book describe
her actions which resulted in the cutting off of the head


of Holofernes, the rout of the Assyr army, and the de-
liverance of the Jews. See Jupitu, Book or.


see next


JUDITH, BOOK OF:


I. Name
TI. Canonicity
III. Contents
IV. Fact or Fiction?

V. Dare
1. Probably during the Maccabean Age
2. Other Opinions
(1) Invasion of Pompey
(2) Insurrection under Bar Cochba
VI. OrnicinaL LANGUAGE
. WERSIONS

1. Greek

2. Syriac

3. Latin

4. Hebrew
LiItBRATURE

I. Name,—This apocryphal book is called_after
the name of its principal character Judith (N77,
yhadhith, “a Jewess’; *Iov5(0, Toudith, *lov599,
Toudéth). The name occurs in Gen 26 34 and the
corresponding mase. form (77), y*hadhi, ‘a Jew’’)
in Jer 36 14.21.23 (name of a scribe). In other
great crises in Heb history women have played a
great part (cf Deborah, Jgs 5, and Esther). The
Books of Ruth, Est, Jth and Susannah are the only
ones in the Bible (including the Apoc) called by the
names of women, these women being the principal
characters in each case.

Hf. Canonicity.—Though a tale of Jewish patriotism
written originally in Heh, this book was never admitted
into the Heb Canon, and the same applies to the Book
of Tob. But hoth Jth and_ Tob were recognized as
canonical by the Council of Carthage (397 AD) and by
the Council of Trent (1545 AD). Though, however, all
Romanists include these books in their Bible (the Vulg),
Protestant VSS of the Bible, with very few exceptions,
exclude the whole of the Apoc (see ApocrypHA). In the

X and Vulg, Tob and Jth (in that order) follow Neh
and precede Est. In the EV of the Apoc, which _un-
fortunately for its understanding stands alone, 1 Esd,
2 Esd, Tob aud Jth occupy the first place and in the order
named. In his tr of the Apoc, Luther, for some unex-
pitied reason, puts Jth at the head of the apocryphal

ooks, Wisdom taking the next place.


IIT. Contents.—The book opens with an account
of the immense power of Nebuchadnezzar, king of
Assyria, whose capital was Nineveh. (In the days
of the real Nebuchadnezzar, Assyria had ceased to
be, and its capital was destroyed.) He calls upon
the peoples living in the western country, including
Pal, to help him to subdue a rival king whose power
he feared—Arphaxad, king of the Medes (other-
wise quite unknown). But as they refused the help
he demanded, he first conquered his rival, annexing
his territory, and then sent his general Holofernes
to subdue the western nations and to punish them
for their defiance of his authority. The Assyr
general marched at the head of an army 132,000
strong and soon took possession of the lands N. and
E. of Pal, demolishing their idols and sanctuaries
that Nebuchadnezzar alone might be worshipped
as god (chs 1-3). He now directed his forces
against the Jews who had recently returned from
exile and newly rebuilt and rededicated their temple.
Having heard of the ruin of other temples caused
by the invading foe, the Jews became greatly
alarmed for the safety of their own, and fortified
the mountains and villages in the south, providing
themselves with food to meet their needs in the
event of war. At the urgent request of Joakim
(“Eliakim” in the Vulg and Pesh), the inhabitants
of Bethulia (so the Lat, Eng., and other VSS, but
Bervhova, Betulotia is more correct according to the
Gr) and of Betomestham (both places otherwise un-
known) defended the adjoining mountain passes
which commanded the way to Jerus. Holofernes at
once laid siege to Bethulia, and by cutting off the
water supply aimed at starving the people to sub-
mission. But he knows little of the people he is
seeking to conquer, and asks the chiefs who are with
him who and what these Jews are. Achior, the Am-
monite chief, gives an account of the Israelites, con-


1779


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Judgment Seat


Judith, Book of


cluding that when faithful to their God they were
invincible, but that when they disobeyed Him they
were easily overcome. Achior is for this saying
expelled and handed over to the Jews. After hold-
ing out for some days, the besieged people insisted
that Onias their governor should surrender. This
he promises to do if no relief comes in the course of
five days. A rich, devout and beautiful widow


called Judith (daughter of Merari, of the tribe of-


Simeon (8 1]), hearing of these things, rebukes the
murmurers for their lack of faith and exhorts them
to trust in God. As Onias abides by his promise
to the people, she resolves to attempt another mode
of deliverance. She obtains consent to leave the
fortress in the dead of night, accompanied by her
maidservant, in order to join the Assyr camp.
First of all she pniye earnestly for guidance and
success; then doffing her mourning garb, she puts
on her most gorgeous attire together with jewels
and other ornaments. She takes with her food
allowed by Jewish law, that she might have no neces-
sity to eat the forbidden meats of the Gentiles.
Passing through the gates, she soon reaches the
Assyrians. First of all, the soldiers on watch take
her captive, but on her assuring them that she is a
fugitive from the Hebrews and desires to put
Holofernes in the way of achieving a cheap and
easy victory over her fellow-countrymen, she is
warmly welcomed and made much of. She reiter-
ates to Holofernes the doctrine taught by Achior
that these Jews can easily be conquered when they
break the laws of their Deity, and she knows the
necessities of their situation would lead them to
eat food prohibited in their sacred laws, and when
this takes place she informs him that he might at
once attack them. Holofernes listens, applauds,
and is at once captured by her personal charms. He
agrees to her proposal and consents that she and
her maid should be allowed each night to say their
prayers out in the valley near the Heb fortress.
On the 4th night after her arrival, Holofernes
arranges a banquet to which only his household
servants and the two Jewesses are invited. When
allis over, by a preconcerted plan the Assyr general
and the beautiful Jewish widow are left alone. He,
however, is dead drunk and heavily asleep. With
his own scimitar she cuts off his head, calls her maid
who puts it into the provision bag, and together
they leave the camp as if for their usual prayers
and join their Heb compatriots, still frantic about
the immediate future. But the sight of the head
of their arch foe puts new heart into them, and next
day they march upon the enemy now in panic at
what had happened, and win an easy victory.
Judith became ever after a heroine in Jewish ro-
mance and poetry, a Heb Joan of Arc, and the tale
of the deliverance she wrought for her people has
been told in many languages. For later and shorter
forms of the tale see VII, 4 (Heb Midrashes).

IV. Fact or Fiction?—The majority of theolo-
gians down to the 19th cent. regarded the story of
Jth as pure history; but with the exception of O.
Wolf (1861) and von Gumpach, Protestant scholars
in recent times are practically agreed that the
Book of Jth is a historical novel with a purpose
similar to Dnl, Est and Tob. Schiirer classes it
with “parenetic narratives” (pardnetische Erzdh-
lung). The Heb novel is perhaps the earliest of all
novels, but it is always a didactic novel written to
enforce some principle or principles. Roman
Catholic scholars defend the literal historicity of
the book, though they allow that the proper names
are more or less disguised. But the book abounds
with anachronisms, inconsistencies and impossi-
bilities, and was evidently written for the lesson it
teaches: obey God and trust Him, and all will be
well. The author had no intention to teach history.


Torrey, however, goes too far when he says (see Jew
Enc, “Book of Jth’) that the writer aimed at
nothing more than to write a tale that would amuse.
A tone of religious fervor and of intense patriotism
runs through the narrative, and no opportunity of
enforcing the claims of the Jewish law is lost. Note
esp. what is taught in the speeches of Achior (5
12-21) and Judith (8 17-24; cf 11 10), that,
trusting in God and keeping His commandments,
the nation is invulnerable.

According to the narrative Nebuchadnezzar has
been for 12 years king of Assyria and has his capital
at Nineveh, though we know he never was or could
be king of Assyria. He became king of Babylon
in 604 BC, upon the death of his father Nabopolas-
sar, who in 608 had destroyed Assyria. The Jews
had but recently returned from exile (4 3; 5 19),
but were independent, and Holofernes knew nothing
about them (6 3). Nebuchadnezzar died in 561
BC and the Jews returned under Cyrus in 538.
Bethulia to which Holofernes lay siege was other-
wise quite unknown: it is probably a disguised
form of Béh Elohim or Béth 'Hloh, “house of
God,” and means the place where God is with His
people. The detailed description of the site is but
part of the writer's art; it was the place which every
army must pass on its way to Jerns. As a matter
of fact, there is no such position in Pal, and least
of all Shechem, which Torrey identified with Bethu-
lia. We know nothing besides what ch 1 tells us
of “Arphaxad who reigned over the Medes in
Ecbatana’’; on the contrary, in every other mention
of the name it stands for a country or a race (see
Gen 10 22.24; 11 10-13).

V. Date.—It is evident that this religious ro-
mance was prompted by some severe persecution

in which the faith of the Jews was
1. During sorely tried, and the writer’s domi-
the Macca- nant aim is identical with that of the
bean Age author of Dnl, viz. to encourage those

suffering for their religion by giving
instances of Divine deliverance in the darkest hour.
“Only trust and keep the law; then deliverance
will unfailingly come’—that is the teaching. Jth
might well have been written during the persecution
of the Maccabean age, as was almost certainly the
Book of Dnl. We have in this book that zeal for
orthodox Judaism which marked the age of the
Maccabees, and the same strong belief that the
war in which the nation was engaged was a holy one.
The high priest is head of the state (see 4 6), as
suiting a period when the religious interest is upper-
most and politics are merged in religion, thongh
some say wrongly that John Hyrcanus (135-106
BC) was the first to combine priestly and princely
dignities. We have another support for a Macca-
bean date in the fact that Onias was high priest
during the siege of Bethulia (4 6), the name being
suggested almost certainly by Onias III, who be-
came high priest in 195 (or 198) BC, and who died
in 171 after consistently opposing the Hellenizing
policy of the Syrians and their Jewish allies.

That the persecutions of Antiochus Epiphanes
(175-164 BC) supply as good a background for this
book as any other event in Jewish history is the
least that can besaid; but one may not be dogmatic
on the matter, as similar conditions recurred in the
nation’s history, and there is no external or internal
evidence that fixes the date definitely. The follow-
ing scholars decide for a date in the Maccabean age:
Fritzsche, Ewald, Hilgenfeld, Schiirer, Ball, Cornill
and Lébr. The author was certainly a resident in
Pal, as his local knowledge and interestsshow; and
from his punctilious regard for the law one may
judge that he belonged to the Hasidaean (hdstdhim)
party. Since he so often mentions Dothan (Gr
Dothae, Dothaim) (3 9; 4 6; 7 3.18; 8 3), it is


Judith, Book of
Justice


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1780


probable that he belonged to that neighborhood.
Though, however, the author wrote in the time of
the Maccabees, he seems to set his history in a
framework that is some 200 years earlier, as Néldeke
(Die altlest. Lit., 1868, 96; Aufsdtze zur persischen
Geschichte, 1887, 78) and Schiirer (GJV, III, 323 ff)
show. In 350 BC, Artaxerxes Ochus (861-338 BC)
invaded Phoenicia and Egypt, his chief generals
being Holofernes (2 4, etc) and Bagoas (12 11),
both of whom are in Jth officials of King Nebu-
chadnezzar and take part in the expedition against
the Jews. This was intended probably to disarm
the criticism of enemies who might resent any writ-
ing in which they were painted in unfavorable colors.


(1) Invasion of Pompey.—That it was the invasion of
Pompey which gave rise to the hook is the opinion held


by Gaster. If this were so, Jth and the Ps

2. Other Sol arose under the pressure of the same
Salty circumstances (see Ryle and James, The
Opinions Psalms of Solomon, XL, aud J. Rendel
about the Harris, Zhe Odes and_Psalms of Solomon,
Date Ill), But in the Ps Sol the supreme
ruler is a king (17 22), not a high priest


(Jth 4 6). Besides, anyone who reads the
Ps Sol and Jth will feel that in the former he has to do
with a different and later age. rae es
Insurrection under Bar Cochba.—Hitzig (who held
that the insurrection under Bar Cochba, 132 AD, is
the event referred to), Volkmar and Graetz_date this
book in the days of the emperor Trajan (or Hadrian ?).
Volkmar gives himself much trouble iu his attempt to
prove that the campaigns of Nehuchadnezzar stand
really for those of Trajan. But itis a sufficient refuta-
tion of this opinion that the book is quoted by Clement
of Rome (55), who died in 100 AD, and whose reference
to the book shows that it was regarded in his day as
authoritative and even as canonical, so that it must have
been written long before.


VI. Original Language.—That a Heb or (less.


likely) an Aram. original once existed is the opinion
of almost all modern scholars, and the evidence for
this seems conclusive. There are many Hebraisms
in the book, e.g. év rats qudpacs, en tails hémérais
(‘Sn the days of,” 1 7, and 9 t besides); the frequent
use of o¢ddpa, sphédra, in the sense of the Heb
NA, m’sdh, and even its repetition (also a Hebra-
ism, 4 8); ef émt wodd opbdpa, ept pol sphédra (6
18) and rA#G0s rodd ofbdpa, pléthos poli sphédra
(2 17). Note further the following: ‘Let not thy
eye spare,” etc (2 11; cf Ezk 6 11, ete); ‘as I
live” (in an oath, 2 12); “God of heaven” (6 8;
11 17); “son of man,” parallel with ‘‘man,” and in
the same sense (8 16); “and it came to pass when
she had ceased crying,” etc (10 1); ‘the priests who
serve in Jerus before the face of our God” (11 138).
In16 3 we have the words: ‘Fora god that shatters
battle is [the] Lord.” Now “Lord” without the
article can be only the Heb “Yahweh,” read always
*ddhonay, “Lord.” But the phrase, ‘to shatter
battle,” 1s not good Gr or good sense. The Heb
words shdbhath (‘‘to rest”; cf shabbath, ‘Sabbath’’)
and shdbhar (‘to break”) are written much alike,
and in the original Heb we must have had the
causative form of the first vb.: “A God that makes
war cease is [the] Lord” (see Ps 46 9). Moreover,
the Heb idiom which strengthens a finite vb. by
placing a cognate (absolute) infinitive before it is
represented in the Gr of this book in the usual form
in which it occurs in the LXX (and in Welsh), viz.
a participle followed by a finite vb. (see2 13). The
present writer has noted other examples, but is
prevented by lack of space from adding them here.
That the original book was Heb and not Aram. is
made extremely likely by the fact that the above
examples of Heb idiom are peculiar to this language.
Note esp. the idiom, “and it came to pass that,” etc
(2 4), with the implied “waw consecutive,” and
what is said above about 11 13, where the senseless
Gr_ arose through the confusion of two similarly
written Heb (not Aram.) words. There are cases
also of mistakes in the Gr text due to wrong tr from
the Heb, asin 1 8 (where for ‘‘nations” read “cities”


or “mountains”); 22 (where for “concluded,”
Heb aa , wa-ykhal, read “revealed,” Do, wa-yr-
ghal); 3 1.9.10 (see Fritasche, s.v.), etc.
VII. Versions. —The Gr text appears in three forms:
(1) that of the principal Gr uncials (A, B, agreeing closely),
which is followed in printed editions of the
1. Greek LXX; (2) that of codd. 19, 108 (Lucian's
> GTee: text), an evident revision of (1); (3) cod.
: 58 which closely resembles (2) and with
which the Old Lat and Pesh agree in most points.
There are two extant Syr VSS, hoth of them depend-
ent on the Gr text (3) noted above. The Pesh is given
in Walton's Poluaie ane me ec
aC revised form in Lagarde, Lib. Vet. Tes
2. Syriac "hoe Syr, 104-26. ‘The so-called Hexa-
plar Syr text was made by Paul of Tella
in the 6th cent.

(1) The Old Lat seems to have been made from the
Gr text, cod. 58 (see above). (2) Jerome made his Lat

8 (with which the Vulg is identical) from
3. Latin a lost Chaldee VS. That this last is not
: the original text of the hook is certain. be-
cause neither Origen nor his Jewish teachers

knew anything of a Heb or Aram. text of Jth.

Several late Heb VSS of the book have been found,
no one of them with strong claims to be cousidered the

original text, though Gaster (see #B, IT,
4, Hebrew (601,2,642) does make such @ claim for the
ve S$ found, edited and tr’ by _him (see
Midrashes pgpa, XVI, 156-63), The Heb_ mid-
rashes were made to be read in Jewish
homes and vary according to the circumstances of their
origin. But they agree in these points: Proper names
are often omitted. Jerus is the scene of action, the wars
being those of the Maccabees. Judith is a Jewish maiden
and daughter of Ahitah, according to the Gaster MS, and
she_helongs apparently to the Maccabean family. It
is Nicanor who is beheaded, the occasion heing the Feast
of Dedication; in the Gaster MS it is the king who is
kiNed. Translations of these midrashes may he seen in
Jellinck, Beth Hammidrash, I, 130-41; II, 12f; Lepsius,
Zeitschr. fir wiss. Theologie, 1867, 337 ff; Ball, Speaker's
Apoc, I, 25 ff; Scholz, Comm.?, Anhange I and II;
Gaster, op. cit. _Gaster argues that the much shorter
form of the tale in his MS is older than the longer VS.
But if a writer were to expand a short story, he would
hardly be likely to invent several proper names and to
change others. It is probable that Judith came to be
represented as a pure maiden (a virgin) under the influ-
ence of the low conception of marriage fostered in the
mediaeval Christian church.

Lireraturs.—For the editions of the Gr text and for
comms. on the Apoc, see under ArocrypHaL LitEeRa-
tuRE. But on Jth note in particular the commen-
taries by Fritzsche and Ball, the latter containing elab-
orate hibliography. But the following must in addition
be mentioned: Scholz, Commentar tiber das Buch Judith
und iiber Bel und Drache, 1896; _@ 2d ed has appeared;
A. S. Weissmann, Das Buch Judith historisch-kritisch
beleuchtet, Wien, 1891; Schiirer, GJ V4, III, 230-37, with
full bibliography; cf HJ P, II, iii, 32-37; Pentin, The Apoe
in English Lit., Judith, 1908; aud the relevant articles in
the Bible dicts., esp. that by F. C. Porter in HDB.

; T. Witton Daviss

JUEL, joo’el ({1] "Iowé, Found; [2]


*ToufA,
Touél): E
(1) 1 Esd 9 34=“Uel” in Ezr 10 34.
(2) 1 Esd 9 85=“‘Joel” in Ezr 10 48.
JUGGLERY, jug’lér-i (yonrla, goétia): The


word occurs once in 2 Macc 12 24 RVm (AV
“craft,” RV ‘‘crafty guile’).


JUICE, j00s, jis: -The word occurs once in Cant
8 2 (tr of OD OY, ‘dsis, RVm “sweet wine’), and
once in RVm of Job 6 6, where for ‘‘the white of
an egg’ m reads, “the juice of purslain.”’ LXX has
pijpacw Kevois, rhémasin kenots, “empty words.”


JULIA, joo'li-a (Tovdta, Toulia): The name of a
Rom Christian to whom St. Paul sent greetings, the
wife or sister of Philologus with whose name hers
is coupled (Rom 16 15). The name points to a
member of the imperial household.


JULIUS, j6o'li-us (’TotAvos, Jovilios): The cen-
turion of the Augustan cohort under whose charge
Paul was sent a prisoner to Rome (Acts 27 1.8).
See Anmy, Roman; Banp, AUGUSTAN.


JUMPING, jum’ping. See Games.


1781


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Judith, Book of


Justice


JUNIAS, j60’ni-as or JUNIA, joo’ni-a (Iovvias,
Tountas, "Iovvla, Iounia): One to whom, with
Andronicus, greetings are sent by Paul at the close
of his letter to the Romans (Rom 16 7). The
name may be masc., Junias, a contraction of Ju-
nianus, or fem. Junia; itis Iountan, the accus. form,
that is given. In all probability this is the masc.,
Junias. Paul defines the two as (1) ‘‘my kinsmen,”
(2) “my fellow-prisoners,’”’ (3) ‘‘who are of note
among the apostles,”’ and (4) “who also have been
in Christ before me.”

(1) They were Jews. Paul calls the Jews “my
brethren,” ‘‘my kinsmen according to the flesh”
(Rom 9 3). Because Prisca and Aquila, a Jew
and Jewess, are not designated as kinsfolk, Cony-
beare and Howson suppose “‘the epithet to denote
that the persons mentioned were of the tribe of
Benjamin.”’

(2) They had been companions of Paul in some
unrecorded imprisonment. The phrasc denotes
more than the fact that they, like Paul, had suffered
imprisonment for the sake of Christ.


3) This may mean (a) that they were well


known to the apostolic circle (so Gifford and Weiss),
or (b) distinguished as apostles. The latter is
probably correct, ‘‘apostle’’ being used in a wide
sense (cf 1 Cor 15 7). The prophetic ministry
of the early church consisted of apostles, prophets
and teachers (1 Cor 12 28; Eph 411), the
apostles being missionaries in the modern sense
(see Lindsay, Church and Ministry, ch iii). Some
apostles were missionaries sent out by particular
churches (Acts 13 2.3; 2 Cor 8 23; Phil 2 25).
(4) They were among the first converts, “early
disciples” like Mnason of Cyprus (Acts 21 16).
ee . 8. F. Hunter
JUNIPER, j60’ni-pér (OF, rothem; faeuev,
rhathmén, 1 K 19 4f, m “broom”; Ps 120 4,m
“broom”; Job 30 4 tr “broom”): This is quite
certainly the Arab. ratam (Retama retem, N.O.
Leguminosae), a va-
riety of broom which
is one of the most
characteristic shrubs of
the deserts of Southern
Pal and southward to
‘Egypt. Though the
shade it affords is but
scanty, in the absence
of other shrubs it is
frequently used by
desert travelers as a
refuge from the sun’s
scorching rays (cf 1 K
19 4). The root yields
good charcoal, giving
out much heat (Ps 120
4). For people to be
reduced to chew it for
nourishment betokens
the lowest depth of
starvation (Job 30 4).
Indeed so hopeless is
this root as a source ‘
of food that many commentators believe that the
accepted text is in error, and by altering a single
letter, substituting 7 for ™, they get a readin 1
which has been adopted in RVm, “to warm them
instead of “their meat,” which certainly is much
more probable. E. W. G. Masterman


Retem Bush (Retama retem).


PITER, joo’pi-tér, ji'pi-tér (Zets, Zetis):
oppiter” is pienabied in 2 Mace 6 2; Acts 14
12.13, with “Zeus” in the RVm in all cases. In
addition the Gr stem appears in domrerobs, diopetous,
in Acts 19 35, EV “which fell down from Jupiter’;
but the word means “from the clear sky” (cf “from


heaven” in the RVm). “Jupiter”? was considered
the Lat equivalent of the Gr ‘‘Zeus,”’ the highest god
in the developed Gr pantheon, and Zeus in turn, in
accord with the syncretism of the period, was
identified with countless deities in the local cults
of Asia Minor and elsewhere. So in Acts 14 12.13,
“Zeus”? and ‘Hermes’ are local deities that had
been renamed. On the other hand, the Zeus of
2 Macc 6 2 is the genuine Gr deity, who had been
adopted as a special patron by Antiochus Epiphanes
and to whose temple in Athens Antiochus had con-
tributed largely. The title “Olympius” (2 Macc 6
2) is derived from the early worship on Mt. Olym-
pus, but had come to be thonght one of the god’s
highest appellations; Xenios, “protector of stran-
gers,’’ was a title in a cult particularly popular with
travelers. See ABomMINATION oF DESOLATION, and
Smith, HGH L, 333-34. Burton Scott Easton


JUPITER AND MERCURY. See Asrroxoey,
Ill, 1; Mercury; Jupiter.


JURISDICTION, joo-ris-dik’shun (éovela,
exousia): The word exousia is well known in NT
‘Gr. It is derived from the word ézestt, and sug-
gests the absence of any hindrance to an act. It
contains the idea of right and might (Cremer). In
the NT it means right, authority, capability (Rom
9 21); power, strength (Mt 9 8); right and
might (Jn 5 27). Thusit gets the meaning of the
powers of the magistrate, which it bears in later
Gr (Tit 3 1; Rom 13 1-3). And in this sense
it is used in Lk 23 7, where it is tr? “Jurisdiction.”


JUSHAB-HESED, j6o’shab-hé’sed (TOM AD,
yushabh hesedh, “loving-kindness is returned”):
Son of Zerubbabel. The name is probably sym-
bolical (1 Ch 3 20); ef Sauan-JasHus.


JUSTICE, jus’tis (WPTY, edhakah, PTL, cedhek;
Stcacorivyn, dikatostiné): The original Heb and
Gr words are the same as those rendered “right-
eousness.” This is the common rendering, and in
about half, the cases where we have ‘‘just’”? and
‘justice’ in AV, ARV has changed to “righteous”
and “righteousness.” It must be constantly borne
in mind that the two ideas are essentially the same.
See RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Justice had primarily to do with conduct in rela-
tion to others, esp. with regard to the rights of

others. It is applied to business,
1. Human where just weights and measures are
Justice demanded (Lev 19 35.36; Dt 25 13—

16; Am 8&5; Prov 111; 16 11;
Ezk 45 9.10). It is demanded in courts, where the
rights of rich and poor, Israelite and sojourner, are
equally to be regarded. Neither station nor bribe
nor popular clamor shall influence judge or witness.
“Justice, justice shalt thou follow’ (Dt 16 20m;
ef vs 18-20; Ex 23 1-3.6-9). In general this
justice is contrasted with that wickedness which
“feared not God, and regarded not man” (Lk
18 2).

In a larger sense justice is not only giving to
others their rights, but involves the active duty of
establishing their rights. So Israel waits upon
God’s justice or cries out: ‘The justice due to me
[lit. “‘my justice’’] is passed away from my God”
(Isa 40 27). Jeh is to show her to be in the right
as over against the nations. Justice here becomes
mercy. To ‘“‘seek justice’? means to “relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow”
(Isa 117; cf 11.4; Jer 22 15.16; Ps 82 2-4).
Thesame idea appearsin Dt 24 12.13; Ps 87 21.26;
112 4-6, where the tr is “righteous” instead of
‘ust.’

oth this conception of justice the full meaning of


Justice
justification


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1782


the NT is not yet reached. It does not mean sin-
lessness or moral perfection. Job knows the sin
in his heart (Job 13 23.26; 7 21), and yet speaks
of himself as a just or righteous man (12 4; 13 18).
The Psalmist confidently depends upon the right-
eousness of God though he knows that no man is
righteous in God’s sight (Ps 143 1.2; cf 7 8; 18
20-24). It is not a lack of humility or dependence
upon God when the Psalmist asks to be judged
according to his righteousness. In relation to God,
the just, or rightcous, man is the one who holds to
God and trusts in Him (Ps 33 18-22). This is
not the later Judaistic legalism with its merit and
reward, where God’s justice is simply a matter of
giving each man what he has earned.

The word “justice” does not occur in the NT,
and in most cases where we find “just” in AV it is
changed to “righteous” in ARV. The idea of jus-
tice or righteousness (remembering that these are
essentially the same) becomes more spiritual and
ethicalin the NT. It is a matter of character, and
God’s own spirit is the standard (1 Jn 3 7; Mt
5 48). The mere give-and-take Justice is not
enough. We are to be merciful, and that to all.
The ideal is righteousness, not rights. As Holtz-
mann says, ‘““The keynote of the Sermon on the
Mount is justitia and not jus.”

God’s justice, or righteousness, is founded in His
essential nature. But, just as with man, it is not

something abstract, but is seen in His
2. Justice relation to the world. It is His king-
of God ship establishing and maintaining the

right. It appears as retributive jus-
tice, ‘that reaction of His holy will, as grounded in
His eternal being, against evil wherever found.”
He cannot be indifferent to good and evil (Hab 1
13). The great prophets, Isaiah, Micah, Amos,
Hosea, all insist: upon Jeh’s demand for righteous-
ness.

But this is not the main aspect of God’s justice.
Theology has been wont to set forth God’s justice
as the fundamental fact in His nature with which
we must reconcile His mercy as best, we may, the
two being conceived as in conflict. a matter
of fact, the Scriptures most often conceive God’s
justice, or righteousness, as the action of His mercy.
Just as with man justice means the relief of the
oppressed and needy, so God’s justice is His kingly
power engaged on behalf of men, and justice and
mercy are constantly joined together. Heis ‘‘a just
God and a Saviour” (Isa 45 21). “I bring near my
righteousness [or ‘‘justice”] .. . . and my salvation
shall not tarry’ (Isa 46 13; cf Ps 51 14; 103 17;
7115; 116 5; Isa 51 5.6). The “Tighteous acts of
Jeh” mean His deeds of deliverance (Jgs 5 11).
And so Israel sings of the justice, or judgments, or
righteousness of Jeh (they are the same), and pro-
claims her trust in these (Ps 7 17; 35 23.24.28;
36 6; 140 12.13; 60 5.6; 94 14.15; 103 6; 143 1).

The NT, too, does not lack the idea of retributive
justice. The Son of Man “shall render unto every
man according to his deeds’ (Mt 16 27; cf 25
14-46; Lk 12 45-48; Rom 2 2-16; 6 23; 2 Cor
510; Col 3 24.25; 2 Thess 18.9; He 2 2.3;
10 26-31). But God’s justice is far more than this.
The idea of merit and reward is really superseded
by a higher viewpoint in the teaching of Jesus. He
speaks, indeed, of recompense, but it is the Father
and not the judge that gives this (Mt 6 1.4.6.18).
And it is no mere justice of earth, because the
reward transcends all merit (Mt 24 46.47; Mk
10 30; Lk 12 37). This is grace not desert (Lk
17 10). And the parable of Mt 20 1-15 gives at
length the deathblow to the whole Judaistic scheme
of merit and reward.

And God’s justice is not merely gracious, but
redemptive. It not simply apportions rights, it


establishes righteousness. Thus, just asin the OT,
the judge is the Saviour. The difference is simply
here: in the OT the salvation was more national
and temporal, here it is personal and spiritual.
But mercy is opposed to justice no more here than
inthe OT. Itis by the forgiveness of sins that God
establishes righteousness, and this is the supreme
task of justice. Thus it is that God is at the same
time “just, and the justifier of him that hath faith
in Jesus” (Rom 3 26). ‘He is faithful and right-
eous [or ‘‘just’’; sec AV] to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness” (1 Jn 1 9).


Lirzrature.—see Comm., and Bih. Theologies under
“Justice” and ‘‘Righteousness,’’ and esp. Cremer, Bib.-


Theol. Lex. of NT Gr.
Harris Frankuin Ratt
JUSTIFICATION, jus-ti-fi-ka’shun (PY , cedhek,
vb. PIX, cadhék; LXX and NT S:xalopa, dikaidma,
Stxalwors, dikatdsis, vb. Sinaidw, dikaidd, ‘justifica-
tion,” “to justify,” in a legal sense, the declaring
just or righteous. In Bib. lit. &xatotv, dikaioin,
without denying the real righteousness of a person,
is used invariably or almost invariably in a declara-
tive or forensic sense. See Simon, HDB, I, 826;
Thayer, Grimm, and Cremer under the respective
words):
I. Tae Writtnes or Pact
1. Universality of Sin
2. Perfection of the Law of God
3. Life, Work and Death of the Atoning Saviour


(1) Paul’s Own Experience
(2) The Resurrection Connected with the


Death 3
(8) Faith, Not Works, the Means of Justifica-
ion
3 Baptism Also Eliminated
(5) Elements of Justification
fe) Forgiveness of Sins _
b) Declaring or a peaving as Righteous
(6) Justification Has to Do with the Individual
II. Tae Oraer NT Waittnes
1. The Synoptic Gospels
2. John’s Writings
3. 1 Peter and Hebrews
4. Epistle of James
III. Taz OT
IV. Later DeveLorpMent or THE Doctrine
1. Apostolic and Early Church Fathers
2. Council of Trent
3. Luther
4. Schleiermacher
5. Meaning and Message to the Modern Man
LiteERatuRE


I. The Writings of Paul.—In this article refer-
ence will first be made to the writings of Paul, where
justification receives its classic ex-
1. The Uni- pression, and from there as a center,
versality the other NT writers, and finally the
of Sin OT, will be drawn in. According to
é Paul, justification rests on the foliow-
ing presuppositions:

The universality of sin. All men are not only
born in sin (Eph 2 3), but they have committed
many actual transgressions, which render them
liable to condemnation. Paul proves this by an
appeal to the OT witnesses (Rom 3 9 ff), as well
as by universal experience, both of the heathen
(1 18-32) and Jews (2 17-28; 3 9).

_ The perfection of the Law of God and the neces-
sity of its perfect observance, if justification is to
come by_ it (3 10). The modern


2. The notion of God as a good-natured, more
Perfection or less nonchalant ruler, to whom per-
of the Law fect holiness is not inexorable, was not
of God that of Paul. If one had indeed kept


the law, God could not hold him guilty
(2 13), but such an obedience never existed. Paul
had no trouble with the law as such. Those who
have tried to find a difference here between Gal and
Rom have failed. The reminder that the law was
ordained by angels (Gal 3 19) does not mean that
it was not also given by God. It might be reckoned
in a sense among the elements of the world (késmos,


1783


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Justice
Justification


4 3), as it is an essential part of an ordered universe,
but that docs not at all mean that it is not also
holy, right and good (Rom 7 12). It was added,
of course, on account of transgressions (Gal 3 19),
for it is only a world of intelligent, free spirits
capable of sin which needs it, and its high and
beautiful sanctions make the sin seem all the more
sinful (Rom 7 18).
_It was fundamental in Paul’s thinking that Christ
died for our sins, according to the Scriptures (1 Cor
: In due season He died for the
3. The Life, ungodly (Rom 5 6); while we were
Work and yet: sinners He died for us (ver 8); we
Death of are justified in His blood (ver 9), and
the Atoning it is through Him that we are saved
Saviour from the wrath (ver 9). While we
were enemies we were reconciled to
God through the death of His Son (ver 10), being
justified freely by His grace through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus whom God set forth as a pro-
pitiation (8 24.25). There is no reconciliation, no
justification, except through and by and for Christ.


(1) Paul's own experience—Paul's own experience can-
not he left out of the account. He lived through the
doctrine, as well as found it through illumination of the
Spiritin the OT, It was not that he had only outwardly
kept the law. He had been jealous for it, and bad been
blameless in_every requirement of its righteousness
(Phil 3 6). What was borne in upon him was how little
such hlamelessness could stand before the absolute
standard of God. Just how far he was shaken with
doubts of this kind we cannot say with certainty; but
it seems impossible to conceive the Damascus conver-
sion scene in the case of such an upright man and stren-
uous zealot without supposing a psychological prepara-
tion, without supposing doubts as to whether his ful-
filling of the law enabled him to stand before God.
Now, for a Pharisaically educated man like himself,
there was no way of overcoming these doubts but in a
renewed struggle for his own righteousness shown in the
fiery zeal of his Damascus journey, pressing on even in
the blazing light of noonday. This conversion broke
down his pen esop ny of life, his Lebensgewissheit, his assur-
ance of salvation through works of the law done never so
conscientiously and perfectly. The revelation of the
glorified Christ, with the assurance that He, the God-sent
Messiah, was the very one whom he was persecuting,
destroyed his dependence on his own righteousness, @
righteousness which had led him to such shocking conse-
quences. Although this was for him an individual ex-

erience, yet it had universal applications. It showed

im that there was an inherent weakness in the law
through flesh, that is, through the whole physical, psy-
chical and spiritual nature of man considered as sinful,
as working only on this lower plane, and that the law
needed bracing and illuminating by the Son, who,
though sent in the likeness of the flesh of sin, yet _(as an
offering) for sin condemned sin and cast it out (Rom 8
Phe the end that the law might be fulfilled in those who
through Him walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit
(ver 4). That was the glory of the new righteousness
thus revealed. If the law had been able to do that, to
give life, Christ need not have come, righteousness
would have been by the law (Gal 3 21). But the facts
show that the law was not thus able, neither the law
written on the heart given to all, nor the law given to
Moses (Rom 1 18-3 19). Therefore every mouth is
stopped, and all flesh is silent before God. On the
ground of law-keeping, what the modern man would
call morality, our hope of salvation has been shattered.
The law has spoken its judgment against us (Gal 3 10).
It cannot therefore lead us to righteousness and life, nor
was that its supreme intention: 1 was a pedagogue or
tutor (“paidagog6s"') to lead us to Christ that we might be
justified by faith (ver 24; see Ihmels in RE’, 16, 483-84).
‘What made Paul to differ from his companions in the
faith was that his own bitter experience under the reve-
lation of Christ had led him to these facts.


(2) The resurrection connected with the death_—
It was remarked above that the ground of justifi-
cation according to Paul is the work of Christ.
This means esp. His death as a sacrifice, in which, as
Ritschl well says (Rechifertigung und Verséhnung,
3. Aufl., 1899, TT, 157), the apostles saw exercised
the whole power of Hisredemption. But that death
cannot be separated from His resurrection, which
first awakened them to a knowledge of its decisive
worth for salvation, as well as finally confirmed
their faith in Jesus as the Son of God. ‘‘The ob-
jective salvation,” says Ritschl (p. 158), “which


was connected with the sacrificial death of Christ
and which continued on for the church, was made
secure by this, that it was asserted also as an attri-
bute of the resurrected one,’’ who was delivered up
for our trespasses, and was raised for our justifi-
cation (Rom 4 25). But this last expression is not
to be interpreted with literal preciseness, as though
Paul intended to distinguish between the forgive-
ness of sins as brought about by the death, and
justification, by the resurrection, for both forgive-
ness and justification are identified in 4 6-8. It
was the resurrection which gave Christians their
assurance concerning Christ (Acts 17 31); by that
resurrection He has been exalted to the right hand
of God, where He maketh intercession for His people
(Rom 8 34), which mediatorship is founded upon
His death—the Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world (Rev 13 8m; ef Gr text).

B. Weiss well says: ‘It was by the certainty of the
exaltation of Christ to Messianic sovereignty brought
about by the resurrection that Paul attained to faith in
the saving significance of His death, and not conversely.
Accordingly, the assurance that God cannot condemn us
is owing primarily to the death of Christ, but still more
to His resurrection and exaltation to God's right hand
(Rom § 34), inasmuch as these first prove that His
death was the death of the mediator of salvation, who
has redeemed us from condemnation. .... The ob-
jective atonement was accomplished by the death of
Christ, but the appropriation of it in justification is
Possible only if we believe in the saving significance of

is death, and we can attain to faith in that only as it
is sealed by the resurrection” (Bik. Theol. of NT, I,
436-37).

(3) Faith, not works, the means of justification —
The means or condition of justification is faith
(Rom 3 22.25.26.28, etc) which rests upon the pure
grace of God and is itself, therefore, His gift, (Eph
28). This making faith the only instrument of .
justification is not arbitrary, but because, being the
receptive attitude of the soul, it is in the nature of
the case the only avenue through which Divine
blessing can come. The gifts of God are not against
the laws of the soul which He has made, but rather
are in and through those laws. Faith is the hand
outstretched to the Divine Giver, who, though He
sends rain without our consent, does not give sal-
vation except through an appropriate spiritual
response. This faith is not simply belief in his-
torical facts, though this is presupposed as to the
atoning death (Rom 3 25), and the resurrection
(10 9) of Jesus, but is a real heart reception of the
gift (ver 10), and is therefore able to bring peace
in our relation to God (5 1). The object of this
faith is Jesus Christ (3 22, etc), through. whom
only comes the gift of righteousness and the reign-
ing in life (6 17), not Mary, not angels, not doc-
trine, not the church, but Jesus only. This, to
be sure, does not exclude God the Father as an
object of faith, as the redeeming act of Christ is
itself the work of God (2 Cor 6 19), whose love
expressed itself toward us in this way (Rom 6 8).
Faith in the only one God is always presupposed
(1 Cor 8 6), butit was the apostolic custom rather
to refer repentance to God and faith to Christ (Acts
20 21). But the oneness of God the Father and
Christ the Son in a work of salvation is the best
guaranty of the Divinity of the latter, both as an
objective fact and as an inner experience of the
Christian.

The justification being by faith, it is not by works
or by love, or by both in one. It cannot be by
the former, because they are lacking either in time
or amount or quality, nor could they be accepted
in any case until they spring from a heart renewed,
for which faith is the necessary presupposition. It
cannot be by the latter, for it exists only where the
Spirit has shed it abroad in the heart (Rom 56 5),
the indispensable prerequisite for receiving which is
faith. This does not mean that the crown of Chris-


Justification


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1784


tianity is not love, for it is (1 Cor 13 13); it means
only that the root is faith. Nor ean love be foisted
in as a partial condition of justification on the
strength of the word often quoted for that purpose,
“faith working through love” (Gal 5 6). The
apostle is speaking here only of those who are already
‘fn Christ,” and he says that over against the
Galatian believers bringing in a lot of legal observ-
ances, the only availing thing is not circumcision
or its lack, but faith energizing through love. Here
the interest is, as Ritschl says (II, 343), in the king-
dom of God, but justification proper has reference
to the sinner in relation to God and Christ. See
the excellent remarks of Bruce, St. Paul’s Con-
ception of Christianity, 1894, 226-27. At the same
time this text reveals the tremendous ethical reli-
gious force abiding in faith, according to St. Paul.
It reminds us of the great sentence of Luther in his
preface to the Ep. to the Rom, where he says:
“Faith is a Divine work within us which changes
and renews us in God according to Jn 1 13, ‘who
were born not of blood, nor of the, will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God.’ This destroys
the old Adam and makes new creatures of us in
heart, will, disposition, and all our powers. Oh,
faith is a living, active, jealous, mighty thing, in-
asmuch as it cannot possibly remain unproductive
of good works” (Werke, Erl. Ausg., 63, 124-25).


# Baptism also eliminated.—Not only are good works
and love removed as conditions or means of justification
of the sinner, but baptism is also eliminated. According
to Paul, it is the office of baptism not to justify, but to
cleanse, that is, symbolically to set forth and seal the
washing away of sin and the entrance into the new life
by a dramatic act of burial, which for the subject and
all witnesses would mark a never-to-be-forgotten era
in the history of the believer. ‘‘Baptism,'’ says Weiss
(I, 454), ‘‘presupposes faith in Him as the one whom the
church designates as Lord, and also binds to adherence
to Him which excludes every dependence upon any other,
inasmuch as He has acquired a claim upon their devotion
by the saving deed of His self-surrender on the cross."
So important was baptism in the religious atmosphere
at that time that hyperbolical expressions were used to
express its cleansing and illuminating office, but these
need not mislead us. We must interpret them accord-
ing to the fundamental conceptions of Christianity as
areligion of the Spirit, not of magic nor of material media.
Baptism pointed to a complete parting with the old life
by previous renewal through faith in Christ, which re-
newal baptism in its turn sealed and announced in a
climax of self-dedication to him, and this, while sym-
bolically and in contemporary parlance of both Jew and
Gentile called a new birth, was prohably often actually
so in the psychological experience of the baptized. But
while justification is often attributed to faith, it is never
to baptism.


(5) Elements of justification—What are the ele-
ments of this justification? There are two: (a)
Forgiveness of sins (Rom 4 5-8; cf Acts 13 38.
39). With this are connected peace and recon-
ciliation (Rom 6 1.9.10; cf 10 11). (6) The de-
claring or approving as righteous or just (Rom 3
21-30; 4 2-9,22; 5 1.9-11.16-21, etc). C. F.
Schmid is perfectly right when he says that Paul
(and James) always uses dikaioun in the sense
of esteeming and pronouncing and treating as
righteous, both according to the measure of the law
(Rom 2 13; 3 20) and also according to grace
(Bib. Theol. of the NT, 1870, 497). The word is a
forensic one, and Godet goes so far as to say that
the word is never used in all Gr lit. for making
righteous (Comm. on Rom, ET, I, 157, Amer. ed,
95). This is shown further by the fact that it is
the ungodly who are justified (Rom 4 5), and that
the justification is a reckoning or imputation
(logtzesthai) of righteousness (Rom 4 6.22), not
an infusing or making righteous. The contrast
of “to justify” is not “to be a sinner,” but is “to
accuse” or ‘‘to condemn” (Rom 8 33.34), and the
contrast of “justification” is ‘condemnation”
(6 18). Besides, it is not the infusing of a new life,
of a new holiness, which is counted for righteousness,


but it is faith which is so counted (Rom 4 5; Phil
3 9). That upon which God looks when He justi-
fies is not the righteousness He has imparted or is
to impart, but the atonement He has made in
Christ. Itis one of the truest paradoxes of Chris-
tianity that unless a righteous life follows, there has
been no justification, while the justification itself
is for the sake of Christ alone through faith alone.
It is a “status, rather than a character,” says
Stevens (The Pauline Theology, 1892, 265); “it
hears the stamp of a legal rather than of an ethical
conception,’ and he refers to the elaborate and con-
vineing proof of the forensic character of Paul’s
doctrine of justification,” in Morison, Exposition
of Romans, ch III, 163-200. An interesting illus-
tration of how further study may correct a wrong
impression is given by Lipsius, who, in his Die
Paulinische Rechfertigungslehre, 1853, maintained
that righteousness or justification meant not ‘“ex-
clusively an objectively given external relation to
God, but always at the same time a real inner con-
dition of righteousness” (p. 10), whereas in his Lehr-
buch der evangelisch-protesiantischen Dogmatik, 1876,
8. Aufl., 1898, he makes the righteousness of God
properly an “objective gift of grace, not simply
in the sense in which the OT just one judged his
position of salvation as a gift of grace, but as a
righteousness specially reckoned and adjudicated
by way of grace and acknowledged before the
judgment (or court, Gericht) of God (Rom 4 6; ef
vs 1-8.11; 3 23; Gal 36). This is always the
meaning of dtkaioun, dikaiotisthai, or dikaiosis in
Paul. It consists in the not-reckoning of sins,”
ete (p. 658). Of course justification is only a part
of the process of salvation, which includes regen-
eration and sanctification, but these are one thing
and justification is another.

(6) Justification has to do with the individual. —
Finally it is asked whether justification in Paul’s
mind has to do with the individual believer or with
the society or Christian congregation. Ritschl
(II, 217f) and Sanday-Headlam (The Ep. to the
Rom, 122-23) say the latter; Weiss (I, 442), the
former. It is indeed true that Paul refers to the
chureh as purchased with Christ’s blood (Acts 20
28, or God’s blood, according to the two oldest MSS
and ancient authorities; cf Eph & 25), and he uses
the pronoun ‘‘we” as those who have received re-
demption, ete (Col 114; Eph 2 18); but it is
evident on the other hand that faith is an indi-
vidual matter, a thing first between man and his
God, and only after a man has been united to
Christ by faith can he enter into a spiritual fellow-
ship with fellow-believers. Thereforé the subject
of justification must be in the first place the indi-
vidual, and only in the second place and by conse-
quence thesociety. Besides, those justified are not
the cleansed and sanctified members of churches,
but the ungodly (Rom 4 5).

As to the argument fr fl “
Headlam, it se ey ee char Bre preteen
of baptism as taking place in the Christian community
with believers and for believers, that that for and to
which they are baptized is not justification, but the death
and resurrection of Christ (6 3.4), and that the right-
eousness of God has been manifested not through bap-
tism but through falth in Jesus Christ unto all that be-
lieve (3 22), being justified freely, not through baptism,
but through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus
(ver 24). With Paul baptism has always a mystical
significance as symbolizing and externally actualizing
union with the death of the Lord, and would be both
Impossible and impertinent in the case of those not
already believers in Christ and thus inwardly united to
His society.

Il, The Other NT Writings.—So much for Paul.
Let us now take a glance at the other NT books.
It is a commonplace of the theology that is called
“modern” or “critical,” that Paul and not Jesus
is the founder of Christianity as we know it, that


1785


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Justification


the doctrines of the Divinity of Christ, atonement,
justification, etc, are Paul’s work, and not his Mas-
ter’s. There is truth in this. It was part of the
humiliation of Christ as well as His pedagogical
method to live, teach and act under the conditions of
His time and country, on the background of Pal
of 30 AD; and it was specially His method to do
His work and not His disciples’, to live a life of love
and light, to die for the sins of the world, and then
go back to the Father that the Holy Spirit might
come and lead His followers into all truth. <A full
statement of the doctrines of Christianity on His
part would have been premature (Jn 16 12), would
have been pedagogically unwise, if not worthless.
First the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in
the ear (Mk 4 28). It would also have been spir-
itually and philosophically impossible, for Chris-
tianity was not aset of teachings by Christ—but a
religion springing out of His life, death, resurrec-
tion, ascension, intercession, mediatorial activity
in history through the Spirit who works in His dis-
ciples and on the world through and by that life,
death, etc. The only question is whether the
apostles were true to the spirit and content of His
teachings in its moral and religious outlines. And
esp. in this matter of justification, a teaching by
Christ is not to be looked for, because it is the very
peculiarity of it that its middle point is the exalted
Lord, who has become the mediator of salvation by
His death and resurrection. Did the Pauline doc-
trine fit into the concrete situation made by the
facts of Christ mentioned above, and was it the
necessary consequence of His self-witness? Let us

look into the Synoptic Gospels.
So far is it from being true, as Harnack says
(What Is Christianity? 2d ed, rev., New York,
1901, 68), that the “whole of Jesus’


1. The message may be reduced to these two
Synoptic heads: God as Father, and the human
Gospels soul so ennobled that it can and does


nnite with Him,” that an essential
part of His message is omitted, viz. that salvation
is bound up in His (Christ’s) own person, (The
reader is asked to verify the references for himself,
as space will not allow quotation.) See Mt 10
37-39; 16 24-27. Confession of Him (not simply
of the Father) determines acknowledgment above
(10 32), where judgment is rendered according to
our attitude to Him in His unfortunate ones (25
35 ff). No sooner was His person rightly estimated
than He began to unfold the necessity of His death
and resurrection (16 21). The evening before that
death occurred, He brings out its significance, per-
petuates the lesson in the institution of the Supper
(Mk 14 24), and reénforces it after His resurrec-
tion (Lk 24 26). Paul himself could hardly have
expressed the fact of the atonement through Christ’s
death more decisively than Mt 20 28; 26 28.
With this foundation, could the Christian doctrine
of salvation take any other course than that it
actually did take? Instead of referring men to the
Father, Christ forgives sins Himself (9 2-6), and
Hereckons all men as needing this forgiveness (6 12).
While the time had not arrived for the Pauline
doctrine of righteousness, Jesus prepared the way
for it, negatively, in demanding a humble sense of
sin (6 3), inner fitness and perfection (vs 6.8.20.48),
and positively in requiring recourse to Him by those
who felt the burden of their sins (11 28), to Him
who was the rest-giver, and not simply to God the
Father, a passage of which Rom 6 1 is an echo.
For it was specially to those to whom, as to the
awakened Paul, the law brought condemnation
that He came, came to heal and to save (Mk 2 17;
Mt 9 13; Lk 15 7). It was for sinners and to
sinners that, He came (Lk 16 2; 7 39; 19 7; Mt
11 19), just as Paul understood; and the way for


their salvation was not better law-keeping, but
trusting prayer in the confession of sin (Lk 18 13),
really equivalent to faith, the humble heart and a
hunger for righteousness (=faith). See Mt 6
8.6. He who brings most of himself, of his own
pride and works, is the least likely to obtain the
kingdom of heaven (18 3.4; Mk 10 14). Not
only entrance, but the final reward itself is of grace
(Mt 19 30; 20 1-16), a parable in the true spirit
of Paul, and in anticipation of whose message was
the promise of Paradise to the penitent robber (Lk
23 43). At the very beginning the message sounded
out, ‘“‘Repent ye, and believe in the gospel” (Mk 1
15), the gospel which was summed up in Christ,
who would gather the people, not directly to God
the Father, but to Himself (Mt 23 37). All this
means justification through that faith in Himself,
in His Divine-human manifestation (Mt 16 13-16),
of which faith He expresses Himself with anxiety
in Lk 18 8, and the presence of which he greeted
with joy in Mt 8 10. Ihmels is right therefore in
holding (R#3, XVI, 490) that Paul’s proclamation
was continuous with the self-witness of Jesus, which
conversely pointed as a consequence to the witness
of Paul.
Justification by faith is not more implicit in John’s
Gospel than in the first three; it is only more ex-
plicit (Jn 3 14-16). Eternal life is
2. John’s the blessing secured, but this of course
Writings is only possible to one not under con-
demnation (3 36). The new Sonship
of God came also in the wake of the same faith
(1 12). The Epp. of John vary from Paul in word
rather than in substance. The atoning work of
Jésus is still in the: background; walking in the
light is not conceivable in those under condemna+
tion and without faith; and the confession of sins
that leads to forgiveness seems only another name
for the justification that brings peace (1 Jn 1 9.10;
ef 2 1.2), Everything is, as with Paul (Eph 2 7;
Tit 3 4), led back to the love of God (1 Jn 3 1),
re sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins
4 10).
Seeberg’s point that the ‘‘Pauline doctrine of justifi-


cation is not found in any other NT writer" (History
of Doctrine, I, 48) is true when you em-


2 ter phasize the word ‘‘dcoctrine.’’ Paul gave
: 7: Pete it full scieutific treatment, the ethers pre-
ny suppose the fact, but de net unfeld the
Hebrews doctrine. Peter's ‘‘ Repent ye, and he bap-


tized .... inthenameof Jesus Christ’ (Acts
2 38) is meaningless unless faith were exercised in Christ.
It is He in whom, though we see Him not, yet believing,
we rejcice greatly with joy unspeakable (1 Pet 1 8),
receiving the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls
(ver 9). Itis only, however, through the precicus blecd
as of a lamb without blemish, even that of Christ (ver
19), and isonly through Him that we are believers in God
ver21). The familiar expressicn, ‘‘Come tc Jesus,’’ which
simply means have faith in Jesus for justification and
salvation, goes back te Peter (2 4). The Ep. to the He
has other interests te look after, but it dces not deny
faith, but rather exhorts us te draw near with a true
heart in fulness cf faith (10 22), which it lays at the
foundation of all true religion, thinking and achievement
(ch11). The writer can give no hetter exhortation than
te leck unte Jesus the author and perfecter cf cur faith
(12 2), an exhortation in the true spirit cf Paul, whose
goupel of faith for justification is also summed up in

16.


We come lastly to the core of the matter in regard
to NT representations of justification—the famous
passage in Jas 2 14-26, which at first

4. Epistle sight seems a direct blow at Paul.
of James Here we are met by the interesting
question of the date of James. As we
cannot enter into this (see Jamns, Ep1sTLE oF), what
we say must be independent of this question. A
careful look at this vigorous and most valuable
letter (valuable in its own place, which is not that of
Paul’s letters, in comparison with which it is a
‘Tight strawy epistle,’”’ as Luther truthfully said
[Erl. Ausg., 63,115; see also pp. 156-57], in saying


Justification


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1786


which he did not mean to reject it as useless (straw
has most important uses], but as giving the doctrine
of salvation, for which we must look to Paul) will
show us that contradiction on the part of James to
Paul is apparent and not real.


(1) In this section James uses the word faith simply
for intellectual belief in God, and esp. in the unity of God
(2 19; see also context), whereas Paul uses it for a say-
ing trnst in Christ. As Feine well says (Theol. d. NT,
Leipzig,? 1911, 660-63), for Paul faith is the appropriation
of the life-power of the heavenly Christ. Therefore he
knows no faith which does not bring forth good works
corresponding to it. What does not come from faith
is sin. For James faith is suhordination of man to the
heavenly Christ (2 1), or it is the theoretic acknowledg-
meut of one God (2 19). Justification is for James a
speaking just of him who is righteous, an analytical
Judgment. (Feine also says that James did not under-
stand Paul, but he did not fight him. It was left to
Luther through his deep religious experience first to
understand Paul's doctrine of justification.) (2) James
uses the word ‘‘ works" as meaning practical morality,
going back behind legalism, hehind Pharisaism, to the
position of the OT prophets, whereas Paul uses the word
as meritorious action deserving reward. (3) When
James is thinking of a deeper view, faith stands central
in Christianity (1 3.6; 21; 5 15). (4) Paul also on
his part is as auxious as James vitally to connect Chris-
tianity and good works through faith (1 Thess 1 3;
Gal 5 6; 1 Cor 13 2; Rom 2 6.7; see Mayor, The
Ep. of Jas, 1892, Ixxxviii ff; Franks, in DCG, I, 919-20;
Findlay in HDB, 1-vol ed, 511). (5) The whole argu-
ment of James is bent on preserving a real practical
Christianity that is not content with words merely
(2 15-16), hut shows itself in deeds. He is not trying
to show, as Paul, how men get rid of their guilt and
become Christians, but how they prove the reality of
their profession after they receive the faith. He is not
only writing to Christians, as of course Paul was, but
he was writing to them as Christians (‘‘my breth-
ren,’’ ver 14), as already justified and standing on_the
“faith of our Lord Jesus Christ"' (ver 1), whereas Paul
was thinking of men, Gentile and Jew, shivering in their
guilt before the Eternal Justice, and asking, How cau
we get peace with God? ‘There is not,’ says Beyschlag
(NT Theology, Edinburgh, 1895, I, 367-68), ‘an objec-
tive conflict hetween the Pauline and Jacohean doctrines;
hoth forms of teaching exist peacefully heside each other.
James thought of justification in the simple and most
natural sense of justificatio justi, as the Divine recognition
of an actually righteons man, and he thonght of it as the
final judgment of God upon a man who is to stand in the
last judgment and hecome a partaker of the final sétéria
Csalvation’). Paul also demands as a requisite for this
last indgment and the final sétéria right works, the love
that fulfils the law and the perfected sanctification, but
he (except in Rom 2 13) does not apply the expression
dikaiousthai (‘to he justified’) to the final judgment of
God, which recognizes this righteousness of life as actual.
He applies it rather to that first sentence of God with
which He graciously receives the helieving sinner re-
turning to Him, and takes him into fellowship with
Himself." Beyschlag rightly insists that James un-
douhtedly taught with the first apostles that whoever
helieves in Christ and is haptized receives the forgive-
ness of sins (Acts 2 38; 3 19; 10 43), and that he would
not have contested the Pauline idea of justification hy
grace on account of faith, insisting only that works must
follow. Theologically, the chief if not the only differ-
ence is that James has not yet made the cross of Christ
the center of his point of view, while the atonement was
fundamental with all Paul's thinking. See, further,
James, EPISTLE OF.


Il, The Old Testament.—A word in conclusion
asto the OT. All the NT writers built on the OT.
That there should be a cleft or contradiction be-
tween the OT and what we call the NT would have
been to them inconceivable. But they realized
that that was the early dawn, while they lived in
the light of day. Abraham believed in Jeh; and
He reckoned it to him for righteousness (Gen 15 6;
Rom 4 3). Who does not keep all parts of the
law all the time is condemned (Dt 27 26 LXX;
Gal 3 10; cf Ps 14; 143 2; Rom 3 20; see vs
9-20, and the references to the OT in ARV).
The prophets insisted upon the practical works of
righteousness—‘‘What doth Jeh require of thee, but
to do justly, and to love kindness, and to walk hum-
bly with thy God?” (Mic 6 8). No religious atti-
tude or services could take the place of uprightness
of life. This does not mean that the OT writers
understood that men were justified simply by their
good deeds, for it was always believed that under-


neath all was the mercy and lovingkindness of God,
whose forgiving grace was toward the broken and
contrite spirit, the iniquities of whom were to be
carried by the Servant of Jeh, who shall justify
many (Ps 103 8-13; 85 10; Isa 67 15; 53 11,

and many other passages).
IV. Later Development.—A brief statement now on the
development of the doctrine in the Christian church.
It is humiliating to confess that the wit-


:, ness immediately after the apostles (the
1. Apostolic apostolic Fathers) did not reach the serene


and Early heights of Paul, or even the lower levels
Church of his brethren. There are passages which
Fath remind one of him, but one feels at_once

aters that the atmosphere is different. Chris-


tianity is conceived as a new law rather
than as a gospel of the grace of God. We cannot go into
the reasons for this: suffice it to say that in gentile
Christendom the presuppositions for that gospel failed,
and the NT writings were not yet in the consciousness
of the church to the extent that they dominated her
thinking. The fine passage in Clement of Rome (97
AD, ch xxxii: ‘They all therefore [i.e. Abraham and other
early saiuts] were glorified and maguified, not through
themselves or their own works or the righteous doings
which they wrought, but through His (God's] will. And
so we, having heen called thrdugh His will in Christ
Jesus, are not justified through ourselves or through our
own wisdom or understanding or piety or works which
we wrought in holiness of heart, but through faith, where-
hy the Almighty God justified all men that ever have
heen from the heginuing; to whom be glory forever and
ever, Amen."’) is not at all on a par with his whole Ep.,
as hecoérdinates faith with other virtnes inch xxxv,makes
hospitality and godliness the saving virtues for Lot in
ch xi, couples hospitality and faith together as equal for
Rahab in ch xii, and represents forgiveness of sins through
keeping commandments and love in ch 1. Ignatius
enour 110-15 AD) speaks in one place about Jesus
hrist dying for us, that helieving on His death we might
escape death (Tral. 2), but with him the real saving
things are love, concord, ohedience to bishops, and the
indwelling God =Christ, though he has also the excellent
puesiet **None of these wee is hiddeu from you if ye
© perfect in your faith and love toward Jesus Christ,
for these things are the begiuning and end of life—faith
is the beginning and love the end, and the two being
found in unit are God, while all things else follow in their
train unto true nobility’’ (Eph 14). The so-called
Barnahas (date uncertain) puts the death of Christ
Jesns at the foundation of salvation, which is expressed
hy the remission of sius through His blood (Eph §), the
kingdom of Jesus being ou the cross, so that they who set
their hope on Him shall live forever (ch 8), while at the
time even helievers are not yet justified (ch 4), for which
finally a whole series of works of light must be done and
works of darkness avoided (ch 19). The Shepherd of
Hermas and the Ancient Homily =2 Clem are even more
moralistic, where with whatever praise of faith we have
the beginning of merit. The same legalistic toue sounds
through that invaluable little roll found hy Bryennios
in 1873 and first published by him in Constantinople
in December, 1883, The Teaching (Didache) of the XIT
Apostles. That Catholic trend went forward till it is
almost full-fledged as_early as Tertullian (fl. 200 AD)
and Cyprian (250 AD). See a full statemeut In my
Cyprian, 1906, 146ff. And thus it continued until—
so far as our outline is concerned—it struck Augustiue,
bishop of Hippo (396 ff), who in a masterly and living
way united, so far as they could be united, the Pauline
thoughts of sin, grace, and justification with the regular
Catholic legalism. His hook, De Spiritu et Litera (412
AD), was largely after Paul's own heart, and the Reform-
ers hailed it with joy. But the Catholic elements he
still kept, as for instance, that in justification a good
concupiscence and a good-will are infused, that justifica-
tion grows, that our merits must he taken into the account
even though they are God's merits, that the faith which
eters is a faith which works by love, that faith is the
olding true what God (and the church) says, though
occasionally a deeper view of faith is seen, and that
works are emphasized, as in De fide et operibus,in a
Catholic fashion. With profound and thoroughly
Christian thoughts, Augustine had not so worked him-
self clear of his Catholic inheritance that he could repro-
duce Paul purely. He made a bridge by which we could
go either back to Paul or forward to Aquinas. As Har-
nack well says, Augustine experienced, on the one hand,
the last revival in the ancient church of the principle
that ‘‘faith alone saves,"’ and, on the other, he sileuced
that principle for a thousand years. The very Catholic
theologian who stood nearest to that princIple overcame
it (Zeitschrift f. Theol. uw. Kirche, 1891, 177). His mis-
understanding of Paul’s ‘‘faith that worketh through
love” had momentous consequences.


Those consequences are best seen in the decrees
of the Council of Trent (Session 6, 1547), to which
we now turn, and which are the definite and final


1787


crystallization of the mediaeval development, so
far as that development was Catholic. (1) Justi-
fication is a translation from a natural
state to a state of grace. With this
works prevenient grace, awakening and
assisting, and with this in his turn
man cooperates and prepares himself for justifi-
cation. This codperation has the merit of con-
gruity, though the first call comes before any merit.
(2) Faith is an element in justification. “Receiving
faith by hearing, they of free will draw near to God,
believing those things to be true which have been
Divinely revealed and promised.” Faith as a
living trust in a personal Saviour for salvation is
lacking. Among the truths believed is the mercy
of God and that He wishes to justify the sinner in
Christ. (3) This faith begets love to Christ and
hatred to sin, which are elements also of the justi-
fying process. (4) Now follows justification itself,
“which is not a bare remission of sins, but also
sanctification and renewal of the inner man through
the voluntary reception of grace and of gifts.”
(5) But this renewal must take place through bap-
tism, which, to the prepared adult, both gives and
seals all the graces of salvation, forgiveness, cleans-
ing, faith, hope and love. (6) Justification is pre-
served by obeying the commandments and by good
works, which also increase it. (7) In case it is lost
—and it can be lost, not by venial, but by mortal
sin and by unbelief—it can be regained by the sacra-
ment of penance. (8) To get it, to keep or regain
it, it is also necessary to believe the doctrines as
thus laid down and to be laid down by this Council
(see the decrees in any ed, or in Mirbt, Quellen zur
Geschichte des Papsttums, 2. Aufl., 206-16, or in
Buckley’s or in Waterworth’s translations, and for
an admirable and objective summary see Seeberg,
History of Doctrine, I1, 483-38).
Recent researches in Luther’s early writings have
shown that almost from the beginning of his earnest
study of religious questions, he mount-
3. Luther ed up to Paul’s view of justification by
faith alone (Loofs, DG, 4. Aufl., 1906,
696-98). Faith is the trust in the mercy of God
through Christ, and justification is the declaring
righteous for His sake, which is followed by a real
making righteous. From the beginning to the end
of his life as a religious teacher these are the ele-
ments of his doctrine. Speaking of 1513-15, Loofs
says (p. 697): “Upon these equations [to justify=
to forgive, grace=mercy of the non-imputing God,
faith=trust in His mercy] as the regulators of his
religious self-judgment, Luther’s piety rests, and
corresponding to them his view of Christianity,
and even later” (than 1513-15); and he adds that
“to reckon as righteous” (reputart justum) must not
be understood with Luther as an opposition “to
make righteous,” for his ‘to be justified without
merits’? in the sense of “to forgive’ (absolvi) is at
the same time the beginning of a new life: remissio
peccatt.... tpsa resurrectio. “His constantly
and firmly held view, even more deeply understood
later than in 1513-15, that ‘to be justified without
merit’ = ‘to be resurrected [to be born again]’=‘to
be sanctified’ is a pregnant formulation of his Chris-
tianity.” So much being said, it is not necessary
to draw out Luther’s doctrine further, who in this
respect ‘‘rediscovered Christianity as a religion,”
but it will suffice to refer to the Histories of Doc-
trine (Seeberg gives a full and brilliant exposition),
to Késtlin, Luthers Theologie, 2. Aufl, 1901 (see
Index s.v. ‘‘Rechtfertigung,” and I, 349), and esp.
to Thieme, Die sitiliche Triebkraft des Glaubens:
eine Untersuchung zu Luthers Theologie, 1895, 103-
314.
From Luther and the other reformers the NT
doctrine went over to the Protestant churches


2. Council
of Trent


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Justification


without essential modification, and has remained
their nominal testimony until the present. A
classic expression of it, which may be taken as
representing evangelical Christendom, is the 11th
of the 39 Articles of Religion of the Church of Eng-
land: ‘We are accounted righteous before God
only for the merit of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ by faith, and not for our own works or de-
servings: wherefore that we are justified by faith
ouly is a most wholesome doctrine and very full of
comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily
of Justification.” It is true that at one time Wes-
ley’s opponents accused him of departing from this
doctrine, esp. on account of his famous Minute of
1770, but this was due to a radical misunderstand-
ing of that Minute, for to the last he held staunchly
Paul’s doctrine (for proof see my article in Lutheran
Quarterly, April, 1906, 171-75). :

A new point of view was brought into modern

theology by Schleiermacher, who starts from the

fundamental fact of Christian expe-
4. Schleier- rience that we have redemption and
macher reconciliation with Christ, which fact

becomes ours by union with Christ
through faith. This union brings justification with
other blessings, but justification is not considered
as even in thought a separate act based on Christ’s
death, but as part of a great whole of salvation,
historically realized step by step in Christ. The
trend of his teaching is to break down the dis-
tinction between justification and regeneration,
as they are simply different aspects of union with
Christ.

Ritschi carried forward this thought by emphasizing
the grace of the heavenly Father mediated in the first
instance through the Son to the Christian community,
“to which God imputes the position toward him of
Christ its founder,"' and in the second instance to indi-
viduals ‘‘as by faith in the Gospel they attach them-
selves to this community. Faith is simply obedience to
God and trust in the revelation of his grace In Christ."
This brings sinners into fellowship with God which
means eternal life, which is here and now realized, as the
Fourth Gospel pote out, in lordship over the world
(et Franks in DCG, I, 922-23). The judicial or forenslc
aspect of justification so thoroughly in-wrought in
Paul's thought is denied by Ritschi. ‘‘In whatsoever
way we view the matter,’’ he says, ‘‘the attitude of God
in the act of justification cannot be conceived as that of
a judge” (Christian Doctrine of Justification and Re-
conciliation, ET, 1900, 90). W. N. Clarke agrees with
Schleiermacher in eliminating justification as a separate
element in the work of salvation, and harks back to the
Catholic view in making it dependent on the new life
and subsequent to it (Christian Theology, 407-8). No
book has had as much influence in destroying the NT
conception of justification. among English-speaking
readers as that of J. H. Newman, Lectures on Justifica-
tion, 1838, 3d ed, 1874, which contains some of the finest
pucsane in religious literature (pp. 270-73, 302, 338-39),

ut which was so sympathetic to the Catholic view that
the author had nothing essential to retract when he
joined Rome in 1845. ‘‘Whether we say we are justi-
fled by faith, or by works, or by sacraments, all these
but mean this one doctrine that we are justified by grace
which is given through sacraments, impetrated by
faith, manifested in works" (p. 303). :

Lastly, has the NT conception of justification
by faith any message to the modern maz, or is it,

_ as Lagarde held, dead in the Protes-
6. Meaning tant churches, something which went .


and Mes- overboard with the old doctrine of the
sage tothe Trinity and of Atonement? After
Modern an able historical survey, Holl con-
Man cludes (Die Rechtfertigungslehre im


Licht der Geschichie d. Protestantismus,
Tibingen, 1906, 40-42) that there are two prin-
ciples thoroughly congenial to modern thought
which favor this doctrine, viz. that of the sanctity
and importance of buco the “I’’ that stands
face to face with God, responsible to Him alone;
and second, the restoration of the Reformation-
thought of an all-working God. Whoever feels the
pressure of these two principles, for him the question
of justification becomes a living one. ‘The stand-


Justle
Kaph


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1788


ard on which he must measure himself is the Abso-
lute God, and who ean stand in this judgment?
Not simply on account of single acts, but with his
‘T’ and even with his good-willing. For that is
just the curse which rests upon a man that his ‘T’
is the thing with which alone he wills and can seek
God, and that it is this very ‘I’ which by its wil-
fulness, vanity and self-love poisons all his willing.
Accordingly, it remains true, what the Reformers
said, that man is entirely corrupt, and that he can
do no otherwise than to despair when the majesty
of God dawns upon him” (p. 41). There is, then,
no other solution than the venture of faith that the
same God who crushes our self-deceit lifts up with
His sovereign grace, that we live through Him and
before Him. Luther is right that religiously we
can find no hold except on the Divine act of grace,
which through faith in the Divine Jove and power
working in us and for usever makes us new in Christ.
To give up the doctrine of justification, says Holl
rightly (p. 42), igs to give up conscious personal
religion. Holl writes as a liberal, and he quotes a
stronger liberal still, Treitschke, as saying that in
the 19th cent. it was the orthodox preachers who
proclaimed this doctrine, who built better than the
liberals. Nor, says Holl in another book (Was hat
die Rechtfertigungslehre dem modernen Menschen
zu sagen? Tiibingen, 1907, 26),can anyone who has
experienced justification as an inner transformation
be misled into moral unconcern. A moral ideal
becomes his, much stronger and more compelling
than worldly ethics. The new attitude toward
God constituted by justification impels to an unend-
ing movement in the service of God and man. The
doctrine has not had its day. It is a part of the
eternal gospel. As Jong as sinful man has to do
with an all-holy God, the experience of Paul, Luther
and Wesley becomes in a sense normative for the
race,


Literature.—Besides the books mentioned in the
text, the following on justification itself may he consulted
(those marked with a star are Protestant, those with a
dagger are Catholicor High Church Anglican): Goodwin, *
new ed, with pretece hy Wesley, 1807; Junkins,* 1839;
Hare,* new ed, 1839 (Ist ed with preface hy Jackson,
1817); Kerwick,t 1841; Heurtley,f 1846 (Bampton
Lectures for 1845); MclIlvaine,* 1861, 3d ed, 1868
(Righteousness of Faith, important); Buchanan,* 1867
Qmportant) j Body,t .1870; Bunyan,* new ed, 1873;

arkey,* 75; Davies,* 1878; Sadler,f 1888; and
Holden,t 1901. Besides these, Laurence, Bampton
Lectures for 1804, sermon 6; Drummond, Apostolic
Teaching and Christ's Teaching (see index); Schlatter,
NT Theology, 2 vols, 1909-10; the various systematic
Theologies; Theologies of the NT, and Comm. may he
consulted; also Ménégoz, Die Rechifertigungslehre nach
Paulus und nach Jakobus, 1903; Kiihl, Die Stellung des
Jakobusbriefes z. alttest. Gesetz u. z. Paulinischen Recht-
fertigungalehre, 1905.

JoHun ALFRED FAULKNER


KAB, kab (Ap, kabh, ‘something hollowed out,”
2K 6 25; AV Cab): A Heb dry measure and
liquid measure equal to about 2 quarts. See
Wricuts aNnp MEASURES.


KABZEEL, kab’zé-el, kab’zél (OSAP, kabhe’ al
“lwhom] God collects’): One of the “uttermost
cities” of Judah toward the border of Edom in the
S. (Negeb) (Josh 15 21). It was the native place
of Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, one of David’s
mighty men (2 8 23 20; 1 Ch 11 22). ‘Jekab-
zeel and the villages thereof,” one of the places
re-inhabited by the men of Judah (Neh 11 25),
appears to be the same place. The site is un-
known.


JUSTLE, jus’! (PPW, shakak): The word occurs
once in Nah 2 4 (in AV and RV), where ARV has
‘fush to and fro.”


JUSTUS, jns’tus (Iotcros, Jotistos): There are
three of this name mentioned in the NT.

(1) It was the Rom surname of JosePH Bar-
SABBAS (q.v.) (Acts 1 23).

(2) A Corinthian proselyte (sebdmenos tén
Theén), whose house adjoined the synagogue and
who received Paul when the Jews opposed him
(Acts 18 7). He was probably a Rom citizen, one
of the colont, and so he would be of assistance to the
apostle in his work among the better class of
Corinth. There is some disagreement among MSS
regarding the name. TR gives ‘Justus’ alone.
RV following NE, Vulg, Boh, Arm, gives ‘Titus
Justus’; WH, Tisch., B,D, give ‘‘Titius Justus”;
Cheyne (ZB, s.v. ‘‘Justus’’) thinks these forms a
corruption of “Tertius Justus,’”’ and that the bearer
of the name was the “Tertius” of Rom 16 22.
Paul still continued his lodgings with Aquila and
Priscilla, but made the house of Justus his own
synagogue.

(3) A Jew, Jesus Justus, mentioned with Mark
and Aristarchus by Paul in his letters to the Colos-
sians (Col 4 11), is a fellow-worker and one that
had been a comfort unto him. S. F. Hunter


JUTTAH, jut’a (NO", yuttdh, Josh 21 16; LXX
Tavi, Tani; and in Josh 16 55 AV, LXX 'Irdv,
lidn, A, Tetid); JUTAH, joo’ta, ji’ta (APN,
yutah, Josh 15 55): A town in the hill country of
Judah, mentioned with Maon, Carmel and Ziph; a
Levitical city (Josh 21 16). In some VSS of LXX
it occurs (lord, [oté) in 1 Ch 6 57. In the Onom
(266 49; 133 10) a large village called “Juttah” is
described as 18 Rom miles from Eleutheropolis.
This agrees with the position of Yuitd, a large and
prosperous Moslem village, 3,740 {t. above sea-level,
53 miles 8. of Hebron and 153 miles from Beit
Jebrin (Eleutheropolis). There are many rock-cut
tombs and ancient winepresses all around the village.

Reland (Pal, 870) suggested (and many others
have followed him) that the még “Iovéa, pdélis
fouda, tr’ “city of Judah,” in Lk 1 39, should be
polis Lovta, “the city Yuta.” The tr “eity of Ju-
dah’ is suspicious, because Jouda is without the
article, which is usually put before the name of a
district; the interchange of t and dis a very common
one. Dr. Paterson, resident many years in Hebron,
states that there is a local Moslem tradition in the
district that Yutta was the home of John the Bap-
tist. For Yutta see PEF, ILI, 310, Sh XXT.

BE. W. G. MastermMan


KADESH, ka’desh (Op, kadhash; Kats,
Kadés, Ps 29 8; Jth 19). See KapusH-BaRNngEA.


KADESH-BARNEA, ka’desh-biar’né-a (Wp
INA , kadhésh barne; Ka84s, Kadés): Mentioned
10 t; called also ‘Kadesh” simply. The name
perhaps means “the holy place of the desert of
wandering.’ There are references to Kadesh in
early history. At En-mishpat (‘the same is
Kadesh”) Chedorlaomer and his allies smote the
Amalekite and Amorite. Abraham dwelt near
Kadesh, and it was at Beer-lahai-roi between Ka-
desh_and Bered that the Angel of Jeh appeared
to Hagar (Gen 14 7; 16 14; 201). It was an
important camp of the Israelites during their


1789


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Justle
Kaph


wanderings, and seems to have been their head-
quarters for 38 years (Dt 1 2; 2 14; Jth 6 14).
There the returning spies found the camp (Nu 13
26); there Miriam died and was buried (Nu 20 1);
from thence messengers were sent to the king of
Edom (Nu 20 14; Jgs 11 16 ff). There the people
rebelled because of the want of water, and Meces
brought water from the rock (Nu 20 2 ff); it was
called therefore Meribath—or Meriboth-Kadesh
(Nu 27 14; Ezk 47 19; 48 28). It was situated
in the wilderness of Zin (Nu 20 1; 33 36.37) in
the hill country of the Amorites (Dt 1.19), 11
days’ journey from Horeb, by the way of Mt. Seir
(Dt 1 2), ‘in the uttermost” of the border of Edom
(Nu_20 16), and on the southern border, probably
the S.E. corner, of Judah (Ezk 47 19; ef Jth 1 9).
See Cobern, Homiletic Review, April and May, 1914.
S. F. Hunter
KADESH IN GALILEE. See Kenzsz, 3.


KADESH ON THE ORONTES, 6-ron’téz (in
MT of 2S 24 6, under the corrupt form DANE
W'), tahtim hodhshi, which should be corrected
from the LXX [Luc.] reading: els rhv viv Xer-
welp Kabdts, eis tén gén Chettieim Kadés, ‘to the
land of the Hittites unto Kadesh,” into 728
TWIP OMANI, 'ereg ha-hittim kadhéshah. Ewald
and others, fixing the northern ideal boundary of
Israel at the sources of the Jordan, would read ‘‘Her-
mon” for hodhshi, but the conjectures of Thenius and
Hitzig of a reference to the northern Kadesh are
fully confirmed by the reading given): Kadesh was
the southern capital of the Hittites, and was situated
on the upper waters of the Orontes, 80 miles N. of
Damascus. Itisnow represented by a large mound
5miles 8S. of what, till the Middle Ages, was called the
Lake of Kades, but now the Lake of Homs. Here
Thothmes III of Egypt (4. 1650 BC), after the
battle of Megiddo, met and received hostages from
the Assyrians, and here too Rameses JI defeated
Hatesar, king of the Hittites (c 1320 BC), and con-
cluded with him a treaty, which was formally in-
scribed on a disk of silver. The incidents of the
battle are depicted on the walls of the Ramesseum,
and an Egyp epic records the heroic deeds of Rame-
ses. Under the name Kadytis, it is mentioned as
being taken by Pharaoh-necoh (Herod. ii.159) in
609 BC. In the only Bible reference (2 S 24 6),
it is named as the northern limit of the census made
by David. W. M. Carisnis


KADMEEL, kad’mi-el Ox atp , kadhmi'él, “‘be-
fore God,” “priest” [?]; “(Cadmiel’ in || lists in 1 Esd
5 26.58 AV; omitted in LXX B; A reads kat Kad-
miélon): A Levite (Ezr 2 40; Neh 7 43), founder
of a family whose descendants returned from captiv-
ity with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 1; Neh 7 43; 12 1.8).
He is named among those who praise God for the
return (Neh 9 4.5; 12 24); was of those who “‘set
forward” the work of the Lord’s house (Ezr 3 9;
1 Esd 5 26.58), and is again mentioned with those
who “seal” the new Return Covenant (Neh 10
28 ff) after the reéstablishment of worship (Neh
10 1.9).


KADMONITE, kad’mon-it C7O7%p, kadhmoni;
KeBpovaior, Kedménatot, signifies “the Easterner,”
or, less probably, ‘‘one of the ancient race’): The
Kadmonites are mentioned in Gen 16 19 along
with the Kenites and Kenizzites of Edom, and are
doubtless the same as ‘‘the children of the east,”’
whose wisdom was celebrated (1 K 4 30). Map,
kedhemah, “the East,’’ was a son of Ishmael (Gen
25 15; cf ver 6). In an Egyp story describing the
adventures of @ political refugee who fled from
Egypt in the time of the XIIth Dynasty, it is said


that he found a refuge in Canaan in the land of
Kaduma or Kedem. Sayce


KAIN, kan (PPS, he-kayin; AV Cain): A town
in the hill country of Judah (Josh 15 57). There
is, too, apparently a reference to this place in Nu
24 21.22:

‘*And he looked on the Kenite, and took up hls para-

ble, and said,

Strong is thy vel ine place,

And thy nest is set in the rock.
Nevertheless Kain shall be wasted,
Untill Asshur shali carry thee away captive."


This place has been very doubtfully identified
as the ruin Yukin, a place on a lofty hill S.E. of
Hebron, overlooking the wilderness of Judah; the
tomb of Cain is shown there. See PHF, III, 312,
Sb XXII. E. W. G. MasrerMan


KAIN (Mp, kayin): A clan name, AV ‘‘the
Kenite’ (Nu 24 225 Jgs 411). In the first pas-
sage RV has “Kain” and m ‘“‘the Kenites” j in the
second, RV has “the Kenite’’ in text and m “Kain.”
Ci preceding article.


KALLAJ, kal’é-i, kal’t (2p, kallay, Y >p, kal,
“swift”): A priest among those who returned with
Zerubbabel (Neh 12 1). He represented the family
of Sallai (Neh 12 20).


KAMON, ka’mon (jp, kamon; AV Camon):
The place where Jair was buried (Jgs 10 3-5). It
is possibly represented either by Kamm or Kumeim,
ruins which lie about 6 and 7 miles respectively to
the &.S.E. of Umm Keis. See further Havvota-
sain. The ruins of Kamm, about 200 yds. square,
crown a small elevation, and point to an important
place in the past. There are large rock-hewn cis-
terns to the S. Among the ruins of Kumein, which
are not considerable, a few mud huts are built,
occupied today by about 200 souls (Schumacher,
Northern 'Ajlan, 137). j


KANAH, ka’na (“3p , kanah, “reeds’’):

(1) The name of a “brook,” ie. wddy, or “tor-
rent bed,” which formed part of the boundary
between Ephraim and Manasseh (Josh 16 8; 17 9).
The border of Ephraim went out westward from
Tappush to the brook Kanah, ending at the sea;
the border of Manasseh from Tappuah, which be-
longed to Ephraim, ‘‘went down unto the brook of
Kanah, southward of the brook.” There seems no
good reason to doubt the identification of “the
brook Kanah’” with the modern Wady Kanah.
The transition from the heavy & to the lighter & is
easy, so the phonetic difficulty is not serious. The
stream rises in the 8.W. of Shechem, flows through
Wady Ishkar, and, joining the ‘Aujeh, reaches the
sea not far to the N. of Jaffa. Guérin, influenced,
apparently, by the masses of reeds of various kinds
which fill the river, argues in favor of Nahr el-Falik,
to the N. of Arsiéf. He identifies it with Nahr el-
Kasab, “river of reeds,’’ mentioned by Beha ed-Din,
the Moslem historian. But this last must be iden-
tified with Nahr el-Mafjir, 13 miles farther N., too
far N. for “the brook Kanah.”

(2) A town on the northern boundary of Asher
(Josh 19 28), probably identical with the village
of Kana, about 7 miles 8.E. of Tyre (SWP, I, 51,
64, Sh I). Ewina


KAPH, kif (>) 5. J.J): The 11th letter of the
Heb alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopaedia
as k, with daghesh, and kh (=German ch) without
daghesh. It came also to be used for the number
20. For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


Kareah
Kenezite


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1790


KAREAH, ka-ré’a (TP, kdréh, “bald head’’):
The father of Johanan and Jonathan, who after the
fall of Jerus joined Gedaliah at Mizpah (2 K 25
23; Jer 40 8).


KARIATHIARIUS, ki-ri-ath-i-a’ri-us (Kapiaés-
apiés, Kariathiariés; B reads Kartatheiareiés; AV
Kiriathiarim [{ Esd 65 19])=Kiriath-jearim in Neh
T 29,


KARKA, kar’ka (APP PS , ha-karka‘ah—with the
art. and M locale; AV Karkaa): A place in the S. of
Judah, between Addar and Wddy el-‘Arish (Josh
15 3). Onom speaks of a village in Judah lying
toward the wilderness, named Akarka. It cannot
now be identified. The name means “the pave-


ment,” or “ground.”


KARKOR, kar’kor ((P7p, karkér): An uni-
dentified place where Gideon surprised and over-
whelmed the remnants of the army of Zeba and
Zalmunnah (Jgs 8 10ff). It probably corre-
sponds to Karkar mentioned by Shalmaneser II,
8. of Hamath (KB, I, 173).


KARTAH, kar’ta (UIP, kartah): A city in the
territory of Zebulun, assigned to the Levites (Josh
21 34). It is not identified. Possibly it is a vari-
ant of Karrats, or of Karan (q.v.).


KARTAN, kar’tan (JP, kartan): A city in the
territory of Naphtali, given to the Gershonite
Levites (Josh 21 32). It is called Kiriathaim in
1 Ch 6 76. Kartan may be a contraction of this.
Cheyne (EB, s.v.) suggests that both names may
be corruptions from ‘“Chinnereth.” Neither is
mentioned in Josh 19 32.38, in the list of Naph-
talite cities, while Chinnereth is.


KATTATH, kat’ath (NOP, kattath): A city in the
territory of Zebulun, named with Iphtah-el, Na-
halel, and Shimron (Josh 19 15), perhaps to be
identified with Kitron (Jgs 1 30), from which
Zebulun did not expel the Canaanites; and with
Kartah (Josh 21 34), which was given to the
Merarite Levites. The Bab Talm (Meg. 6a) identi-
fies Kattath with Sepphoris, the modern Seffiriyeh
(but see Neubauer, Géographie du Talmud, 191).
The Jerus Talm takes it as identical with Ketdnith,
Kuteineh, to the W. of Esdraelon. It should
probably, however, be sought near to Shimron, the
modern Semitiniyeh. W. Ewina


KEDAR, ké’dar (TP, kédhar; KySdp, Kédér):
Second in order of the sons of Ishmael (Gen 25
13 ||} 1 Ch 1 29). The name occurs as typical of a
distant eastern country in opposition to the lands
of the Mediterranean (Jer 2 10). The author of
Second Isa introduces this tribe in company with
Nebaioth, and both are represented as owners of
flocks (Isa 60 7). Evidence of their nomadic
habits appears in Jer 49 28.29, where they are
classed among the Bené-Kedhem, and mention is
made of their flocks, camels, tents, curtains and
furniture. They are spoken of (Isa 42 11) as
dwelling in hdgérim (‘villages’), from which it
would appear that they were a somewhat settled
tribe, corresponding to the Arab. hadariya or “‘town-
dwellers,” as distinct from wabariya or ‘nomads.”
Ezekiel (27 21) gives another hint of their pastoral
nature where, in his detailed picture of the wealth
of Tyre, Kedar and Arabia provide the Tyrians
with lambs, rams and goats. The fame of the tribe
is further reflected in Isa 21 16.17 (the only allu-
sion to their might in war), and in the figurative
references to their tents (Ps 120 5; Cant 15). In


this last passage where the tents are made symbolic
of dark beauty, the word kddhar (‘‘to be black’’)
may have been in the writer’s mind.

The settlements of Kedar were probably in the N.W.
of Arabia, not far from the borders of Pal. Assyr in-
scriptions have thrown light upon the history of the tribe.
There Kedar is mentioned along with the Arabs and
Nebaioth, which decides its identity with Kedar of the
OT, and there is found also an account of the conflicts
between the tribe and King Assurbanipal (see Margo-
liouth in HDB).

Of the Ishmaelite tribes, Kedar must have been
one of the most important, and thus in later times
the name came to be applied to all the wild tribes of
the desert. It is through Kedar (Arab. ketdar)
that Muslim genealogists trace the descent of Mo-
hammed from Ishmael. A. 8, Fuiron


KEDEMAH, ked’é-ma, ké-dé’ma (MATP, kédhe-
mah, “eastward’’): Son of Ishmael (Gen 265 16),
head of aclan (1 Ch 1 31). See KapmMonits.


KEDEMOTH, ked’é-moth, ké-dé’moth (N1O%p,
kedhémath, ‘eastern parts’): From the wilderness
to which this town gave its name, Moses sent mes-
sengers to Sihon, king of the Amorites in Heshbon
(Dt 2 26). It was given by Moses to the tribe of
Reuben (Josh 13 18), and assigned to the Merarite
Levites (21 37; 1 Ch 679). It must probably
be sought on the upper course of the Arnon. Buhl
(GAP, 268) suggests that it may be identified with
Umm er-Resas. See Janaz.


KEDESH, ké’desh (WIP, kedhesh; Ka&qs,
Kéddés):

(1) One of the “uttermost cities’? of Judah
“toward the border of Edom in the 8S.” (Josh 15
23). Possibly it is to be identified with Kaprss-
BARNEA (q.v.); otherwise it is strange that this
latter should be omitted from the list. Dillmann
would identify it with Kddus, to the 8. of Hebron,
mentioned by Mukaddasi. ;

(2) A town in the territory of Issachar, given to
the Gershonite Levites (1 Ch 6 72).: In the list of
Joshua (21 28) its place is taken by Kisuron (q.v.).
Conder suggests identification with Tell Abu Kadés,
near Megiddo.

(3) Kedesh-naphtali, the famous city of refuge
in the uplands of Naphtali. It is called “Kedesh,”
simply, in Josh 12 22, etc; Kedesh-
naphtali in Jgs 46; Tob12; Ke-
desh in Galilee in Josh 20 7, etc. It
was assigned to the Gershonite Levites
(1 Ch 6 76). From the name “holy,” we gather
that it was a sanctuary from old time. It was
therefore a place of asylum, and only preserved
its ancient character in this respect when chosen
as one of the cities of refuge. It was the home of
Barak, and here his host assembled. When the
Assyrians invaded the land under Tiglath-pileser,
it was among the first cities to be captured, and its
inhabitants were deported (2 K 15 29). Near
Kedesh was fought the great battle between Jona-
than the Maccabee and Demetrius (1 Mace 11 63
ff). Jos says that in his time it belonged to the
Tyrians, lying between their land and that of Gali-
lee (Ant, XIH, v, 6; BJ, IL, xviii, 1; IV, ii, 3, etc).
Onom places it 20 miles ‘from Tyre, near to Paneas.
It is represented by the modern village of Kedes,
which lies on the plateau tothe W. of el-Huleh. It
crowns a tell which runs out in a low ridge into the
little plain to the W. Near the fountain, which
rises under the ridge to the N., are the most inter-
esting of the ancient remains. There are many
fine sarcophagi, some of them being used as water-
ing-troughs. From, its lofty situation, Kedesh
commanded a spacious view over a richly varied


Kedesh-
naphiali


1791


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Kareah
Kenezite


landscape, with smiling cornfields, and hills clothed
with oak and terebinth. Ewine


KEDESH (1 Macc 11 63.73, A, KySes, Kédes;
AV Cades): Scene of a battle between Judas Mac-
cabaeus and the forces of Demetrius. Scc Kepvrsn-
NAPHTAL!, under KepzEsx, 3.


KEDESH-NAPHTALI,
Kapzsg, 3.


KEEPER, kép’ér, KEEPERS (mostly from AU,
shamar; tdat, philar): The word is used of
keepers of sheep, vineyards, doors, prisons (in Gen
39 21 ff, sar; ef Acts 5 23), ete. In Eccl 12 3,
“The keepers of the house shall tremble,” the allu-
sion is to the decay of bodily powers, the ‘‘keepers”’
being specially the arms, which had become feeble
through age.


KEHELATHAH, ké-bé-la'tha, ké-hel’a-tha
(ANSP , kehélathah, “gathering,” “‘assembly’’): A
desert camp of the Israelites between Rissah and
Mt. Shepher (Nu 33 22.23). Situation is unknown.
See WANDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


ké’desh-naf’ta-li. See


KEILAH, kéi’la (OP, ke‘alah; Keevdép,
Keeilém):

(1) A city of the Shephelah mentioned (Josh 15
44) along with Nezib, Achzib and Mareshah. Among
those who repaired the walls of Jerus was ‘“‘Hasha-
biah, the ruler of half the district of Keilah, for his
district. After him repaired their brethren, Bavvai
the son of Henadad, the ruler of half the district of
Keilah” (Neh 3 17.18).

It is, however, from the story of the wandering of
David that we have most information regarding

this place. It was a city with gates
1. David and bars (18S 23 7). The Philis
and Keilah came against it and commenced rob-

bing the threshing-floors. David,
after twice inquiring of Jeh, went down with his
600 men (ver 13) and ‘fought with the Philis, and
brought away their cattle, and slew them with a
great slaughter.” Saul hearing that David and
his men were within a fortified town “summoned
all the people to war, to go down to Keilah, to be-
siege David and his men” (ver 8). Then David
asked Abiathar the priest to bring him an ephod,
and he inquired of Jeh whether, if Saul came, the
men of Keilah would surrender him to save that
city; hearing from Jeh, ‘“They will deliver thee
up,” he and all his men escaped from Keilah and
went into the wilderness. The reputed strength of
Keilah ig confirmed by its mention in 5 tablets in
the Am Tab under the name of Kilta (qilti, Petrie)
with Gedor, Gath, Rabbah and Gezer.

Although other identifications were proposed by
the older topographers, there is now a general con-

sensus of opinion that the site of this
2, Identifi- city is Khurbet Kila (Jos, Ant, VI,
cation xiii, 1, in his account of David’s ad-
venture calls the place ‘Killa’’). It
is a hill covered with ruins in the higher part of
Wady es Sar, 1,575 ft. above sea-level, whose ter-
raced sides are covered with cornfields. The
Onom (Lat text) states that it was 8 miles from
Eleutheropolis, which is about the distance of Kh.
Kila from Beit Jibrin. Beit Nusib (Nezib) is a
couple of miles away, and Tell Sandahannah (Mare-
shah) but 7 miles to the W. (Josh 16 44). An
early Christian tradition states that the prophet
Habakkuk was buried at Keilah.
(2) The Garmite (q.v.), 1 Ch 4 19; see PEP,


314, Sh XXI.
E. W. G. MasterMan


KELAIAH, kéla’ya, ké-li'a (TP, kelayah,
“swift for Jeh’’[?]; KwAlos, Kélios, B, Kévos, Kénos):
One of the priests who had “foreign wives’ (Ezr 10
23, also “Kelita’’). In || list of 1 Esd 9 23, he
again has a double name—Colius”’ and “Calitas.””
A “Kelita” is named as helping Ezra at the ex-
pounding of the law (Neh 8 7; cf1 Esd 9 48, ‘Ca-
litas’), and also among the signatories of the
covenant (Neh 10 9; for nature of covenant see
vs 28ff). They may not, however, be the same
person.


KELITA, kel/i-ta, ké-li’ta (NO"DD, lia’
“dwarf”’). See Krnaran.


KEMUEL, kem’t-cl, ké-mi’el ONP, kema’al,
“God’s mound”):

(1) Nephew of Abraham (Gen 22 21), father of
Aram, whom Ewald identifies with Ram of Job 32
2; but cf Gen 10 22, where Aram is described as
one of the children of Shem. They may not be the
same person.

(2) Prince of Ephraim, one of the land commis-
sioners who divided Canaan (Nu 34 24).

(3) A Levite, father of Hashabiah, one of the
tribal princes of David’s time, a ruler among the
Levites (1 Ch 27 17).


KENAN, ké’nan (]2°p, kéndn; Kawév, Kaindn):
Ason of Enosh, the son of Seth (Gen 6 9.10.12.13.
14; 1 Ch1 2). AV form (except in 1 Ch 1 2),
is ‘‘Cainan.”


KENATH, ké’nath (PP, kendth; Kaé0, Kadth,
Kaandth in LXX, A): A city in Bashan, taken along
with its ‘‘daughters,” i.e. ‘villages’ from the Amor-
ites by Nobah who gave it_his own name (Nu 82
42), It was recaptured by Geshur and Aram (1 Ch
2 23). It is probably identical with the modern
Kanawat, which is built on the site, and largely from
the materials of an ancient city. It lies about 16
miles to the N. of Bosra eski Sham, the Bostra of the
Romans, on both sides of Wady Kanawat, where,
descending from the slopes of Jebel ed-Druze, it
plunges over a precipice, forming a picturesque
waterfall. On the plateau above the modern village,
there is a striking collection of Rom and Christian
remains, the shapely forms of many columns lend-
ing distinction to the scene. One large building is
associated with the name of the patriarch Job—
Makam Ayytb. The position commands a spa-
cious and interesting view over the whole of the
Hauradn. The identification has been rejected by
Socin (Baedeker, Pal, 207), but his reasons are
not given. Moore (Jgs, 222) also rejects it, but for
reasons that are not convincing. W. Ewine


KENAZ, ké’naz, KENEZ, ké’nez (TI), kenaz,
“hunting”):

(1) A “duke” of Edom, grandson of Esau (Gen
86 11.15.42; 1 Ch 1 36.53).

(2) Father of Othniel (Josh 15 17; Jgs 1 43;
39.11; 1 Ch 4 13).

(3) The unidentified k*naz of 1 Ch 4 15, who
appears to be a descendant of (2). There is, how-
ever, some difficulty with the passage here.


KENEZITE, ké/nez-it (IP, kenizzt; Kevefaios,
Kenezaios): AV in Gen 16 19 and RV uniformly,
spell ‘“‘Kenizzite.” The Kenezites were the clan
whose name-father was Kenaz (q.v.). Their land,
along with that of their Canaanite tribes, was
promised to Abram (Gen 15 19). To this clan
belonged Jephunneh, the father of Caleb (Nu 32 12;
Josh 14 6.14). It had evidently been absorbed
by the tribe of Judah. If the Kenezites went down


Kenites
Key


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1792


with Jacob into Egypt, they may have become iden-
tified with his family there.


KENITES, ké/nits (WP, ha-keni, "PT, ha-
ként; in Nu 24 22 and Jgs 411, Pp, kayin;
oi Kevaior, hot Kenatoi, of Kivain, hot Kinatot):
A tribe of nomads named in association with various
other peoples. They are first mentioned along with
the Kadmonites and Kenizzites among the peoples
whose land was promised to Abram (Gen 15 19).
Balaam, seeing them from the heights of Moab,
puns upon their name, which resembles the Heb
ken, “a nest,” prophesying their destruction
although their nest was “‘set in the rock’’—possibly
a reference to Sela, the city. Moses’ father-in-law,
Jethro, is called “the priest of Midian” in Ex 3 1;
18 1; but in Jgs 1 16 he is described asa Kenite,
showing a close relation between the Kenites and
Midian. At the time of Sisera’s overthrow, Heber,
a Kenite, at ‘‘peace’ with Jabin, king of Hazor,
pitched his tent far N. of his ancestral seats (Jgs
417). There were Kenites dwelling among the
Amalekites in the time of Saul (1 § 15 6). They
were spared because they had ‘‘showed kindness to
all the children of Israel, when they came up out of
Egypt.” David, in his answer to Achish, links the
Kenites with the inhabitants of the S. of Judah
(27 10). Among the ancestors of the tribe of
Judah, the Chronicler includes the Kenite Ham-
math, the father of the Rechabites (1 Ch 2 55).
These last continued to live in tents, practising the
ancient nomadic customs (Jer 35 6 ff).

The word kéni in Aram. means “smith.” Pro-
fessor Sayce thinks they may really have been a
tribe of smiths, resembling ‘‘the gipsies of modern
Europe, as well as the traveling tinkers or black-
smiths of the Middle Ages’ (HDB, s.v.). This
would account for their relations with the different
peoples, among whom they would reside in pursuit
of their calling.

In Jos they appear as Kenetides, and in Ant, IV,
vii, 3 he calls them “the race of the Shechemites.”’


W. Ewine
KENIZZITE, ken’i-zit. See Kmnuzire.
KENOSIS, kénd’sis: The word ‘“kenosis”


(xévwots, kéndsis) has entered theological language
from Phil 2 7, where in the sentence he ‘‘emptied
himself’’ the Gr vb. is ekéndsen. ‘‘Kenosis,” then, the
corresponding, noun, has become a technical term
for the humiliation of the Son in the incarnation,
but in recent years has acquired a still more techni-
cal sense, i.e. of the Son’s emptying Himself of
certain attributes, esp. of omniscience.
(1) The theological question involved was one
about as far as possible from the minds of the Chris-
tians of the apostolic age and appar-
41. The NT ently one that never occurred to St.
Paul. For in Phil 2 7 the only “‘emp-
tying” in point is that of the (external) change
from the “form of God” to the “form of a servant.”
Elsgwhere in the NT it'is usually taken as a matter
of course that Christ’s knowledge was far higher
than that of other men (Jn 2 24 is the clearest
example). But passages that imply a limitation of
that knowledge do exist and are of various classes.
Of not much importance are the entirely incidental
references to the authorship of OT passages where
the traditional authorship is considered erroneous,
as no other method of quotation would have been
possible. Somewhat different are the references to
the nearness of the Parousia (esp. Mt 10 23; 24
29). But with these it is always a question how
far the exact phraseology has been framed by the
evangelists and, apart from this, how far Christ
may not have been consciously using current
imagery for the impending spiritual revolution,


although knowing that the details would be quite
different (see Parousta). Limitation of knowl-
edge may perhaps be deduced from the fact that
Christ could be amazed (Mt 8 10, etc), that He
could be really tempted (esp. He 4 15), or that He
possessed faith (He 12 2; see comm.). More
explicitly Christ is said to have learned in Lk 2 52;
He 5 8. And, finally, in Mk 13 32 || Mt 24 36,
Christ states categorically that He is ignorant of the
exact time of the Parousta.

(2) An older exegesis felt only the last of these
passages as a real difficulty. A distinction con-
structed between knowledge naturally possessed
and knowledge gained by experience (i.e. although
the child Jesus knew the alphabet naturally, He was
obliged to learn it by experience) covered most of
the others. For Mk 13 32 a variety of explana-
tions were offered. The passage was tr? ‘‘neither
the Son, except the Father know it,” a tr that can
be borne by the Gr. But it simply transfers the
difficulty by speaking of the Father’s knowledge
as hypothetical, andis an impossible tr of Mt 24 36,
where the word “only” is added. The explanations
that assume that Christ knew the day but had no
commission to reveal it are most unsatisfactory,
for they place insincere words in His mouth; “It
is not for you to know the day” would have been the
inevitable form of the saying (Acts 1 7).

(1) Yet the attempt so to misinterpret the verses
is not the outcome of a barren dogmatic prejudice,

but results from a dread lest real injury
2. Dog- be done to the fundamentals of Chris-
matic tian consciousness. Not only does the
mind of the Christian revolt from
seeing in Christ anything less than true God, but
it revolts from finding in Him two centers of
personality—Christ was One. But as omniscience
ig an essential attribute of God, it is an essential
attribute of the incarnate Son. So does not any
limitation of Christ’s human knowledge tend to
vitiate a sound doctrine of.the incarnation? Cer-
tainly, to say with the upholders of the kenosis in
its “classical’’ form that the Son, by an exercise of
His will, determined to be ignorant as man, is not
helpful, as the abandonment by God of one of His
own essential attributes would be the prepos-
terous corollary. (2) Yet the Bib. data are explicit,
and an explanation of some kind must be found.
And the solution seems to lie in an ambiguous use
of the word ‘‘knowledge,” as applied‘to Christ as
God and as man. When we speak of a man’s
knowledge in the sense discussed in the kenotic
doctrine, we mean the totality of facts present in
his intellect, and by hisiguorance we mean the ab-
sence of a fact or of facts from that intellect. Now
in the older discussions of the subject, this intel-
lectual knowledge was tacitly assumed (mystical
theology apart) to be the only knowledge worthy
of the name, and so it was at the same time also
assumed that God’s knowledge is intellectual also
—"“God geometrizes.’ Under this assumption
God’s knowledge is essentially of the same kind as
man’s, differing from man’s only in its purity and
extent. And this assumption is made in all dis-
cussions that speak of the knowledge of the Son as
God illuminating His mind as man. (3) Modern
critical epistemology has, however, taught man a
sharp lesson in humility by demonstrating that the
intellect is by no means the perfect instrument
that it has been assumed to be. And the faults are
by no means faults due to lack of instruction, evil
desires, etc, but are resident in the intellect itself,
and inseparable from it as an intellect. Certain
recent writers (Bergson, most notably) have even
built up a case of great strength for regarding the
intellect as a mere product of utilitarian develop-
ment, with the defects resulting naturally from such


1793


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Kenites
Key


an evolution. More esp. does this restriction of the
intellect seem to be true in religious knowledge, even
if the contentions of Kant and (esp.) Ritschl be not
fully admitted. Certain it is, in any case, that even
human knowledge is something far wider than intel-
lectual knowledge, for there are many things that we
know that we never could have learned through the
intellect, and, apparently, many elements of our
knowledge are almost or quite incapable of transla-
tion into intellectual terms. Omnniscience,’ then,
is by no means intellectual omniscience, and it is
not to be reached by any mere process of expansion
of an intellect. An “omniscient intellect” is a con-
tradiction in terms. (4) In other words, God’s
omniscience is not merely human intellectual knowl-
edge raised to the infinite power, but something
of an entirely different quality, hardly conceivable
to human thought—as different from human intel-
lectual knowledge as the Divine omnipotence is
different from muscular strength. Consequently,
the passage of this knowledge into a human intellect
is impossible, and the problem of the incarnation
should be stated: What effect did Divine omnis-
cience in the person have on the conscious intellect,
of the manhood? There is so little help from the
past to be gained in answering this question, that it
must remain open at present—if, indeed, it is ever
capable of a full answer. But that ignorance in the
intellect of the manhood is fully consistent with
omniscience in the person seems to be not merely
a safe answer to the question as stated, but an in-
evitable answer if the true humanity of Christ is to
be maintained at all.


Literature.—Sanday’s Christology and Personality,
1911, and La Zouche, The Person of Christ in Modern
Thought, 1912, are among the latest discussions of the
subject, with very full references to the modern literature.

Burton Scorr Easton


KERAS, ké’ras (Klpas, Kiras): In 1 Esd 6 29,
the head of a family of temple-servants, called
“Keroz’’ in Ezr 2 44; Neh 7 47.


KERCHIEF, kér’chif (MBDA, mispahoth; ém-
BédAaa, epibélaia): Occurs only in Ezk 13 18.21, in
a passage which refers to some species of divination.
Their exact shape or useisunknown. They were ap-
parently long veils or coverings put over the heads
of those consulting the false prophetesses and
reaching down to the feet, for they were for “per-
sons of every stature.”


KEREN-HAPPUCH, ker’en-hap’uk, ké’ren-
hap’uk (JABM JAP, keren happukh, “thorn of anti-
mony,” i.e. beautifier; LXX 'Apoddelas képas,
Amaltheias kéras): The 3d daughter of Job (Job
42 14), born after his restoration from affliction.
Antimony, producing a brilliant black, was used
among the Orientals for coloring the edges of the eye-
lids, making the eyes large and lustrous. Hence the
suggestiveness of this name of an article of the ladies’
toilet, a little horn or receptacle for the eye-paint.


KERIOTH, ké'ri-oth, -dth (NPP, kriyath):

(1) A city of Moab, named with Beth-meon and
Bozrah (Jer 48 24.41). Here was a sanctuary of
Chemosh, to which Mesha says (M §, ]. 13) he
dragged “the altar hearths of Davdoh.’ It may

ossibly be represented by the modern Kurata,
acne Diban and ‘Attartis. Some (e.g. Driver on
Am 2 2) think it may be only another name for
Ar-Moab. Buhl (GAP, 270) would identify it
with Kir of Moab (Kerak). No certainty is yet
possible.

(2) A city of Judah (Josh 16 25; RY Kenriotu-
HEZRON [q.v.]), possibly the modern el-Kuryatain,
to the N.E, of Tell ‘Arad. Ewine


_ KERIOTH-HEZRON, ké’ri-oth-heg/ron (NTP
JIM, keriydth hecrén; Josh 15 25 says, “The
same is Hazor”’; AV “Kerioth and Hezron which
is Hazor’): One of the cities in the “south”
of Judah. Robinson (BR, II, 101) identifies it
with the ruined site of Kuryatain, 44 miles N.
of Tell ‘Arad. It has been suggested that Kerioth
was the birth place of Jupas Iscarior (q.v.). Cf
Kenriota, 2.


KERNEL, k@r‘nel (O°2E77,, hargannim, EV “‘ker-
nels”; LXX reads siémphullon used by Aristopha-
nes as=olives from which oil has been pressed,
later,in same, of raisin pulp): Mentioned in Nu 6
4 along with 37, zagh, tr? “husks.” This tr, ‘‘ker-
nels” or “grape stones,” is from the Tg and Talm,
but is doubtful, and it may be the word should be
tr? “sour grapes.”


KEROS, ké’ros (OMP , bérds, ‘fortress’ [?]): One
of the Nethinim (Ezr 2 44; Neh 7 47), an order
appointed to the liturgical offices of the temple.
See Neruinim. ;

KESIL, ké’zil (Orion). See Astronomy.

KESITAH, kes’i-ta, ke-sé’ta (TQ°WP, ksitah).
See Prece or Money.


KETAB, ke’tab (KyraB, Katdb): Ancestor of a
family of Nethinim (1 Esd 6 30).


KETTLE, ket”l: In EV only in 1 § 2 14 for
didh, ‘“‘a vessel for cooking.” The same word
in 2 Ch 35 13 is rendered “caldrons,” and in
Job 41 20 (Heb 12), ‘‘pot.” Ps 81 6 (Heb 7) (AV
“nots’’) belongs rather to another signification of
the word (RV “basket,” for carrying clay or
bricks).


KETURAH, ke-tii’rii, ke-too’ra (TWVIOP , ketairah;
Xerrotpa, Cheitoura, ‘“incense’’): The second wife
of Abraham (Gen 25 1; 1 Ch 1 32f). Accord-
ing to the Bib. tradition, he contracted this second
marriage after the death of Sarah (cf Gen 23), and
very likely after the marriage of Isaac (cf Gen 24).
It is not improbable that,’as some writers have sug-
geated, this change in the life of his son prompted
Abraham to remarry in order to overcome the feel-
ing of lonesomeness caused by Isaac’s entering the
state of matrimony.

1 Ch 1 32 (and also Gen 25 6) shows us that
K. was not considered to be of the same dignity as
Sarah who, indeed, was the mother of the son of
promise, and, for obvious reasons, the sons of
Abraham’s concubines were separated from Isaac.
She was the mother of 6 sons representing Arab
tribes 8. and E. of Pal (Gen 25 1-6), so that
through the offspring of Keturah Abraham became
“the father of many nations.” WitiiaM Baur


KEY, ké (MDS, maphieeh, an ‘‘opener”’; ef
krels, kleis, “that, which shuts”): Made of wood,
usually with nails which fitted into correspond-
ing holes in the lock, or rather bolt (Jgs 3 25).
Same is rendered ‘‘opening” in 1 Ch 9 27. See
Hovse. :

Figurative: Used fig. for power, since the key was
sometimes worn on the shoulder as a sign of official
authority (Isa 22 22). In the NT it is used
several times thus fig.: of Peter: “the keys of the
kingdom of heaven” (Mt 16 19); of Christ, in
Rev, having the “keys of death and of Hades’’
(1 18), also having ‘‘the key of David” (3 7). An
angel was given “the key of the pit of the abyss” (9


Keys, Power of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1794


1; 20 1). Our Lord accused the teachers of the
Jaw of His day of taking away “‘the key of knowl-


Daal t
_ ant ;


Egyptian Key.


edge” from men, that is, locking the doors of truth
against them (Lk 11 52; cf Mt 23 13).
Epwarp Baaspy PoLiarp

KEYS, kéz, POWER OF:

I. Taz Prosuems InNvotvep

1. The Keys; and the Binding and Loosing
2. Meaning of the Statements
3. How Peter Is Related to These Powers
4, Is the Primary Idea That of Position and
Authority ?
TI. Views Maintaitnep
1. Agent of the Power
2. Nature of the Power
3. Scope of the Power
III. Dara ror Decipine THE Quzstions INVOLVED
. Passages Employing the Terms ‘‘Key,” ‘‘ Bind-
ing and Loosing’’
. Related Passages
. Examples of Exercise of This Power
ONCLUSION
. Nature of the Power
. Agent of the Power
3. Scope of the Power

There is no more stubbornly contested conception
in Christian terminology. The thought connects
itself immediately with Mt 16 19, but it is hardly
correct to say that it originates there, for the con-
troversy is one that grows out of the conflict of
forces inherent in the institutional development of
religion and of society. It must have arisen, in
any event, if there had been no such word as that
in Mt 16 19, although not in the same terms as it
is now found. Since the Reformation it has been
recognized, by Catholic and Protestant, that on the
interpretation of this passage depends the authority
of the Church of Rome and its exclusive claims, so
far as their foundation in Scripture is concerned;
while on the other hand there is involved the ‘“‘va-
lidity” of the “sacraments,” “ordinances” and
“orders” of Protestantism and the very hope of
salvation of Protestants.

I. The Problems Involved.—The crucial passage
has two declarations, commonly spoken of as

promises to Peter: to him Christ will
1. The give the keys of the kingdom of
Keys; and heaven; whatsoever he shall bind on
the Binding earth shall be bound in heaven, while
and Loosing whatsoever he shall loose on earth

shall be loosed in heaven. How are
the facts of having committed to him the keys and
the function of binding and loosing related? Are
they two forms of one declaration? Is the first
gencral, and the second a specific sphere of its appli-
cation?

Both statements are made in figurative terms.
That of the keys is supposed to be drawn from the
duties of the chief steward of a house, or establish-
ment. The idea of the keys of a city turned
over to some distinguished person is advanced, but
is hardly to be considered. We need, then, to


QeN


Iv.


Ne


know the functions of the chief steward and how
they apply to the kingdom of heaven, and to Peter
as its steward. What was Peter to
2. Meaning bind and loose, men or things, per-
of the sonsor teachings? Numerous examples
Statements could be cited of the use of these terms
to signify forbidding (binding) and per-
mitting (loosing) conduct as legitimate under the
law of the OT (Lightfoot, McClintock and Strong,
Schaff-Herzog, Hastings, etc). The strict school
of Shammai bound many things loosed by the laxer
school of Hillel (Broadus, Mt). Is this conclusive
that Jesus is here giving Peter authority for “‘lay-
ing down the law for his fellow-disciples,” “‘author-
ity to say what the law of God allows, and what it
forbids,”’ ‘the power of legislation for the church’’?
(Cf Mason in HDB, IV, 30.)
Ecclesiastical contentions turn esp. on Peter’s
relation to these words of Jesus. Do they signify
powers and “‘privileges’’ conferred on


3. How Peter, exclusively or representatively?
Peter Is Are they official or personal? Do
Related to they belong to other apostles, and to
These other officers besides apostles? Can
Powers the powers be exercised by individuals


or by the church alone? If any be-

sides Peter have these powers, do they pass to them
from Peter, and how?

What,seems to the writer a fundamental question

here is either passed over very lightly or entirely

omitted in the discussions of this sub-


4.Isthe ject. Did Jesus mean by these words
Primary to confer on Peter, or on anyone to
Idea That whom they may apply, authority, or
of Position obligation; privilege, or responsibility?
and Does He promise position, or does He
Authority? impose duty? These alternatives are


not necessarily exclusive, but the inter-
pretation of the thought will be determined in no
small measure by where the stress is laid.

Hl. Views Maintained.—The possibilities have
been exhausted in the interpretations and appli-

cations advocated. It is not possible
1. Agent of to classify on lines of the creeds, ex-
the Power cept very generally, for there is little

} uniformity of view existing within the
various communions.

(1) Generally speaking, the Roman Catholic
church gives to Peter a unique position. Her
theologians also agree that all the powers and privi-
leges of Peter descend to his successors in the
vicarate of Christ. When the question is raised
of the extension of these prerogatives beyond Peter
and the popes, all sorts of views are held, concern-
ing both the fact and the method of that extension.

(2) Among Protestants there is general agree-
ment that the church is the agent of this power, but
there is not uniformity as to the nature of the au-~
thority or the manner of its exercise.

_ (8) Some think that Peter has no peculiar rela-
tion to the keys; that these words were spoken to
him only as the first who gave expression to that
conception and experience, on the basis of which
Jesus commits the keys of the kingdom to any be-
liever in Him as the Christ of God.

We may summarize the more important views
as to Peter thus: (a) the power committed to him
alone and exercised, (i) at Pentecost, or (ii) at
Pentecost, Caesarea and other places; (6) the power
committed to Peter and to the other apostles, in-
cluding Paul, discharged by them, and descended
to no others; (c) the power conferred on Peter
officially and on his official successors; (d) the power
conferred on Peter and the other apostles and to
such as hold their place in the church; (e) that the
power belongs to Peter as representative of the
church, and so to the church to be exercised (i) by


1795


the officials of the church, Gi) by the officials and
those to whom they commit it, (iii) by all priests
and persons allowed to represent the church, de
facto, (iv) by the church in its councils, or other
formal and official decisions, (v) by the church in a
less formal way than (iv), (vi) by all members of
the church as representing it without specific com-
mission; (f) that it belongs to the Christian as such,
and so is imposed upon, or offered to, all Christians.

There is general—not absolute—agreement that
the holder of the keys is to admit men into the


kingdom. It is not agreed that the
2. Nature holder of the keys may, or can, deter-
of the mine who are members of the kingdom.
Power Both sides are taken. Some think


that the power is that of announcing
authoritatively the conditions of entrance, while
others insist that the holder of the keys also deter-
mines what individuals have accepted the conditions.

(1) There is strong support for the view that the
primary function of the keys lies in determining

the teaching of the kingdom, main-
3. Scope of taining purity of doctrine. Emphasis
the Power _ is laid on the use of the neuter, ‘‘what-

soever’’—not ‘‘whomsoever”—with the
binding and loosing. This would lead, however, to
the secondary and implied function of declaring who
had or had not accepted the teaching of the kingdom.

(2) In the Roman Catholic church we find insist-
ence on distinguishing between the general authority
of the keys in all affairs of the church and religion,
and the binding and loosing which they specifically
apply to absolution. Only on this last are Catho-
lics in full agreement. That the church administers
salvation is held by Rom and Gr Catholics and by
not a few Protestants, although Protestants do not,
as a tule, claim exclusive power in salvation as do
the others. Absolution is held to be a general
(derived) priestly function, while the authority of
the keys resides in the pope alone. .

(3) Eminent Catholic authorities admit that
the Fathers generally understood the keys to sig-
nify the power of forgiving sins, and that they
seldom make any reference to the supremacy of
Peter. But they claim that rarely the Fathers do
take “‘Christ’s promise in the fuller meaning of the
gift of authority over the church.” Suarez was
the first to develop the doctrine that it conferred on
Peter and his successors authority in its widest sense,
administrative and legislative. /

(4) The extension of the authority of the keys
to include civil matters is a contention of the Rom
church, shared in modified form by some Protes-
tants. Indeed the relation of ecclesiastical to civil
authority must be said still to be awaiting clear
definition in Protestantism. Macedo (De Clavibus
Petri) claims the theologians of the church for the
civil authority of the keys. Joyce in the Catholic
Enc affirms that he is unable to verify this claim,
but, on the contrary, finds that the opponents of
the extension of the authority of the church to
civil matters use Mt 16 19 in support of their posi-
tion on the ground that to Peter were committed the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, not of the kingdoms
of this world.

I, Data for Deciding the Questions Involved.—
We must first examine the Scriptures employing

the terms we seek to define. (1) Mt
1. Passages 16 19, the crucial passage, is part of a


Employing paragraph over which there is no end of
the Terms controversy. The incident at Caesarea
“Key,” Philippi was understood then and after-
“Binding” ward to mark an epoch in the life
and “Loos- and teaching of Jesus. Having elicit-
ing” ed Peter’s confession, Jesus pronounces


a benediction on him because his in-
sight represented a Divinely mediated experience


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Keys, Power of


of fundamental significance in His own plan and
mission. Jesus goes on to say: “And I also say
unto thee, that thou art Peter [‘a stone’’], and upon
this rock I will build my church; and the gates of
Hades shall not prevail against it” (ver 18). The
controversy rages about ‘Peter’ (wérpos, pétros)
and the “rock” (mérpa, pétra), “gates of Hades,”
and ‘prevail against it.” Are the church to be
built on the rock and the kingdom whose keys are
to be given to Peter the same? Such a shifting
of figure is not conclusive against the thought.
Perhaps the church is the organic form of the king-
dom, tts personal content and expression on earth
at any given time. This church exists wherever
men consciously accept and are included in the
kingdom. The kingdom will always embrace in-
fluences, institutions, individuals, not be reckoned
in any organized or visible church. The church
has never had—in the nature of the case can never
have—one complete organization including all the
organized life of the kingdom, or even of the church.
Any claims to this are contradicted by facts obvious
at every moment of history. The change in figure
from ver 18 to ver 19 is not conclusive against sup-
posing the church to be built in him. But it seems
far better to understand that Peter is the first stone
in the building, while the foundation is that vital
experience in which Peter came to know Jesus as
the Christ, the Son of God. On this is erected the
church, out of those living stones (Al@oe fGvres, lithot
zontes, 1 Pet 2 4) that know and confess Jesus the
Christ. The transition is thus easy to giving Peter
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the reason
for giving them to him rather than to any other may
be found in the fact that he is now the first so to
enter into the kingdom as to be fitted for church
functions.

It is not needful to determine, for our purpose,
the exact meaning of “gates of Hades” and their not
prevailing against the church (cf various comms.).
It is clear that the church is to persist in the life
of the world and so the kingdom will not lack or-
ganized and aggressive expression. Nor does the
relation of binding and loosing depend at all upon
the critical question of reading or omitting “and”
between the two parts of the verse. The conviction
could hardly be escaped that the latter function is
intimately related to the former, and is either di-
rectly or mdirectly involved within it.

(2) The pl. “keys,” occurs elsewhere only in Rev
1 18, where the Christ represents Himself as hold-
ing the keys of death and of Hades. The word
“Hades” might connect this with Mt 1619. The
immediate occasion for the statement is that He
who was dead, is alive; He has not only overcome
death in His own person but has conquered it and
its realm, so that they can no more have power ex-
cept as subject to Him, since He holds their keys.
Men on earth will either fall under the power of
death and Hades or they must enter the kingdom of
heaven. If the living Christ has the keys of the
kingdom in the hands of Peter, or other friends, and
holds the keys of its enemies in His own hands, the
work will go on with success. It is not certain that
the two passages can properly be so closely con-
nected, but they thus afford just the assurance that
is contained for the churches in Rev.

(3) In Rev 8 7 Christ appears in the character,
“he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the
key [sing.] of David, he that openeth and none can
shut, and that shutteth and none openeth.” The
idea is not restricted but indicates mastery over all
things in the Messianic kingdom, its own operations
and all forms of opposition. In the next verse, as
a specific instance, He has set before the church at
Philadelphia an open door (opportunity and prog-
ress) which none can shut. Ci as to this Eph 1 22.


eke Power of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


eys


1796


_ (4) It seems to be taken for granted that Jesus,
in Mt 46 19, had direct reference to Isa 22 22,
yet the passage is not Messianic except in a general
sense and on the assumption that the power of Jeh
over the nations in the OT is wielded by the Christ
in the NT (see JEHovag; Lorp). Eliakim is to
have absolute power, holding the key of the house
of David. The use of the words “open” and ‘‘shut,””
as well as the general conception, connects the
passage rather with Rev 3 7.

(5) Rev 9 1; 201 are to be taken together.
“The key of the pit of the abyss” in the hands of
the angel or angels signifies, in these specific cir-
ees the same power as that indicated in

8.

(6) In Lk 11 52 Jesus pronounces a woe upon
the “lawyers” who had “taken away the key of
knowledge” from the people, neither entering in nor
allowing those about to go in, toenter. The knowl-
edge of God and Divine things was in the control,
in great measure, of these scribes. This connects
the figure directly with the idea of Mt 16 19, and
the connection is emphasized by comparing Mt
23 2f; and is made definite by the word of Jesus
in Mt 18 52 with which is to be compared Lk 12
42, where it would not be allowable to suppose that
Jesus meant to limit the idea of “the faithful and
wise steward” to Peter. This passage with the
references seems to be highly important for our
subject.

Light is to be drawn from several passages that
do not use the exact terms of Mt 16 19, hut that
deal with the same general ideas.

(1) Mt 18 18 places the respon-
sibility for binding and loosing on all
disciples (18 1), and the reason is ex~
plained in the assured presence of the Christ, Him-
self in any company of two or three who have come
together in prayer touching any matter in His name,
i.e. as His representatives. ‘The immediate refer-
ence is to matters of discipline in the effort to rescue
any “brother” from sin. The passage is to be
taken of sin generally, for the reading “‘against
thee” (ver 15) is to be rejected, in spite of both
revised VSS. The reference of binding and loosing
here to the man is conclusive against limiting the
idea in 16 19 to teaching (cf also Lk 17 1ff). It
is also to be noted that the responsibility is placed
upon the individual Christian to codperate with
others when necessary. ;

(2) Mt 9 8 shows that the multitude recognized
that God had given power on earth to pronounce
forgiveness of sins, and apparently they do not
limit this power to the Divine Person, for they do
not yet know Him as such.

(3) Jas 5 14 ff recognizes the value of elders, and
probably of others also, in securing the forgiveness
of them that have sinned. ‘

(4) What one must regard as the proper starting-
point for studying this subject is Jn 20 21 ff. Ap-
pearing to ten of the apostles and to others on the
first night after the resurrection, Jesus says: ‘‘As
the Father sent me, even so send you. And when
he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith
unto them, Whose soever sins ye forgive, they are
forgiven unte them; whose soever ye retain, they
are retained.” By comparing this with the corre-
sponding account in Lk 24 we see that Jesus is
directing that they shall carry on His work (see also
Jn 14 12-14; 15 15.16), that He teaches them at
length of the nature of His work as seen in the OT,
and that the method of their work is to be preach-
ing repentance and remission of sins in His name
among all nations. Significant for our purpose are
the presence of others than the apostles, the gift of
the Holy Spirit, His own self-projection in His
messengers, and the solemn statement that the sins


2. Related
Passages


of men will be retained or forgiven as it is done
through these followers. :

(1) It is remarkable that there is no distinct
reference to this authority of the keys in the records

of the work of the apostles and others
3. Examples in the NT. Their consciousness seems
of Exercise most of all to have been dominated
of This by the fact that they were witnesses of
Power Jesus, and this corresponds exactly

with the point of emphasis in all the
various forms and occasions of the giving of the com-
mission (see Acts 2 32; 3 15; 4 33; 5 32; 10 39.41;
13 31; 1 Pet 5 1; cf Carver, Missions in the Planof
the Ages). It is said of Paul and Barnabas (Acts
14 27) that after their first missionary journey they
rehearsed to the church at Antioch ‘‘all things that
God had done with them, and that he had opened
a door of faith unto the Gentiles.” At Pentecost and
at other times Peter was the chief speaker, and so
opened the door of the kingdom. Referring to his
preaching to Cornelius and his friends, Peter reminds
the saints in the conference at Jerus (Acts 15) that
God made choice among them, that by his mouth
the Gentiles should hear the word of God and be-
lieve, but this was said by way of conciliating the
Jewish party and not as claiming any priority in
authority. It was Philip, the deacon-evangelist,
who first preached to the S anians (Acts 8), and
some “men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they
were come to Antioch, spake unte the Greeks also,
preaching the Lord Jesus” (Acts 11 20), the first
example of “opening a door of faith” to full heathen.
Peter appears in the Jerus conference with no
authority above that of other apostles and elders.
By reference to Gal 2 we see that Paul was here
only as a matter of prudence and fraternity, not
recognizing any authority to legislate for his
churches or his ministry. The decision there
reached is promulgated as that of the brethren as a
body, loosing all the law of Moses save four matters
that were ‘necessary’ on account of fundamental
morals and of the universal presence of Jews in
every city (Acts 15 20 f.28f). In the sense of
teaching Christian conduct all Paul’s letters are
examples of binding and loosing.

(2) As to binding and loosing sins Peter speaks
in the cases of Ananias and Be autirs (Acts 5),
Simon Magus (ch 8), and in deciding upon the bap-
tism of Cornelius and his household (10 48). Paul
speaks with equal boldness in the judgment of
Elymas (13 10), where we are told that he was
under the Spirit; passes upon the faith of a dozen
men at Ephesus, and requires their new baptism
after instruction (19 3-7); commands the church
at Corinth to turn over to Satan the incestuous
man (1 Cor 5 5; ef 1 Tim 1 20), and later urges
the man’s restoration to loving fellowship, declaring
that he has been forgiven (2 Cor 2 5ff)._ Obscure
men like Philip (Acts 8) and Ananias of Damascus
in the case of Paul himself (Acts 9) exercised the
same sort of judgment as to the forgiveness and
reception of men into the fellowship.

IV. Conclusion.—We sum up what seems to be
the teaching of Scripture. We conclude that the

power is not a special privilege and
1, Nature extraordinary authority, but a re-
of the sponsibility intrusted by Jesus Christ
Power as the method of extending His work.
. There is in it nothing magical, mys-
terious, or arbitrary; not ecclesiastical or official,
but spiritual and primarily personal. The keys of
the kingdom of heaven are first of all the gospel of
salvation through Jesus Christ. By this means
men are admitted into the kingdom. The fully
attested method of using the keys is that of wit-
nessing personally to an experience of Jesus Christ.
He was conferring power for saving and not for


1797


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA meee of


barring from salvation. Let it be borne in mind
always that Jesus was offering Peter not power
but duty, not privilege but responsibility. Neither
of these terms, “power” and “privilege,” that have
come to be associated with the gift of the keys occurs
with that gift in the words of the Master. The
keys are primarily for admitting to the kingdom of
heaven, not for barring from the church.

The holder of the keys is any man with that ex-
perience that called forth from Jesus the assurance
that Peter should have the keys.


2. Agent Such a man will be in fellowship and
of the codperation with like men, in a church,
Power and the Spirit of Jesus will be present


; _ in them, so that their decisions and
their testimony will be His as well as theirs. There
is a corporate, or church, agency, therefore, and the
man who would ignore that lacks the experience or
the Spirit needful for the use of the keys. Yet the
church is never to overshadow or exclude the indi-
vidual responsibility and authority.

It is to be understood that the keys of the king-
dom of heaven confer no political authority or
power, save that of holy and redemp-


3. Scope _ tive influence. The kingdom of Jesus
of the is not of this world. Its power is
Power spiritual and is to be exercised always


primarily in the saving of men. Men
do not need to be locked out of the kingdom. They
are out, and too contented to remain so. It does
happen that evil men seek to take possession of the
kingdom for evil ends, and then it is that the au-
thority rests in spiritual men to exclude. Men that
are to be brought into the kingdom of heaven are
now in sin, and where the duty of releasmg them is
not discharged by Christians, the sinners are left
bound in their sins.

There is also involved of necessity the duty of
declaring not only the conditions of entrance into the
kingdom, but the courses of conduct appropriate
tothe kingdom. It is thus that binding and loosing
in teaching devolve upon the holders of the keys.
To that extent, and in that sense, alone, is there the
power of “legislating’’ within the kingdom. This
is only interpreting and applying the principles that
are given us in the Scriptures. See further As-
SOLUTION; ImposiTiON of Hanns; Peter; Rock.

Wiuiam Owen CARVER

KEZIAH, ké-zi’a (WEP, kei'ah, “cassia”;
Kaota, Kasia, A, Kassia): The 2d daughter of Job
(Job 42 14), born after his restoration from afflic-
tion. The word “cassia” became a feminine name
from the fragrance of the flower.


KEZIZ, ké’ziz (Y"XP, cig). See Emux-xeziz.


KHAN, kan, kan. See Inn.
KIBROTH-HATTAAVAH,  kib-roth-ha-ta’a-va,
kib-roth- (VINE MP, kibhrith ha-ta’dwah, “the
graves of greed”): A desert camp of the Israelites,
one day’s journey from the wilderness of Sinai.
There the people lusted for flesh to eat, and, a great
number of quails being sent, a plague resulted;
hence the name (Nu 11 34; 33 16; Dt 9 22).


KIBZAIM, kib-za’im, kib’zi-im. See JoKMEAM.


KICK (Aakrite, laktizs): In the famous vision
on the road to Damascus the unseen voice said to
Saul: “Why persecutest thou me? It is hard for
thee to kick against the goad” (Acts 9 4f; 26 14).
The words are omitted from the best MSS in 9 4.
This was a familiar proverb in both Gr and Lat lit.,
and refers to the severer goading received by an ox
which kicks back at the goad used to guide or urge


him on. The words seem to mean that Paul’s
paroxysm of persecution was a painful as well as
profitlesas resistance to the pricks of conscience by
which God was leading him into the light.


KID: (1) “TH, g’dht (Ex 23 19, etc); (2) fem.
gdhiyah (Isa 11 6, etc); (3) DY M7, gedhi ‘izetm,
EV “kid,” lit. “kid of the goats,” AVm (Jgs
6 19, etc); (4) TY, ‘Zz, lit. “goat” (Dt 14 21; 1 K
20 27); (5) DIY PW, & Gr Sizzim, AV “kid of the
goats,” RV “he-goat” (Gen 37 31; Lev 9 3, etc);
(6) eptdos, ériphos (Lk 16 29). See Goat.


KIDNAPPING, kid’nap-ing (MANSTEALING):
The term itself occurs only in the NT (4véparodior}s,
andrapodistés =“‘manstealer”’)in 1 'Tim 110. The
crime was directly forbidden in the Heb law (Ex
21 16; Dt 24 7), and was made punishable with
death.


KIDNEYS, kid’niz (always in the pl.: M93,
kelayoth; veppot, nephrot;' Lat. renes, whence the
Eng. “reins’”’): “Reins” and “kidneys” are syno-
nyms, but AV undertook a distinction by using
the former word in the figurative, the latter in the
literal passages. ERV has followed AV exactly,
but ARV has retained “reins” only in Job 16 13;
Lam 3 18; Rev_2 23, elsewhere substituting
“heart,” except in Ps 139 13, where “inward parts”
isused. AV and ERV also have “reins” for D727,
hdlagdyim, in Isa 115 (ARV “‘oins’). The
physiological function of the kidneys is not referred
to in the Bible, but has been introduced (quite
wrongly) by AVm to Lev 16 2; 22 4.

(1) The kidneys owe their importance in the
Bible partly to the fact that they are imbedded in
fat, and fat of such purity that “fat of the kid-
neys”’ was a proverbial term for surpassing excel-
lence (Dt 82 14m). For the visceral fat was the
part of the animal best adapted for sacrificial burn-
ing, and hence came to be deemed peculiarly sacred
(Lev 7 22-25; 18 216). Accordingly, the kid-
neys with the fat surrounding them were burned
in every sacrifice iu which the entire animal was not
consumed, whether in peace (Lev 3 4.10.15; 9 19),
sin (Ex 29 13; Lev 4 9; 8 16; 9 10), or trespass
(Lev 7 4) offerings; cf the “ram of consecration”
(Ex 29 22; Lev 8 25). So in Isa 34 6, “fat of
the kidneys of rams” is chosen as a typical sacrifi-
cial term to parallel “blood of lambs and goats.”
(2) The position of the kidneys in the body makes
them particularly inaccessible, and in cutting up
an animal they are the last organs to be reached.
Consequently, they were a natural symbol for the
most hidden part of a man (Ps 139 13), and in Job
16 13 to “cleave the reins asunder” is to effect the
total destruction of the individual (cf 19 27; Lam
313). This hidden location, coupled with the
sacred gacrificial use, caused the kidneys to be
thought of as the seat of the innermost moral (and
emotional) impulses. So the reins instruct (Ps
16 7) or are “pricked” (Ps 73 21), and God can
be said to be far from the reins of sinners (Jer
12 2). In all of these passages “conscience” gives
the exact meaning. So the reins rejoice (Prov 23
16), cause torment (2 Esd 5 34), or tremble in
wrath (1 Macc 2 24). And to “know” or ‘try
the reins” (usually joined with “the heart”) is an
essential power of God’s, denoting His complete
knowledge of the nature of every human being
(Ps 79; 26 2; Jer 11 20; 17 10; 20 12; Wisd
16; Rev 2 23). See Far; Psycnotocy; Sac-
nirice. Cf RS?, 379-80, and for Gr sacrificial paral-
lels Journal of Philology, XTX (1890), 46. The an-
atomical relations are well exhibited in the plate in
SBOT, “Leviticus.” Burton Scorr Easton


Kidron
King, Kingdom


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1798


KIDRON, kid’ron (Ke8pa4v, Kedrén; AV Cedron):
A place which, in obedience to Antiochus Sidetes,
Cendebaeus fortified (1 Macc 16 39 ff), to which,
when defeated, he fled, hotly pursued by John and
Judas, sons of Simon the Maccahee, who burned
the city (16 4ff). It is named along with Jamnia
(Yebna) and Azotus (Esdud). It is possibly iden-
tical with katrah, a village about 3 miles 8.W. of
‘akir (Ekron).


KIDRON, THE BROOK (ji4p 579, nahal
kidhron; in Jn 18 1 [AV Cedron], 6 xewpdppous
tév Kédpev, ho cheimdrrhous tén Kédroén, according
to RVm, the last two words are to be considered
as meaning “of the cedars.”” The Heb word has
been very generally accepted as from “Ip, kdadhar,
“to become black,” but it is an attractive sugges-
tion [Cheyne] that it may be a phonetic varia-
tion of JIN, giddéron, ‘‘a spot for inclosures for
cattle,’’ of which latter there must have been many
around thenow buried caves which lay at the base of
the cliffs around the spring Gihon):

The Nahal Kidhron is the valley known today
as the Wddy Sitti Miriam, which lies between the

eastern walls of Jerus and the Mount


1. WAdy of Olives. It commences in the pla-
Sitti teau_to the N. of the city, and after
Miriam making a wide sweep S.E., under the


name Wddy el Jéz (“Valley of the
Walnuts”), passes S. until level with the south-
eastern corner of the temple-area where its bed is


Kidron, Looking S.E. from the Wall of Jerusalem.


spanned by an old bridge; here the bottom of the
valley, 40ft. beneath the present surface level, is 400
ft. below the temple-platform. From this point
it narrows and deepens gradually, bending slightly
W. of S., and, after receiving the Tyropceon valley,
joins a little farther S.W. with the Valley of Hinnom
to form the Wddy en Ni ar, which winds on through
the ‘‘wilderness of Judaea’’ to the Dead Sea. Where
the three valleys run together is a large open space
filed with gardens (the Kine’s GarpeEns, q.v.),
which are kept irrigated all the year round by means
of the overflow waters from the ‘Ain Silwdn (see
SitoaM). It is where the Hinnom valley runs into
the Kidron that some would locate Topueta (q.v.).
Except at the irrigated gardens, the ravine is a dry
valley containing water only during and immedi-
ately after heavy rain, but in ancient times the rocky
bottom—now buried beneath many feet of rich
soil—must have contained a little stream from
Gihon for at least some hundreds of yards. This
was the “brook that flowed through the midst of
the land” (2 Ch 82 4). The length of the valley
from its head to Bir Eyydb is 23 miles.

Since the 4th cent. AD, this valley has been
known as the Vatiey or JnenosHaPHat (q.v.), and
from quite early times it was a favorite situation
for mterments (2 K 23 4.6.12; 2 Ch 34 4.5); it


is by Moslem and Jewish tradition the scene of the
last judgment, and was known to the Moslems in
the Middle Ages as Wddy Jehannum;
2. Tradi- see Gensenna. It is probable that the
tions “graves of the common people,’’ where
King Jehoiakim cast the body of the
prophet Uriah, were here (Jer 26 23), and it has
been suggested, with less probability, that here too
may have been the scene of Ezekiel’s vision of the
“valley of dry bones’’ (Ezk 37; cf Jer 31 40).
The Fields of Kidron (2 K 23 4), though gen-
erally identified with the open, lower part of this
valley, where it is Joined by the Tyro-


3. The peon valley, may more probably have
Fields of | been in the upper part where the wide
Kidron expanded valley receives the name


Wady el Jéz; this part is actually on

the road to Bethel.
The most dramatic scene associated with the

Kidron is that recorded in connection with its

earliest Scriptural mention (2 S 15
4, Histori- 23), when David, flying before his
cal Asso- _ rebellious son Absalom, here stood on
ciations the Jerus side of the valley while all

his adherents passed over. ‘‘And all
the country wept with a loud voice, and all the
people passed over: the king also himself passed
over the brook Kidron .... toward the way of
the wilderness.”? The passing over this brook ap-
pears to have been viewed as the solemn abandon-
ment of the Jerus territory (cf 1 K 2 37). In1 K
16 13; 2 Ch 15 16, we read that Asa burnt at
the brook Kidron ‘‘an abominable image for an
Asherah” which Maacah, his mother, had set up.
In the reforms of Hezekiah, ‘all the uncleanness
that they found in the temple of Jeh’”’ was carried
by the Levites to the brook Kidron (2 Ch 29 16);
“Allthe altars for incense took they away, and cast
them into the brook Kidron” (30 14). This local-
ity was again used in the reforms of Josiah when the
king “brought out the Asherah from the house of
Jeh, without Jerus, unto the brook Kidron, and
burned it at the brook Kidron, and beat it to dust,
and cast the dust thereof upon the graves of the com-
mon people” (2 K 23 6). Thesame treatment was
given to the vessels made for Baal, the Asherah and
the host of heaven (ver 4), and the two idolatrous
altars of Manasseh (ver 12). Jos (Ant, IX, vii,
3) states that Athaliah was slain in the valley of
Kidron, but this does not quite tally with the ac-
count (2 K 11 16). It was a valley associated
with graves and the ashes of abominations, but it
was prophesied that it should be ‘“‘holy unto Jeh”
(Jer 31 40). Twice it is mentioned simply as “‘the
valley,” nahal (2 Ch 83 14; Neh 215). Very
different from these earlier scenes is the last
Scriptural reference (Jn 18 1), when Jesus “went
forth with his disciples over the brook Kidron” for
His last hours of spiritual struggle and prayer
before the turmoil of the end.

E. W. G. Masterman
KILAN, kilan (Kudv, Kilén; AV Ceilan):

Mentioned with Azetas in 1 Esd 6 15; their sons
returned among, the exiles with Zerubbabel. The
names do not appear in the lists of Ezr and Neh.


KIMAH, ki’ma (Pleiades).

KIN. See Kinprep.

KIN, NEXT OF. See Kinsman.

KINAH, ki’na (TP, kindh): An unidentified
town on the southern boundary of Judah, toward
Edom (Josh 15 22). The word kindh means


“elegy,” ‘“dirge,” “lament for the dead.” The
name, however, may have been derived from the


See ASTRONOMY.


1799


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Kidron
King, Kingdom


Kenites, "3°?, who had settlements in the S. (1S
27 10, etc).


KINDNESS, kind’nes (70M, hesedh; xpynorérys,
chrést6tés): “Kindness” in the OT is (with one ex-
ception) the tr of hesedh, “kindness,” “favor,”
“mercy,” etc, used chiefly of man but also of God
(Gen 20 13; 40 14; 18 156; 20 14.15; 28
93; Neh 9 17; Ps 141 5; Isa 54 8.10, etc);
tobh, “‘good,’’ is once so tr? (2 8 2 6). In the NT
chréstotés, “usefulness,” “beneficence,” is rendered
“kindness” 4 t in AV (2 Cor 6 6; Eph 2 7; Col
3 12; Tit 3 4, and in Gal 6 22 RV) 3, see GENTLE-
ness; Goopness, Philanthropia, “love of man-
kind,” is tr4 “kindness” (Acts 28 2), and phila-
delphia, “love of the brotherhood” (2 Pet 1 7, ERV
“love of the brethren,” ARVm “Gr, love of the
brethren’).

For ‘'kindness” (Ps $1 21) RV has “‘lovingkindness,”
and ARV in other places where the reference is to God;
for ‘‘shew," ‘‘shewed kindness" (Josh 2 12) ‘‘deal,’'
‘dealt kindly’’; for The desire of man is his kindness’’
(Prov 19 22) ARV has ‘'That which maketh a man to be
desired is his kindness,'’ ERV ‘‘The desire of man is [the
measure of) his kindness,” like ARV in m; for ‘‘merci-
ful kindness’? (Ps 117 2) ARV has ‘‘lovingkindness,"
ERV “mercy”; both have ‘‘lovingkindness’ (Ps 119
76); for “of reat kindness’’ (Neh 9 17; Joel 2 13;
Jon 4 2) ARV has ‘‘abundant_in lovingkindness,’’
ERV “plenteous in_mercy’’; has ‘‘kindness’’ for
“mercy” (Gen 39 21); for “pity” (Job 6 14); for
‘‘goodness’’ (Prov 20 6); ‘favor and kindness"’ ARV,
for '‘graceand favor” (Est 2.17). See LovincxinpNzss;


Mercy.
W. L. WaLker

KINDRED, kin’dred: Several words are rendered
“kindred” in AV. MN, ’ah, “brother,’’ was used
loosely among Hebrews for a member of the same
tribe or family, arelative; and isonce tré “kindred’”’
(1 Ch 12 29AV). Once also somewhat loosely
ag the tr of MITA, moddha‘ath, lit. “acquaintance”
(Ruth $ 2; ef same root in 2 1, rendered “‘kins-
man”); once, for the figurative expression, “men
of thy redemption” (T2N4, g’ ullah, referring to the
law of the redemption of land by kinsmen, Lev 25
25). The two most common words for kindred are:
(1) ms, méledheth, “related by birth” (Gen 12 1;
244.7; 31 3.13; 329; 43 7; Nu 10 30; Est 2
10.20; 8 6); (2) MAMEWA, mishpahah, “family”
(Gen 24 38.40.41; Josh 6 23; Ruth 23; 1 Ch
16 28; Job 32 2; Ps 22 27; 96 7).

In the NT (several times), yévos, génos, “‘kindred
by birth,” so, of same family, tribe or race (Acts 4
6; 7 13.19 RV “race’”’); s0 also ouvyyévea, sug-
géneia (Lk 161; Acts 7 3.14). In AV_ vay,
phulé, ‘“‘tribe,” rendered “kindred” (Rev 1 7; 5 9;
79; 119; 18 7; 14 6), but better “tribe” as in
RV. sarpid, pairid, rendered “kindred” in Acts
3 25, is better ‘“families,” asin RV.

Epwarp Bacpy PoLtiarD

KINE, kin: (1) D°DSN, ’dlaphim, pl. of FN,
’eleph, “ox,” or “cow,” ARV ‘‘cattle,” AV and
ERV’ “kine? (Dt 7 13; 28 4.18.51); (2) "p3,
bakadr, “ox” or “cow,” ARV “herd,” AV and ERV
“kine” (Dt 32 14; 2 8 17 29); (3) N18, parath,
pl. of M8, parah, “young cow” or “heifer,” RV
“kine” in Gen 41 2-27; 1867-14; Am 41;
in Gen 32 15, ARV has “cows.” See Carrie;
Cow.


KING, KINGDOM, king’dum:


I. Kine xo;
1. Etymology and Definition
2. Earliest Kings. ‘
3. Biblical Signification of the Title
Il. Krnopom
1. Israel's Theocracy
- 2. Period of Judges
3. Establishment of the Monarchy


. Appointment of King

. Authority of the King
. Duties of the King
. The Symbols of Royal Dignity
Maintenance and Establishment

1) Income

2) The Royal Court

9. Short Character Sketch of Israel’s Kingdom

LiteRATURE


I. King.—The Heb word for king is J%'A,
melekh; its denominative q>0 , malakh, ‘to reign,”
“to be king.”’ The word is apparently


derived from the V¥ mlkh which de-
1. Ety- vee


mology and notes: (1) in the Arab. (the, vb., and
Definition & -


5 , n.), “to possess,”’ “to reign,”’ in-


WNO oR


asmuch as the possessor is also lord and ruler;
(2) in the Aram. (72%), and Assyr ‘‘counsel,”’
and in the Syrian “‘to consult”; cf Lat consul.

If, as has been suggested, the root idea of “‘king”’
is “counsellor” and not “ruler,” then the rise of the
kingly office and power would be due to intellectual
superiority rather than to physical prowess. And
since the first form of monarchy known was that
of a “city-state,” the office of king may have
evolved from that of the chief “elder,” or intellec-
tual head of the clan.

The first king of whom we read in the Bible was
Nimrod (Gen 10 8-10), who was supposedly _the

founder of the Bab empire. His-
2. Earliest torical research regarding the kings
Kings of Babylonia and Egypt corroborates

this Bib. statement in so far as the
ancestry of these kings is traced back to the carliest
times of antiquity. According to Isa 19 11, it
was the pride of the Egyp princes that they could
trace their lineage to most ancient kings. The Ca-
naanites and Philis had kings as early as the times
of Abraham (Gen 14 2; 20 2). Thus also the
Edomites, who were related to Israel (Gen 36 31),
the Moabites, and the Midianites had kings (Nu
22 4; 31 8) earlier than the Israelites. .

In Gen 14 18 we read of Melchizedek, who was
a priest, and king of Salem. At first the extent of
the dominion of kings was often very limited, as
appears from 70 of them being conquered by Adoni-
bezek (Jgs 1 7), 31 by Joshua (Josh 12 7 ff), and
82 being subject to Ben-hadad (1 K 20 1).

The earliest Bib. usage of this title “king,’’ in
consonance with the general oriental practice, de-

notes an absolute monarch who exer-~
8. Biblical cises unchecked control over his sub-


Significa~ jects. In this sense the title is applied
tion of the to Jeh, and tohuman rulers. No con-
Title stitutional obligations were Jaid upon


the ruler nor were any restrictions put
upon his arbitrary authority. His good or bad
conduct depended upon his own free will.

The title “king” was applied also to dependent
kings. In the NT it is used even for the head of a
province (Rev 17 12). To distinguish him from
the smaller and dependent kings, the king of Assyria
bore the title “king of kings.”

Hl, Kingdom.—The notable fact that Israel
attained to the degree of a kingdom rather late,
as compared with the other Sem nations, does not
imply that Israel, before the establishment of the
monarchy, had not arrived at the stage of consti-
tutional government, or that the idea of a king-
dom had noroom in the original plan of the founder
of the Heb nation. For a satisfactory explana-
tion we must take cognizance of the unique place
that Israel held among the Sem peoples.

It is universally recognized that Israel was a
singular community. From the beginning of its
existence as a nation it bore the character of a re-
ligious and moral community, a theocratic common-


King, Kingdom THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1800


wealth, having Jeh Himself as the Head and Ruler.
The theocracy is not to be mistaken for a hierarchy,
nor can it strictly be identified with
1, Israel’s any existent form of political organiza-
Theocracy tion. It was rather something over
and above, and therefore independ-
ent of the political organization. It did not super-
sede the tribal organization of Israel, but it
supplied the centralizing power, constituting Israel
a nation. In lieu of a strong political center,
the unifying bond of a common allegiance to Jeh,
i.e. the common faith in Him, the God of Israel,
kept the tribes together. The consciousness that
Jeh was Israel’s king was deeply rooted, was a
national feeling, and the inspiration of a true pa-
triotism (Ex 16 18; 196; Jgs 6). Jch’s king-
ship is evinced by the laws He gave to Israel, by
the fact that justice was administered in His name
(Ex 22 28), and by His leading and aiding Israel
in its wars (Ex 14 14; 15 3; Nu 21 14; 15 18
17; 25 28). This decentralized system which
characterized the early government of Israel politi-
cally, in spite of some great disadvantages, proved
advantageous for Israel on the whole and served a
great providential purpose. It safeguarded the
individual liberties and rights of the Israelites.
When later the monarchy was established, they
enjoyed a degree of local freedom and self-control
that was unknown in the rest of the Sem world;
there was home rule for every community, which
admitted the untrammeled cultivation of their
inherited religious and social institutions.

From the political point of view Israel, through
the absence of a strong central government, was
at a great disadvantage, making almost impossible
its development into a world-empire. But this
barrier to a policy of self-aggrandizement was a
decided blessing from the viewpoint of Israel’s
providential mission to the world. It made pos-
sible the transmission of the pure religion in-
trusted to it, to later generations of men without
destructive contamination from the ungodly forces
with which Israel would inevitably have come into
closer contact, had it not been for its self-contained
character, resulting from the fashion of a state it
was providentially molded into. Only as the
small and insignificant nation that it was, could
Israel perform its mission as “the depository and
perpetuating agency of truths vital to the welfare
of humanity.” Thus its religion was the central
authority of this nation, supplying the lack of a
centralized government. Herein lay Israel’s unique-
ness and greatness, and also the secret of its
strength as a nation, as long as the loyalty and
devotion to Jeh lasted. Under the leadership of
Moses and Joshua who, though they exercised a
royal authority, acted merely as representatives
of Jeh, the influence of religion of which these lead-
ers were a personal embodiment was still so strong
as to keep the tribes united for common action.
But when, after the removal of these strong leaders,
Israel no longer had a standing representative of
Jeh, those changes took place which eventually
necessitated the establishment of the monarchy.

In the absence of a special representative of Jeh,
His will as Israel’s King was divined by the use of

the holy lot in the hand of the highest
2. Period priest. But the lot would not supply
of Judges the place of a strong personal leader.

Besides, many of the Israelites came
under the deteriorating influence of the Can. wor-
ship and began to adopt heathenish customs. The
sense of religious unity weakened, the tribes became
disunited and ceased to act in common, and as a
result they were conquered by their foes. Jeh
came to their assistance by sending them leaders,
who released the regions where they lived from


foreign attacks. But these leaders were not the
strong religious personalities that Moses and Joshua
had been; besides, they had no official authority,
and their rule was only temporary and local. It
was now that the need of a centralized political
government was felt, and the only type of per-
manent organization of which the age was cog-
nigant was the kingship. The crown was offered
to Gideon, but he declined it, saying: ‘“Jeh shall
rule over you” (Jgs 8 22.23). The attempt of his
son, Abimelech, to establish a kingship over Shechem
and the adjacent country, after the Canaanitic
fashion, was abortive.

The general political condition of this period is
briefly and pertinently described by the oft-recur-
ring statement in Jgs: ‘‘In those days there was no
king in Israel: every man did that which was right
in his own eyes.”’

Not until the time of Samuel was a formal king-
dom established over Israel. An attempt to ameli-

orate conditions by a union of civil


3. Estab- and _ religious functions in the hands
lishment of Eli, the priest, had failed through
of the the degeneracy of his sons. Similarly
Monarchy the hopes of Israel in a hereditary


judgeship had been disappointed
through the corruption of the sons of Samuel. The
Philis were threatening the independence and hope
of Israel. Its very existence as a distinct race, and
consequently the future of Jeh’s religion, impera-
tively demanded a king. Considering that it was
the moral decline of the nation that had created
the necessity for a monarchy, and moreover that
the people’s desire for a king originated from a purely
national and not from a religious motive, the un-
willingness of Samuel, at first, to comply with the
demand for a king is not surprising. Even Jeh
declared: ‘‘They have not rejected thee but they
have rejected me,’”’ etc. Instead of recognizing
that they themselves were responsible for the fail-
ures of the past, they blamed the form of govern-
ment they had, and put all their hopes upon a king.
That it was not the monarchy as such that was
objectionable to Jeh and His prophet is evidenced
by the fact that to the patriarchs the promise had
been given: ‘Kings shall come out of thy loins”
(Gen 17 6; 35 11). In view of this Moses had
mdde provision for a kingship (Dt 17 14-20).
According to the Mosaic charter for the kingship,
the monarchy when established must be brought
into consonance with the fact that Jeh was Israel’s
king. Of this fact Israel had lost sight when it
requested a kingship like that of the neighboring
peoples. Samuel’s gloomy prognostications were
perfectly justified in view of such a kingship as
they desired, which would inevitably tend to selfish
despotism (1 8 8 11f). Therefore God directs
Samuel to give them a king—since the introduction
of a kingship typifying the kingship of Christ lay
within the plan of His economy—not according to
their desire, but in accordance with the instructions
of the law concerning kings (Dt 17 14-20), in
order to safeguard their liberties and prevent the
forfeiture of their mission.
According to the Law of Moses Jeh was to choose
the king of Israel, who was to be His representative.
é The choice of Jeh in the case of Saul
4. Appoint- is implied by the anointing of Saul by
ment of Samuel and through the confirmation
King of this choice by the holy lot (1 S 10
; ; 1-20). This method of choosing the
king did not exclude the people altogether, since
Saul was publicly presented to them, and acknowl-
edged as king (1 § 10 24). The participation of
the people in the choice of their king is more pro-
nounced in the case of David, who, having been
designated as Jeh’s choice by being anointed by


1801


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA King, Kingdom


Samuel, was anointed again by the elders of Israel
before he actually became king (2 8 2 4).

The anointing itself signified the consccration
to an office in the theocracy. The custom of
anointing kings was an old one, and by no means
pecular to Israel (Jgs 9 8.15). The hereditary
kingship began with David. Usually the firstborn
succeeded to the throne, but not necessarily. The
king might choose as his successor from among his
sons the one whom he thought best qualified.

The king of Israel was not a constitutional
monarch in the modern sense, nor was he an auto-

crat in the oriental sense. He was
5. Author- responsible to Jeh, who had chosen
ity of the him and whose vicegerent and servant
King he was. Furthermore, his authority
“a _. Was more or less limited on the re-
ligious side by the prophets, the representatives of
Jeh, and in the political sphere by the “elders,”
the representatives of the people, though as king
he stood above all. Rightly conceived, his kingship
in relation to Jeh, who was Israel’s true king, im-
plied that he was Jeh’s servant and His earthly sub-
stitute. In relation to his subjects his kingship
demanded of him, according to the Law, “that his
heart be not lifted up ahove his brethren’”’ (Dt 17 20).

In a summary way the king was held responsible

for all Israel as the Lord’s people. His main duty
was to defend it against its enemies,
6. Duties and for this reason it devolved upon
of the King him to raise and maintain a standing
army; and it was expected of him that
he be its leader in case of war (1S 8 20). In
respect to the judiciary the king was a kind of
supreme court, or court of final appeal, and as such,
as in the days of Solomon, might be approached
by his most humble snbjects (28.15 2; 1 K 3
16 ff). Legislative functions he had none and was
himself under the Jaw (1 K 21 4; Dt 17 19).
The king was also in a way the summus episcopus
in Israel. His very kingship was of an entirely
religious character and implied a unity of the
heavenly and earthly rule over Israel through him
who as Jeh’s substitute sat “upon the throne of the
kingdom of Jeh over Israel”? (1 Ch 17 14; 28 5;
29 23), who was “Jeh’s anointed’ (1 8 24 10;
26 9; 25 1 14), and also bore the title of “son
of Jeh” and “the first-born,” the same as Israel did
(Ex 4 22; Hos 111; 28 7 14; Ps 89 27; 2 7).
Thus a place of honor was assigned to the king in
the temple (2 K 11 4; 23 3; Ezk 46 1.2); be-
sides, he officiated at the national sacrifices
(esp. mentioned of David and Solomon). He
prayed for his people and blessed them in the name
of Jeh (28 6 18; 24 25;1 K 3 4.8; 8 14.55.62;
9 25). Apparently it was the king’s right to ap-
point’ and dismiss the chief priests at the sanctu-
aries, though in his choice he was doubtless re-
stricted to the Aaronites (1 Ch 16 37.39; 28 8
17; 1 K 2 27.35). ‘The priesthood was under the
king’s supervision to such an extent that he might
concern himself about its organization and duties
(1 Ch 15 16.23.24; 1646), and that he was
responsible for the purity of the cult and the main-
tenance of the order of worship. In general he was
to watch over the religious life and conduct of his
people, to eradicate the high pee and every form
of idolatry in the land (2 18 4). Ezk 45 22
demands of the prince that he shall provide at the
Passover a bullock for a sin offering for all the
people. ;

The marks of royal dignity, besides the beautiful
robes in which the king was attired (1 K 22 10),
were: (1) the diadem (“J2, nézer) and the crown
(MII, ‘dfarah, 2 S 1 10; 2 K 11 12; 2 8 12 30),
the headtire; (2) the scepter (DAW, shébhet),


originally a long, straight staff, the primitive sign
of dominion and authority (Gen 49 10; Nu
17; Isa 14 5; Jer 48 17; Ps
7. The 29; 465 7). Saul had a spear (18S
Symhols of 18 10; 22 6); (8) the throne (NG,
Royal kiss@, 1 K 10 18-20), the symbol of
Dignity majesty. Israel’s kings also had a
palace (1 K 7 1-12; 22 39; Jer 22
14), a royal harem (2 S 16 21), and a body-
guard (2S 8 18; 16 18).
(1) Income.—(a) According to the custom of
the times presents were expected of the subjects
(1 8 10 27; 16 20) and of foreigners
8. Mainte- (28 8 2; 1 K 5 1ff; 10 25; 2 Ch 32
nance and 23), and these often took the form of


Establish- an annual tribute. (b) In time of
ment war the king would lay claim to his

share of the booty 2 8S 8 11; 12 30;
1 Ch 26 27). (©) Various forms of taxes were in


vogue, as a part of the produce of the land (1 K 9
11;_ 18 17 25), forced labor of the Canaanites
(1 K 9 20; 2 Ch 2 16) and also of the Israelites
(1 K 6 18; 11 28; 12 4), the first growth of the
pasture lands (Am 7 1), toll collected from cara-
vans (1 K 10 15). (d) Subdued nations had to
pay a heavy tribute (2 K 3 4). (e) The royal
domain often comprised extensive possessions (1 Ch
27 25-31).

(2) The royal court—The highest office was that
of the princes (1 K 4 2), who were the king’s ad-
visers or counsellors. In. 2 K 25 19 and Jer 52
25 they are called “they that saw the king’s face”
(cf also 1 K 12 6, ‘“‘stood before Solomon”). The
following officers of King David are mentioned:
the captain of the host (commander-in-chief), the
captain of the Cherethites and the Pelethites (body-
guard), the recorder (chronicler and reminder), the
scribe (secretary of state), the overseer of the forced
labor, the chief ministers or priests (confidants of
the king, usually selected from the royal family)
(2.8 8 16-18; 20 23-26).

During the reign of Solomon other officers were
added as follows: the overseer over the twelve
men “who provided victuals for the king and his
household” (1 K 4 5.7), the officer over the bouse-
hold (1 K 4 6; 18 3) (steward, the head of the
palace who had “‘the key” in his possession, Isa 22
22); the king’s friend (1 K 4 5; 1 Ch 27 33) is
probably the same as the king’s servant mentioned
among the high officials in 2 K 22 12. It is not
stated what his duties were. Minor officials are
servants, cupbearer (1 K 10 5), keeper of the ward-
robe (2 K 22 14; 10 22), eunuchs (chamherlains,
not mentioned before the division of the kingdom)
(1 K 22 9; 2 K 8 6).

No higher conceptions of a good king have ever
been given to the world than those which are pre-

sented in the representations of king-


9. Short ship in the OT, both actual and ideal.
Character Though Samuel’s characterization of
Sketch of . the kingship was borne out in the
Israel’s example of a great number of kings of
Kingdom Israel, the Divine ideal of a true king


came as near to its realization in the
case of one king of Israel, at least, as possibly no-
where else, viz. in the case of David. Therefore
King David appears as the type of that king in
whom the Divine ideal of a Jeh-king was to find
its perfect realization; toward whose reign the
kingship in Israel tended. The history of the king-
ship in Israel after David is, indeed, characterized
by that desire for political aggrandizement which
bad prompted the establishment of the monarchy,
wile was contrary to Israel's Divine mission as
the peculiar people of the Jeh-king. When Israel’s
kingdom terminated in the Bab exile, it became evi-
dent that the continued existence of the nation was


King, Christ as


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1802


possible even without a monarchical form of govern-
ment. Though a kingdom was established again
under the Maccabees, as a result of the attempt of
Antiochus to extinguish Israel’s religion, this king-
dom was neither as perfectly national nor as truly
religious in its character as the Davidic. It soon
became dependent on Rome. The kingship of Herod
was entirely alien to the true Israelitish conception.

It remains to be said only that the final attempt
of Israel in its revolt against the Rom Empire, to
establish the old monarchy, resulted in its down-
fall as a nation, because it would not learn the
lesson that the future of a nation does not depend
upon political greatness, but upon the fulfilment of
its Divine mission.

Literaturse.—J. P. McCurdy, History, Prophecy and


the Monuments; Riehm, Handwérterbuch des bibl. Alter-
tums; HDB; Kinzler, Bibl. AT.
8S. D. Press


KING, CHRIST AS:


J. Tue Reaciry or Cxnist’s KinesHip

1. The OT Foreshadowings
la the Psalms and Prophets

2. The Gospel Presentation
(1) Christ's Claim to Be King
2) Christ's Acceptance of the Title
(3) Christ Charged and Condemned as King
(4) The Witness of the Resurrection and of

Apostolic Preaching
(5) The Testimony of the Epistles and Apoc-
alypse
II. Curist's Tirte to Kinesuir

1. By Birth

2. By Divine Appointment

3. By Conquest

4. By the Free Choice of His People

III. Tse Nature or Curist’s KincsHir

1. Spiritual

2. Universal
(1) Kingdom of Grace, of Power
(2) Kingdom of Glory

3. Eternal


I. The Reality of Christ’s Kingship.—There can
be no question but that Christ is set before us in
Scripture as a king. The very title Christ or ‘‘Mes-
siah”’ suggests kingship, for though the priest is
spoken of as “‘anointed,”’ and full elucidation of the
title as applied to Jesus must take account of His
threefold office of prophet, priest and king, yet
generally in the OT it is the king to whom the
epithet 1s applied.


We may briefly note some of the OT predictions of
Christ as king. The first prediction which represents
the Christ as having dominion is that of
1. The OT Jacob concerning the trihe of Judah:
Fore~ “‘Until Shiloh come; and unto him shall
J the obedience of the peoples he’’ (Gen 49
shadowings 10); then kingly dignity and dominion
are suggested hy the star and scepter in
Balaam's prophecy (Nu 24 15-17). As yet, however,
Israel has no king hut God, hut when afterward a king is
given and the people hecome familiar with the idea, the
prophecies all more or less have a regal tint, and the
coming one is preéminently the coming king.

In the Pss and Prophets —We can only indicate a few
of the many royal_predictions, hut these will readily
suggest.others. In Ps 2 the voice of Jeh is heard above
all the tumult of earth, declaring, ‘‘ Yet I have set my
king upon my holy hill of Zion.” Soin Pss 24, 45, 72,
89 and 110 we have special foreshadowings of the Mes-
sianic king. The hahe that Isaiah sees horn of a virgin
is also the ‘‘ Prince of Peace” (Isa 9 6.7), of the increase
of whose government there shall be no end, and as the

rophet gazes on him he joyfully exclaims: ‘‘ Behold, a

ing shall reign in righteousness"’ (Isa 82 1). Jeremiah,
the prophet of woe, catches bright glimpses of his coming
Lord, and with rapture intensified hy the Su ourns
sorrow cries: ‘‘Behold, the days come, saith Jeh, that
will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and he shall
reign as king and deal wisely, and shall execute justice
and righteousness in the land” (28 5). Ezekiel, dwelling
amid his wheels, secs in the course of Providence many
revolutions, hut they are all to hring about the dominion
of Christ: “I will overturn, overturn, overturn... .
until he come whose right it is; and J will give it him”
(21 rae Daniel sees the rise and progress, the decline
and fall of many mighty empires, hut heyond all he sees
the Son of man inheriting an everlasting kingdom (7 13).
Hosea sees the repentant people of Israel in the latter
days seeking Jeh their God, and David (the greater
David) their king (8 5). Micah sees the everlasting
Ruler coming out of Bethlehem clad in the strength and.


majesty of Jeh, who shall ‘‘be great unto the ends of the
earth’ (5 4). Zechariah, exulting in His near approach,
cries: ‘‘ Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, ie
daughter of Jerus: hehold, thy king cometh unto thee
(9 9), and he follows His varied course through gloom and
through glory, until the strong conviction is born in his
heart and expressed in the glowing words: ‘‘Jeh shail
be King over all the earth” (14 9). The more extreme
higher critics would, of course, deny that these are direct
predictions of Jesus Christ, hut most, if not all, would
admit that they are ideal representations which were only
fully realized in Jesus of Nazareth.


The Gospels present Christ as king. Mt, trac-
ing His genealogy, gives special prominence to His


royal lineage as son of David. He
2. The tells of the visit of the Magi who in-
Gospel quire for the newborn king of the Jews,
Presenta- and the scribes answer Herod’s ques-
tion tion by showing from Micah’s prophecy


that the Christ to be born in Bethle-
hem would be a “governor,” and would rule, “be
shepherd of my people Israel” (2 5.6). Lk’s
account of the Nativity contains the angel’s dec-
laration that the child to be born and named Jesus
would occupy the throne of David and reign over
the house of Jacob forever (1 32.33). In John’s
account of the beginning of Christ’s ministry, one
of His early disciples, Nathanael, hails Him as
“King of Israel” (1 49), and Jesus does not repn-
diate the title. If Mark has no such definite word,
he nevertheless describes the message with which
Jesus opens His ministry as the “gospel” of ‘the
kingdom of God” (1 14.15). The people nurtured
in the prophetical teaching expect the coming one
to be a king, and when Jesus seems to answer to
their ideal of the Messiah, they propose taking Him
by force and making Him king (Jn 6 15).

(1) Christ’s claim to be king—Christ Himself
claimed to be king. In claiming to be the Messiah
He tacitly claimed kingship, but there are specific
indications of the claim besides. In all His teach-
ing of the kingdom it is implied, for though He
usually calls it the “kingdom of God” or “of
heaven,”’ yet it is plain that He is the administrator
of its affairs. He assumes to Himself the highest
place in it. Admission into the kingdom or ex-
clusion from it depends upon men’s attitude toward
Him. In His explanation of the parable of the
Tares, He distinctly speaks of His kingdom, identi-
fying it with the kingdom of God. “The Son of
man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather
out of his kingdom all things that cause stumbling,
and them that do iniquity..... Then shall the
righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their Father’ (Mt 13 41-43). He speaks of some
seeing ‘‘the Son of man coming in his kingdom”
(Mt 16 28), of the regeneration, ‘when the Son of
man shall sit on the throne of his glory’ (Mt 19
28), of Himself under the guise of a nobleman who
goes “into a far country, to receive for himself a
kingdom,” and does receive it (Lk 19 12-15).

(2) Christ’s acceptance of the title—When the
mother of John and James comes asking that her
two sons may occupy the chief places of honor in
His kingdom, He does not deny that He is a king
and has a kingdom, while indicating that the places
on His right and left hand are already determined
by the appointment of the Father (Mt 20 21-23).
He deliberately takes steps to fulfil the prediction
of Zec: “Behold, thy king cometh,” and He ac-
cepts, approves and justifies the hosannas and the
homage of the multitude (Mt 21 1-16; Mk 11;
Lk 19; Jn 12). In His great picture of the coming
judgment (Mt 25), the Son of man sits upon the
throne of His glory, and it is as “the king’’ that He
blesses and condemns. The dying thief prays,
“Remember me when thou comest in thy king-
dom” (Lk 23 42), and Jesus gives His royal re-
sponse which implies full acceptance of the position.


1803


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA King, Christ as


(3) Christ charged and condemned as king —His
claim throughout had been so definite that His
enemies makc this the basis of their charge against
Him before Pilate, that He said that “he himself
is Christ a king,’ and when Pilate asks, “Art thou
the King?’ He answers, ‘Thou sayest,’? which was
equivalent to “yes” (Lk 23 2.3). In the fuller
account of Jn, Jesus speaks to Pilate of ‘‘my king-
dom,” and says ‘Thou sayest that I am a king.
To this end have I been born” (Jn 18 37). His
claim is perpetuated in the superscription of the
cross in the three languages: ‘This is the King of
the Jews,” and although the priests wished it to be
altered so as to detract from His claim, they yet
affirm the fact of that claim when they say: ‘Write
not, The King of the Jews; but, that he said, I am
King of the Jews” (Jn 19 21). The curtain of His
earthly life falls upon the king in seeming failure;
the taunt of the multitude, ‘Let the Christ, the
King of Israel, now come down from the cross”
(Mk 16 32), meets with no response, and the title
on the cross seems a solemn mockery, like the
elaborate, cruel jest of the brutal soldiers clothing
Him with purple, crowning Him with thorns and
hailing Him King of the Jews. :

(4) The witness of the resurrection and of apos-
tolic preaching.—But the resurrection throws new
light upon the scene, and fully vindicates His claims,
and the sermon of Peter on the day of Pentecost
proclaims the fact that the crucified one occupies
the throne. ‘‘Let all the house of Israel therefore
know assuredly, that God hath made him both Lord
and Christ, this Jesus whom ye crucified” (Acts 2
36). The early preaching of the apostles, as re-
corded in the Acts, emphasizes His lordship, His
kingship; these men were preachers in the literal
sense—heralds of the king.

(5) The testimony of the Epistles and Apocalypse.
—We need not consider in detail the testimony of
the Epp. The fact that Christ is king is every-
where implied and not infrequently asserted. He
is “Lord of both the dead and the living’ (Rom 14
9). He is risen “to rule over the Gentiles” (Rom
15 12). “He must reign, till he hath put all his
enemies under his feet”? (1 Cor 15 25). He is at
the right hand of God “above all rule, and author-
ity,” ete (Eph 1 20-22). Evil men have no
‘nheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God”
(Eph 6 5), and believers are “translated into the
kingdom of the Son of his love” (Col 1 13). He
has been given the name that is above every name
“that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow,”
ete (Phil 2 9-11). Those who suffer with Christ
are to “reign with him” (2 Tim 2 12), at “his
appearing and his kingdom” (2 Tim 4 1), and He
will save them “unto his heavenly kingdom” (2
Tim 4 18); “the eternal kingdom of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ”? (2 Pet 111). Of the Son
it is said: “Thy throne, O God, is for ever and
ever” (He 1 8), and He is a King-Priest “after the
order of Mol omaedeey] ae q ee fons nee
lypse, appropriately, the predominant aspect o
Chriet rehse of a king. He is the “ruler of the
kings of the earth” (Rev 1 5), “King of the ages”
(Rev 16 3), “King of kings’ (17 14; 19 16),
“and he shall reign for ever and ever’ (11 15).
The reality of Christ’s kingship is thus placed be-
yond all doubt. :

Il. Christ’s Title to Kingship.—After the analogy
of earthly kingships it might be said that Jesus

Christ is a king by birth. He was
1. By Birth born a king. His mother, like His

reputed father, “was of the house and
family of David?’ (Lk 2 4). The angel in an;
nouncing His birth declares that He will occupy
the throne of His father David. The Pharisees
have no hesitation in affirming that the Christ


would be Son of David (Mt 22 45; Mk 12 35;
Lk 20 41). Frequently in life He was hailed as
“Son of David,” and after His ascension, Peter
declares that the promise God had made to David
that ‘‘of the fruit of his loins he would set one upon
his throne’ (Acts 2 30) was fulfilled in Jesus of
Nazareth; while Paul declares that the gospel of
God was “concerning his Son, who was born of the
seed of David according to the flesh’ (Rom 1 3).
So that on the human side He had the title to king-
ship as son of David, while on the Divine side as
Son of God He had also the right to the throne.
David was king by Divine choice and appoint-
ment, and this was the ideal in the casc of his


successors. The figment of ‘Divine
2. By Di-  right’—by virtue of which modern
vine Ap- kings have claimed to rule—was, in the
pointment first instance, a reminiscence of the
Bib. ideal. But the idcal is realized
in Christ. Of the coming Messianic King, Jeh


said: ‘Yet I have set my king upon my holy hill
of Zion” (Ps°2 6), and the great proclamation of
Pentecost was an echo of that, decree: “Let all the
house of Israel therefore know assuredly, that God
hath made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus
whom ye crucified” (Acts 2 36), while the apostle
declares that ‘(God highly exalted him, and gave
unto him the name which is above every name”
(Phil 2 9), and again and again the great OT word
of Jeh is applied to Christ: “Sit thou on my right
hand, till I make thine enemies the footstool of thy
feet’? (He 1 13).

Often in the olden times kingship was acquired

by conquest, by superior prowess. According to

one etymology of our word “king,” it
3. By Con- means the “able man,” ‘the one who
quest can,” and everyone remembers Car-

lyle’s fine passage thereon. In the high-
est sense, this is true of Christ, who establishes His
sway over men’s hearts by His matchless prowess,
the power of His infinite love and the charm of
His perfect character.

Except in the most autocratic form of kingship,

some place has been given to the suffrage of the

people,.and the other phases of the
4. By the title have been confirmed and ratified
Free Choice by the voice of the people as they cry,
of His “God save the king!’ and no king is
People well established on the throne if he is

not supported by the free homage of
his subjects. Christ as king wins the love of His
people, and they gladly acknowledge His sway.
They are of one heart to make Him king.

JH. The Nature of Christ’s Kingship.—We
know that the Jews expected a material kmgdom,
marked by earthly pomp and state; a kingdom on
the lines of the Davidic or Solomonic kingdom, and
others since have made the same mistake.

The Scriptures plainly declare, Christ Himself
clearly taught, that His kingship was spiritual.

“My kingdom,” said He, “is not of
1. Spiritual this world” (Jn 18 36), and all the

representations given of it are all con-
sistent with this declaration. Some have empha-
sized the preposition ek here, as if that made a
difference in the conception: ‘My kingdom is not
of this world.” Granted that the preposition indi-
cates origin, it still leaves the statement an assertion
of the spirituality of the kingdom, for if it is not
from this kosmos, from this earthly state of things,
it must be from the other world—not the earthly
but the heavenly; not the material but the spiritual.
The whole context shows that origin here includes
character, for Christ adds, “If my kingdom were of
this world, then would my servants fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews.” Because it is
of an unworldly origin, it is not to be propagated by


King, Christ as
Kingdom of God


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1804


worldly means, and the non-use of worldly means
declares it to be of an unworldly character. So
that to assert that Christ means that His kingdom
was not to arise out of this world, but to come down
from heaven, is not at all to deny, but rather, in-
deed, to declare its essential spirituality, its unworld-
liness, its otherworldliness.

Throughout the NT, spirituality appears as the
prevailing characteristic of Christ’s reign. Earthly
kingdoms are based upon material power, the power
of the sword, the power of wealth, etc, but the
basal factor of Christ’s kingdom is righteousness
(Mt 5 20; 6 33; Rom 1417; Hel 8, ete).
The ruling principle in earthly kingdoms is selfish
or sectional or national aggrandizement; in the
kingdom of Christ it is truth. Christ is king of
truth. “Art thou a king then?” said Pilate. “TI
am,’’ said Christ (for that is the force of ‘thou say-
est that Iam a king’). “To this end have I been
born, and to this end am I come into the world, that
I should bear witness unto the truth,” and He adds
“very one that is of the truth heareth my voice’
(Jn 18 37). Elsewhere He says: “I am the... .
truth” (Jn 14 6), and at the head of the armies of
heaven He still wears the title “Faithful and True”
(Rev 19 11); but if righteousness and truth occupy
such a prominent place in His kingdom, it follows
that it must be distinguished by its spirituality.
His immediate subjects are spiritual men and
women; its laws are spiritual; its work is spiritual;
all the forces emanating from it, operating through
it, centering in it, are spiritual.

The Jewish idea of the Messiah’s reign was a
narrow national one. For them it meant the glori-

fication of the sons of Abraham, the
2. Uni- supremacy of Judaism over all forms
versal of faith and all systems of philosophy;
the subjection to Jewish sway of the
haughty Roman, the cultured Greek and the rude
barbarian. The Messiah was to be a greater king
than David or Solomon, but still a king after the
same sort; much as the limits of the kingdom might
extend, it would be but an extension on Jewish
lines; others might be admitted to a share in its
privileges, but they would have to become natural-
ized Jews, or occupy a very subordinate place. The
prophetic ideal, however, was a universal kingdom,
and that was the conception indorsed and empha-
sized by Christ. (For the prophetic ideal such pas-
sages may be noted as Pss 2, 22, 72; Isa 11 10; Dnl
7 13.14, etc.) Of course, the predictions have a
Jewish coloring, and people who did not apprehend
the spirituality might well construe this amiss; but,
closely examined, it will be found that the prophets
indicate that men’s position in the coming kingdom
is to be determined by their relation to the king,
and in that we get the preparation for the full NT
ideal. The note of universality is very marked
in the teaching of Christ. All barriers are to be
broken down, and Jews and Gentiles are to share
alike in the privileges of the new order. ‘Many
shall come from the east and the west, and shall
sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in
the kingdom of heaven” (Mt 8 11), and stranger
still to the Jewish ear: ‘The sons of the kingdom
shall be cast forth into the outer darkness” (Mt 8
12). In the parables of the kingdom (Mt 13), the
field, in which is sown the good seed of the kingdom,
is the world, and the various other figures give the
same idea of unlimited extent. The same thought
is suggested by the declaration, ‘‘Other sheep I
have, which are not of this fold” (Jn 10 16), also
by the confident affirmation: ‘I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all men unto myself’
(Jn 12 32), and so with many other statements of
the Gospels.

The terms of the commission are enough to show


the universal sovereignty which Christ claims over
men: “Go ye therefore,’ He says, as possessing
all authority in heaven and on earth, “and make
disciples of all the nations’ (Mt 28 19), coupled
with the royal assurance, ‘‘Ye shall be my witnesses
.... unto the uttermost part of the earth” (Acts
1 8). The Book of Acts shows, in the carrying out
of the commission, the actual widening of the borders
of Christ’s kingdom to include believers of all na-
tions. Peter is taught, and announces clearly, the
great truth that Gentiles are to be received upon
the same terms as the Jews. But through Paul as
the apostle of the Gentiles this glorious truth is
most fully and jubilantly made known. In the
dogmatic teaching of his Epp. he shows that all
barriers are broken down, the middle wall of the
fence between Jew and Gentile no longer exists.
Those who were aliens and strangers are now made
nigh in Christ, and “are no more strangers and
sojourners, but ye are fellow-citizens with the saints,
and of the household of God” (Eph 2 19). That
household, that commonwealth, is, in Pauline lan-
guage, equivalent to the kingdom, and in the same
Ep. he describes the same privileged position as
being an “inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and
God” (5 5). The Saviour’s kingdom cannot be
bounded by earthly limits, and all attempts to map
it out according to human rules imply a failure to
recognize the true Scriptural idea of 1ts universality.

(1) Kingdom of grace—of power.—Most of what
we have said applies to that phase of Christ’s king-
dom which is generally called his kingdom of grace;
there is another phase called the kingdom of power.
Christ is in a special sense king in Zion, king in His
church—that 1s universal in conception and des-
tined to be so in reality—but He is also king of the
universe. He is “head over all things’; Eph 1
22; Col 1 18, and other passages clearly intimate
this. He rules over all. He does so not simply as
God, but as God-man, as mediator. It is as me-
diator that He has the name above every name; it
is as mediator that He sits upon the throne of uni-
versal power.

(2) Kingdom of glory —There is also the phase of
the kingdom of glory. Christ’s reign now is truly glori-
ous. The essential spirituality of it implies its glory,
for as the spiritual far surpasses the material in value,
so the glory of the spiritual far transcends the glory
of the material. The glory of worldly pomp, of
physical force, of human prowess or genius, must
ever pale before the glory of righteousness, truth,
spirituality. But Christ’s kingdom is glorious in
another sense; it is a heavenly kingdom. It is the
kingdom of grace into which saved sinners now
enter, but it 1s also the kingdom of heavenly glory,
and in it the glorified saints have a place. Entrance
into the kingdom of grace in this earthly state
secures entrance into the kingdom of glory. _ Right-
ly does the church confess: “Thou art the King of
Glory, O Christ.” The kingdom is yet to assume
an externally glorious form. That is connected
with the appearing of Christ (2 Tim 4 1), the
glory that shall be revealed, the heavenly kingdom.
The kingdom in that stage cannot be entered by
flesh and blood (1 Cor 15 50), man in his mortai-
ity—but the resurrection change will give the fit-
ness, when in the fullest sense the kingdom of this
world shall have “become the kingdom of our Lord,
and of his Christ” (Rev 11 15).

It would be easy to multiply quotations in proof of
this. The great passage in Dnl 7 emphatically de-

clares it. The echo of this is heard in
3. Eternal the angel’s announcement: ‘“He shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever;
and of his kingdom there shall be no end” (Lk 1 33).
The reign of 1,000 years which so greatly occupies
the thoughts of so many brethren, whatever we may


1805


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


King, Christ as
Kingdom of God


decide as to its nature, is but an episode in the reign
of Christ. Heisreigning now, He shall reign forever.
‘Rev 11 15, above quoted, is often cited as applying
to the millennium, but it goes on to say “and he shall
reign [not for 1,000 years simply, but] for ever and
ever.” So, many of the glowing predictions of the
OT, which are often assigned to the millennium, indi-
cate no limit, but deal with the enduring and eternal.
_ The difficult passage in 1 Cor 15 24-28 must be
interpreted in the light of those declarations con-
cerning the eternity of Christ’s reign. It is evi-
dently as mediator that He delivers up the kingdom
to the Father. The dispensation of mediator comes
to anend. All has been done according to the pur-
pose of redemption. All the ransomed are finally
gathered home. He sees of the travail of His soul
and is satisfied. Obdurate enemies are subdued.
God’s glory has been fully vindicated. The Son
becoming subject to the Father, God governs di-
rectly and is all in all. But the Son in some sense
still reigns and through Him God’s glory will ever
shine, while the kingdom eternally rests upon
redemption.

We may summarize by saying tbat Christ is king
of truth, king of salvation (Mt 21 5; Zec 9 9);
king of grace; king of peace (Lk 19 38; He 7 2);
king of righteousness (He 1 8; 7 2); king of glory
(Mt 25 31-34); king eternal; king of saints, king
of the ages; king of kings (Rev 19 16). “Upon
his head are many diadems’” (Rev 19 12). See
also Curist, OrFricEs or. ARCHIBALD M’Caia


KING OF THE JEWS: The title applied in
mockery of Jesus, and put by Pilate on His cross
(Mt 27 29.37 || Mk 16 26, etc). See Jesus Cunist;
Kina, CurisT as.


KINGDOM OF GOD (OF HEAVEN), THE
(h Barttela rSv obpavdv—rod Oeod, hé basileia tin
ouranén—tot. theo):

I. Meganina anp ORIGIN or THE TERM

1. Place in the Gospels
2. ‘‘ Kingdom of Heaven”’ and ‘“‘ Kingdom of God”’
3. Relation to the OT (Daniel, etc)
II. Irs Use py Jesus—Conrrast wits JEwise Con-
CEPTIONS
Current Jewish Opinions
. Relation of Jesus to Same
. Growing Divergence and Contrast
. Prophetic Character of the ‘‘ Temptation"
Modern ‘Futuristic’ Hypothesis (J. Welss,
Schweitzer)
Weakness of This View
. Positive Conceptions of Jesus
III. Tue Ipes in History
1. Apostolic and Post-apostolic Age
2. Early Christian Centuries
3. Reformation Period
4, Later Ideas
IV. Pract 1n THEOLOGY
1. Danger of Exaggeration
2. Elements of Living Power in Idea
LIvERATURE

The “kingdom of God” is one of the most remark-
able ideas and phrases of all time, having begun to
be used very near the beginnings of history and
continuing in force down to the present day.

I. Meaning and Origin of the Term.—Its use by
Jesus is by far its most interesting aspect; for, in

the Gynop uate, at least, it is His
1. Place in watchword, or a comprehensive term
the Gospels for the whole of His teaching. Of this

the ordinary reader of Scripture may
hardly be aware, but it becomes evident and sig-
nificant to the student. Thus, in Mt 4 23, the
commencement of the ministry is described in these
words, “And Jesus went about in all Galilee, teach-
ing in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel
of the kingdom, and healing all manner of disease
and all manner of sickness among the people”; and,
somewhat later, in Lk 8 1, the expansion of His
activity is described in the following terms, “And


No pone


it came to pass soon afterwards, that he went about
through cities and villages, preaching and bringing
the good tidings of the kingdom of God, and with
him the twelve.” When the Twelve are sent forth
by themselves, the purpose of thcir mission is, in


‘Lk 9 2, given in these words, “And he sent them


forth to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the
sick.” In Mt 13 11, the parables, which formed
so large and prominent a portion of His teaching, are
aenoi ata: collectively ‘the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven”; and it will be remembered
how many of these commence with the phrase, ‘“The

kingdom of heaven is like.”
In these quotations, and in others which might
easily be adduced, it will be observed that the
phrases “the kingdom,” ‘the king-


2. *King- dom of God,” ‘the kingdom of
dom of heaven’? are used interchangeably.
Heaven” The last of the three, ‘‘the kingdom of


and ‘‘King- heaven,’’ is confined to the First Gos-
dom of pel, which does not, however, always
God” make use of it; and it is not certain
what may have been the reason for
the substitution. The simplest explanation would
be that heaven is a name for God, as, in the parable
of the Prodigal Son, the penitent says, “I have
sinned against heaven,’’ and we ourselves might
say, “Heaven forbid!’ It is not, however, im-
probable that the true meaning has to be learned
from two petitions of the Lord’s Prayer, the one of
which is epexegetic of the other, ‘“Thy kingdom
come. Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.”
Here the disciples are instructed to pray that the
kingdom of God may come, but this is equivalent
to the petition that the will of God may be done on
earth; Jesus is, however, aware of a region in the
universe where the will of God is at present being
perfectly and universally done, and, for reasons not
difficult to surmise, He elevates thither the minds
and hearts of those who pray. The kingdom of
heaven would thus be so entitled because it is
already realized there, and is, through prayer and
effort, to be transferred thence to this earth.
Although, however, the phrase held this master-
position in the teaching of Jesus, it was not of His
invention. It was employed before
3. Relation Him by John the Baptist, of whom we
to OT read, in Mt 3 1f, “And in those days
(Daniel, etc) cometh John the Baptist, preaching
in the wilderness of Judaea, saying,
Repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”
Indeed, the phrase is far older; for, on glancing
toward the OT, we come at once, in Dnl 2 44, toa
passage where the young prophet, explaining to the
monarch the image of gold, silver, iron and clay,
which, in his dream, he had seen shattered by “a
stone cut out without hands,” interprets it as a
succession of world-kingdoms, destined to be de-
stroyed by ‘a kingdom of God,” which shall last
forever; and, in his famous vision of the “son of
man” in 7 14, it is said, “There was given him
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all the
peoples, nations, and languages should serve him:
his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall
not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not
be destroyed.’ :
These passages in Dnl form undoubtedly the
roximate source of the phrase; yet the idea which
it represents mounts far higher. From the first
the Jewish state was governed by laws believed
to be derived directly from heaven; and, when the
people demanded a king, that they might be like
other nations, they were reproached for desiring
any king but God Himself. With this sublime con-
ception the actual monarchy was only a com-
promise, the reigning monarch passing for Jeh’s
representative on earth. In David, the man after


Kingdom of God THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1806


God’s own heart, the compromise was not unsatis-
factory; in Solomon it was still tolerable; but in the
majority of the kings of both Judah and Israel it
was a dismal and disastrous failure. No wonder
that the pious sighed and prayed that Jeh might


take to Himself His great power and reign, or that:


the prophets predicted the coming of a ruler who
would be far nearer to God than the actual kings
aud of whose reign there would be no end. Even
when the political kingdom perished and the people
were carried away into Babylon, the intelligent and
truly religious among them did not cease to cherish
the old hope, and the very aspect of the world-
powers then and subsequently menacing them only
widened their conceptions of what that kingdom
must be which could overcome them all. The
return from Babylon seemed a miraculous confirma-
tion of their faith, and it looked as if the day long
prayed for were about to dawn. Alas, it proved a
day of small things. The era of the Maccabees
was only a transitory gleam; in the person of Herod
the Great a usurper occupied the throne; and the
eagles of the Romans were hovering on the horizon.
Still Messianic hopes flourished, and Messianic
language filled the mouths of the people.

IL Its Use by Jesus—Contrast with Jewish Con-
ceptions.—Schiirer, in his History of the Jewish

People in the Time of Jesus Christ
1. Current (II, 11, 126 ff), has drawn up a kind
Jewish of Messianic creed, in no fewer than
Opinions eleven articles, which he believes was

extensively diffused at this period.
The Sadducees, indeed, had no participation in
these dreams, as they would have called them, being
absorbed in money-making and courtiership; but
the Pharisees cherished them, and the Zealots
received their name from the ardor with which they
embraced them. The true custodians, however, of
these conceptions were the Prosdechomenoi, as
they have been called, from what is said of them in
the NT, that they “waited for the kingdom of God.”
To this class belonged such men as Nicodemus and
Joseph of Arimathea (Lk 23 51), but it is in the
beginning of the Gospel of Lk that we are intro-
duced to its most numerous representatives, in the
groups surrounding the infant Baptist and the
infant Saviour (Lk 2 25.38); and the truest and
amplest expression of their sentiments must be
sought in the inspired hymns which rose from them
on this occasion. The center of their aspirations,
as there depicted, is a kingdom of God—not, how-
ever, of worldly splendor and force, but of right-
eousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost;
beginning in humility, and passing to exaltation
only through the dark valley of contrition.

Baek was the circle in which both the Baptist
and Jesus were reared, and it was out of this atmos-

phere that the conception of the
2. Relation kingdom of God came into thei: minds.
of Jesus It has frequently been said that, in
to Same making use of this term, Jesus accom-

modated Himself to the opinions and
language of His fellow-countrymen; and there is
truth in this, because, in order to secure a footing
ou the solid earth of history, He had to connect His
own activity with the world in which He found
Himself. Yct the idea was native to His home and
His race, and therefore to Himself; and it is not
improbable that He may at first have been un-
aware of the wide difference between His own
thoughts on the subject and those of His con-
temporaries.

When, however, He began, in the course of His
ministry, to speak of the kingdom of God, it soon
became manifest that by Him and by His con-
temporaries it was used iu different senses; and
this contrast went on increasing until there was a


great gulf fixed between Him and them. The
difference cannot better be expressed thau by say-
ing, as is done by B. Weiss, that He
8. Growing and they laid the accent on different
Divergence halves of the phrase, they emphasizing
and “the kingdom” and He “of God.”
Contrast They were thinking of the expulsion of
the Romans, of a Jewish king and court,
and of a world-wide dominion going forth from Mt.
Zion; He was thinking of righteousness, holiness
and peace, of the doing of the will of God on earth
as it is done in heaven. So earthly and fantastic
were the expectations of the Jewish multitude that
He had to escape from their hands when they tried
to take Him by force and make Him a king. The
authorities never acknowledged the pretensions of
One who seemed to them a religious dreamer, and,
as they clung to their own conceptions, they grew
more and more bitter against One who was turning
the most cherished hopes of a nation into ridicule,
besides threatening to bring down on them the
heavy band of the Roman. And at last they
settled the controversy between Him and them by
nailing Him to a tree.
At one time Jesus had felt the glamor of the
popular Messianic ideas, and at all times He must
have been under temptation to accom-
4. Prophetic modate His own ideas to the prej-


Character udices of those on whose favor His
of the success seemed to be dependent. The
“Temp- struggle of His mind and will with such
tation” solicitations is embodied in what is


called the Temptation in the Wilder-
ness (Mt 4 1-11). There He was tempted to
accept the dominion of the world at the price of
compromise with evil; to be a bread-king, giving
panem et circenses; and to curry favor with the
multitude by some display, like springing from the
pinnacle of the temple. The incidents of this scene
look like representative samples of a long experience;
but they are placed before the commencement of
His publie activity in order to show that. He had
already overcome them; and throughout His min-
istry He may be said to have been continually de-
claring, as He did in so many words at its close,
that His kingdom was not of this world..


It is very strange that, in spite of this, He should
be believed, even by Christian scholars, to have held
a purely futuristic and apocalyptic view

5. Modern of the kingdom Himself. He was all the
“Puturistic” time expecting, it is said, that the heavens
‘“ would open and the kingdom descend from
Hypothesis heaven to earth, a pure and perfect work
Gg: Weiss, of God. This is exactly what was ex-
Schweitzer) pected by_the Jewish multitude, as is
Zz stated in Lk 19 11; and it is precisely

sy et what the authorities believed Him to be
anticipating. The controversy between Him and them
was as to whether Jeh would intervene on His behalf or
not; and, when no intervention took place, they be-
lieved they were justified in condemning Him. The
premises being conceded, it is difficult to deny the force
of their argument. If Jesus was all the time looking out
for an appearance from heaven which never arrived,
what better was He than a dreamer of the ghetto? ‘
It was by Johannes Weiss that this hypothesis was
started in recent times; and it has been worked out by
Schweitzer as the final issue of modern


6. Weak- = speculation on the life of Christ (see his
ness of LS ihe teeta) Heese But in

tidy osition to it can be quoted not a few
This View sayings of Jesus which indicate that, in


His view, the kingdom of God had al-
ready begun and was making progress during His
earthly ministry, and that it was destined to make
progress not hy catastrophic and apocalyptic interference
with the course of Providence, but, as the grain grows—
first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in
the ear (Mk 4 26-29). Of such sayings the most
remarkable is Lk 17 201, ‘And being asked by the Phar-
isees, when the kingdom of God cometh, he answered
them and said, The kingdom of God cometh not with
observation: neither shall they say, Lo, here! or, Theret
for lo, the kingdom of God is within you."’ _‘'Observa-
tion,” in this quotation, is an astronomical term, de-
noting exactly such a manifestation in the physical


1807


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Kingdom of God


heavens as Jesus is assumed to have been looking for;
so that He denies in so many words the expectation
attributed to Him by those representatives of modern
scholarship.


In the nature of the case the kingdom must have
been growing from stage to stage during His earthly
ae ministry. He Himself was there,
7. Positive embodying the kingdom in His person;
Conceptions and the circle gathered around Him
of Jesus partook of the blessings of the king-
dom. This circle might have grown
large enough to be coextensive with the country;
and, therefore, Jesus retained the consciousness of
being the Messiah, and offered Himself in this char-
acter to His fellow-countrymen by the triumphal
entry into Jerus. But the citizens of the kingdom
had to enter it one by one, not in a body, as the
Jews were expccting. Strait was the gate; it was
the narrow gate of repentance. Jesus began by
repeating the initial word of the teaching of His
forerunner; and He had too much reason to con-
tinue repeating it, as the hypocrisy and worldliness
of Pharisees and Sadducees called for denunciation
from His lips. To the frailties of the publicans
-and sinners, on the contrary, He showed a strange
mildness; but this was because He knew the way
of bringing such sinners to His feet to confess their
sins themselves. To .the penitent He granted
pardon, claiming that the Son of man had power
on earth to forgive sins. Then followed the expo-
sition of righteousness, of which the Sermon on the
Mount is a perfect specimen. Yet it commences
with another watchword—that of blessedness, the
ingredients of which are set forth in all their com-
prehensiveness. In the same way, in other pas-
sages, He promises “rest,” ‘‘peace,’”’ and the like;
and again and again, where He might be expected
to employ the term “kingdom of God,” He substi-
tutes “life” or “eternal life.’ Such were the blessings
He had come into the world to bestow; and the
most comprehensive designation for them all was
“the kingdom of God.”

It is true, there was always imperfection attach-
ing to the kingdom as realized in His lifetime, be-
cause He Himself was not yet made perfect. Stead-
ily, from the commencement of the last stage of His
career, He began to speak of His own dying and
rising again. ‘To those nearest Him such language
was at the time a total mystery; but the day came
when His apostles were able to speak of His death
and ascension as the crown and glory of His whole
career. When His life seemed to be plunging over
the precipice, its course was so diverted by the

rovidence of God that, by dying, He became the

edeemer of mankind and, by missing the throne
of the Jews, attained to that of the universe, be-
coming King of kings and Lord of lords.

UL The Idea in History.—After the death of
Jesus, there soon ensued the destruction of the Jew-

ish state; and then Christianity went


1. Apos- forth among the nations, where to
tolic and _— have spoken of it as a kingdom of God
Post-apos- would have unnecessarily provoked
tolic Age hostility and ealled forth the accusa-


tion of treason against the powers that
be. Hence it made use of other names and let
“the kingdom of God” drop. This had commenced
even in Holy Scripture, where, in the later books,
there is a growing infrequency in the use of the term.
This may be alleged as proof that Jesus was being
forgotten; but it may only prove that Christianity
was then too much alive to be trammeled with
words and phrases, even those of the Master, being
able at every stage to find new language to express
its new experience.
In the early Christian centuries, “the kingdom of
God” was used to designate heaven itself, in which


from the first the development of the kingdom
was to issue; this, in fact, being not infrequently
the meaning of the phrase even in the


2. Early mouth of Jesus. The Alexandrian
Christian thinkers brought back the phrase to
Centuries designate the rule of God in the con-


science of men. St. Augustine’s great
work bears a title, De Civiiate Dei, which is a tr of
our phrase; and to him the kingdom of God was the
ehurch, while the world outside of the church was
the kingdom of Satan. From the time of Charle-
magne there were in the world, side by side, two
powers, that of the emperor and that of the pope;
and the history of the Middle Ages is the account ot
the conflict of these two for predominance, each pre-
tending to struggle in the name of God. The ap-
proaching termination of this conflict may be seen


‘in Wycliffe’s great work De Dominio Diino, this


title also being a tr of our phrase.
During the struggles of the Reformation the
battles of the faith were fought out under other
watchwords; and it was rather among


3. Refor- such sectaries as the Baptists, that
mation names like Fifth Monarchy and Rule
Period of the Saints betrayed recollection of

the evangelic phraseology; but how
near, then and subsequently, the expression of


men’s thoughts about authority in church and state
came to the language of the Gospels could easily be
demonstrated, for example, from the Confessions and
Books of Discipline of the Scottish church.
The very phrase, “‘the kingdom of God,” re-
appeared at the close of the Reformation period
among the Pietists of Germany, who, as
4. Later their multiplying benevolent and mis-
Ideas sionary activities overflowed the narrow
boundaries of the church, as it was
then understood, spoke of themselves as working
for the kingdom of God, and found this more to their
taste than working for the church. The vague and
humanitarian aspirations of Rationalism sometimes
assumed to themselves the same title; but it was
by Ritschl and his followers that the phrase was
brought back into the very heart of theology. In
the system of Ritschl there are two poles—the love
of God and the kingdom of God. The love of God
enfolds within itself God’s purpose for the world,
to be realized in time; and this progressive realiza-
tion is the kingdom of God. It fulfils itself esp. in
the faithful discharge of the duties of everyone’s
daily vocation and in the recognition that in the
course of Providence all things are working together
for good to them that love God.
IV. Place in Theology.—There are those to
whom it appears self-evident that what was the
leading phrase in the teaching of Jesus


1. Danger must always be the master-word in
of Exag- theology; while others think this to
geration be a return from the spinit to the letter.


Even Jesus, it may be claimed, had
this phrase imposed upon Him quite as much as
He chose it for Himself; and to impose it now
on theology would be to entangle the movements
of Christian thought with the cerements of the
dead. .

This is an interesting controversy, on both sides
of which much might be said. But im the phrase

“the kingdom of God” there are ele-
2. Elements ments of living power which can never


of Living passaway. (1) It expresses the social
Power in side of Christianity. A kingdom im-
Idea plies multitude and variety, and,


though religion begins with the indi-
vidual, it must aim at brotherhood, organization and
expansion. (2) It expresses loyalty. However
much kings and kingdoms may fail to touch the
imagination in an age of the world when many


Kingdom of Israel
Kings, Books of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1808


countries have become or are becoming republican,
the strength to conquer and to endure will always
have to be derived from contact with personalities.
God is the king of the kingdom of God, and the Son
of God is His vicegerent; and without the love of
God the Father and the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ no progress can be made with the Christian-
ization of the world. (3) It keeps alive the truth,
suggested by Jesus in the Lord’s Prayer, that the
doing of the will of God on earth is the one thing
needful. This is the true end of all authority in
both church and state, and behind all efforts thus
directed there is at work the potency of heaven.
(4) It reminds al] generations of men that their true
home and destiny is heaven. In not a few of Our
Lord’s own sayings, as has been remarked, our
phrase is obviously only a name for heaven; and,
while His aim was that the kingdom should be es-
tablished on earth, He always promised to those
aiding in its establishment in this world that their
efforts would be rewarded in the world to come.
The constant recognition of a spiritual and eternal
world is one of the unfailing marks of genuine
Christianity.

Lirsraturse.—See the works on NT Theology by
Weiss, Beyschlag, Holtzmann, Feine, Schlatter, Weinel,
Stevens, Sheldon; and on the Teaching of Jesus by
Wendt, Dalman, Bruce; Candlish, The Kingdom of God;
Robertson, Regnum Dei; Stalker, The Ethic of Jesus.

James STALKER


KINGDOM OF ISRAEL. See Israen, Kinc-
“DOM OF.


KINGDOM OF JUDAH. See Jupau, Kinc-
DOM OF.


KING’S DALE. See Date, Kine’s.


KING’S GARDEN (PaO, gan-ha-melekh) :
In Neh 3 15, mention is made of ‘‘the pool of
Shelah by the king’s garden”; in 2 K 26 4; Jer
52 7, “All the men of war fled by night by the way
of the gate between the two walls, which was by the
king’s garden’; see also Jer 39 4. The “king’s
winepresses” (Zec 14 10), which must have been
to the extreme S. of the city, were clearly in this
neighborhood. The references all point to the one
situation in Jerus where it is possible for gardens
to flourish all the year round, namely, the part of
the Kidron valley below the Tyropoeon which is
watered by the overflow from the Pool of Siloam
(see Sinoam). Here the vegetable gardens of the
peasants of Siloam present an aspect of green fresh-
ness unknown elsewhere in Jerus.

E. W. G. Masrerman

KING’S MOTHER: The queen-dowager occu-
pied a very important position at the court of
the kings of Israel, e.g. Bathsheba (1 K 2 19);
Maacah (15 13); Athaliah (2 Ch 22 2); and Ne-
hushta (2 K 24 8; Jer 13 18). See Queen; QUEEN
MorTHER.


KING’S POOL (428 MIR, berékhath ha-
melekh): This is possibly the Pool of Siloam (Neh
2 14), and may have been so named as being near
to the “king’s garden.”


KING’S VALE (72 py, ‘émek ha-melekh;
LXX in Gen reads 6 pedion [‘‘the plain’’] basilé6s,
in 2 8, hé koilds [‘‘valley’”’] tou basiléis; AV King's
Dale): The place where the king of Sodom met
Abram (Gen 14 17), and the situation of Absalom’s
monument (2 § 18 18). It was identical with the
Vale of Shaveh, and was evidently near Salem, the
city of Melchizedek (Gen 14 17). If Sate (q.v.)
is Jerus, then Absalom’s pillar was also near that


city, Jos writes (Ant, VII, x, 3), “Absalom had


erected for himself a marble pillar in the king’s dale,
two furlongs [stadia] from Jerus, which he named
Absalom’s Hand.” In all probability this “pillar”
was a rough upright stone—a maccébhah—but its
site is lost. The traditional Gr-Egyp tomb of
perhaps 100-200 years BC which has been hewn out
of the rock on the eastern side of the Kidron valley
is manifestly misnamed “Absalom’s pillar,’ and
the Kidron ravine (mahal) cannot be the King’s
Vale (‘émek). E. W. G. MasterMan


KINGS, BOOKS OF:


I. Titte

II. Scorr
TIY. Craracter or Booxs anp Position in Hesrew

Canon


1. Purpose
2. Character of Data

IV. Historicau Vauus
1. Treatment of Historical Data
2. Chronology
3. Value of Assyrian Records
4, Plan

V. Composition

1. Nature of the Books


2. Sources
3. Kent's Scheme
4. Jand E
VI. Dats
LITERATURE


I, Title—The Heb titlereads, D°D2, mlakhim,
“kings,’”’ the division into books being based on the
LXX where the Books of Kings are numbered 3d
and 4th, the Books of Kingdoms (BactAcwy»,
Basileton) the Books of Samuel being numbered
respectively 1st and 2d. Theseparation in the Heb
into 2 Books of Kings dates to the rabbinic Bible of
Daniel Bomberg (Venice, 1516-17), who adds in a
footnote, “Here the non-Jews [i.e. Christians] begin
the 4th Book of Kings.” The Heb Canon treats
the 2 Books of S as one book, and the 2 Books of
K as one. Hence both AV and RV read incor-
rectly, ‘The First Book of Kings,” even the use of
the article being superfluous.

Hl. Scope.—The Books of K contain 47 chs
(I, 22 chs; II, 25 chs), and cover the period from
the conspiracy of Adonijah and the accession of
Solomon (975 BC) to the liberation of Jehoiachin
after the beginning of the Exile (561 BC). The
subject-matter may be grouped under certain heads,
as the last days of David (1 K 1—2 11); Solomon
and his times (1 K 2 12—11 43); the Northern
Kingdom to the coming of Assyria (1 K 12 16—
2 K 17 41) (937-722 BC), including 9 dynastic
changes; the Southern Kingdom to the coming of
Babylon (1 K 12 1—2 K 26 21, the annals of the
two kingdoms being given as || records until the fall
of Israel) (937-586 BC), during which time but one
dynasty, that of David, occupied the throne; the
period of exile to 561 BC (2 K 25 22-30). A
simpler outline, that of Driver, would be: (1) Solo-
mon and his times (1 K 1-11); (2) Israel and Judah
to the fall of Israel (1 K 12—2 K 17); Judah to
the fall of Jerus (586 BC), and the captivity to the
liberation of Jehoiachin (561 BC) (2 18-25).

“Above all, there are th feat i i
which, in the mind of the patho: a bi prima pores
as shown by the prominence he gives ther in his narra-
tive. (1) The dynasty of David is invested with pe-
culiar dignity. his had two aspects. It pointed back
to the Divine election of the nation in the past, and gave
the guaranty of indefinite national perpetuity in the
fnture. The promise of ‘the sure mercies of David’
was a powerful uniting influence in the Exile. (2) The
Temple and Its service, for which the writer had such
special regard, contributed greatly to the phase of na-
tional character of snbseqnent times. ‘With all the draw-
backs and defacements of pure worship here was the
stated regular performance of sacred rites, the develop-
ment and regulation of priestly order and ritual law
which stamped themselves so firmly on later Judaism.
(3) Above all, this was the period of bloom of OT
prophecy. Though more is said of men like Elijah and
ilisha, who have left no written words, we must not


1809


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Kingdom of Israel
Kings, Books of


forget the desires of preéxiiian prophets, whose writings
have come down to us—men who, against the opposi-
tion of rulers and the indifference of the people, testi-
fied to the morai foundation on which the nation was con-
stituted, vindicated Divine righteousness, rebuked sin,
and held up the ideal to which the nation was called.”—
Robertson, Temple BD, 369 f.

Ill. Character of Books and Position in Hebrew
Canon.—The Books of K contain much historical
material, yet the historical is not their primary
purpose. What in our Eng. Bibles pass for his-
torical books are in the Heb Canon prophetic books,
the Books of Josh, Jgs, 18,2 8,1 Kand2 K being
classed as the ‘Earlier Prophets.”

The chief aim of these books is didactic, the im-
parting of great moral lessons backed up by well-

known illustrations from the nation’s
1. Purpose history and from the lives of its

heroes and leaders. Accordingly, we
have here a sort of historical archipelago, more con-
tinuous than in the Pent, yet requiring much
bridging over and conjecture in the details.

The historical matter includes, in the case of the
kings of Israel, the length of the reign and the

death; in the ease of the kings of
2. Charac- Judah there are included also the age
ter of Data atthe dateof accession, thename of the

mother, and mention of the burial.
The beginnings of the reigns in each case are dated
from a point in the reign of the contemporary ruler,
eg. 1 K 16 1: “Now in the 18th year of king
Jeroboam the son of Nebat began Abijam to reign
over Judah.”

IV. Historical Value.—These books contain a
large amount of authentic data, and, along with the

other books of this group which con-


1. Treat- —stitnte a contemporaneous narrative,
ment of Josh, Jgs, 1 8, 2 8, must be accorded
Historical high rank among ancient documents.
Data To be sure the ethical and religious


value is first and highest, nevertheless
the historical facts must be reckoned at their true
worth. Discrepancies and contradictions are to
be explained by the subordination of historical de-
tails to the moral and religious purpose of the books,
and to the diversity of sources whence these data
are taken, that is, the compilers and editors of the
Books of K as they now stand were working not for
a consistent, continuous historical narrative, but
for a great ethical and religious treatise. The his-
torical material is only incidental and introduced
by way of illustration and confirmation. For the
oriental mind these historical examples rather than
the rigor of modern logic constitute the nnanswer-
able argument.


There cannot be as much said relative to the chrono-
logical value of the books. Thus, e.g., there is a ques-
tion as to the date of the close of Ahaz

2. Chro- reign. According to 2 K 18 10, Samaria
nology fell in the 6th year of Hezekiah’s reign.
The kings who followed Hezekiah aggre-

gate 110 years; 586+4+110+29 (Hezekiah, 2 K 18 2) =
725. But in 2 K 18 13 we learn that Sennacherib’s
invasion came in the 14th year of Hezckiah’s reign.
Then 701+14=715. With this last agrees the account
of Hezekiah's sickness (2 K 20) In explanation
of 2 K 18 13, however, it is urged_by some that the
writer has subtracted the 15 years of 2 K 20 6 from the
29 years of Hezekiah’s reign. Again, e.g. in 1K 61,
we learn that Solomon began to build the temple 430
ears ‘after the children of Israei were come out of the
and of Egypt’? (LXX here reads 440 years). This
would make between Moses and David 12 generations of
40 years each. Bunt counting the Exodus in the reign of
Merenptah, 1225-1215 BC, and the beginning of the
erection of the temple 975 BC, or after, we could not
make out more than (1225-975) 250 years. Further,
if the total length of reigns in Israel and Judah as re-
corded in the || accounts of K be added for the two king-
doms, the two amounts do not agree. And, again, it is
not certain whether in their annals the Hebrews pre-
dated or post-dated the reigns of their kings, i.e. whether
the year of a king’s death was counted his last year and
the ‘first year of his successor’s reign, or whether the
following year was counted the first year of the succeed-


ing king a Curtis in HDB, I, 400, 1,f; Martiin £B, I,
coll. 777 ff).
The Babylonians and Assyrians were


3. Value more skilled and more careful chronologers,
of Assyrian and it is by reference to their accounts of

y. the same or of contemporary events that
Records a sure footing isfound. Hence the value of


such monuments as those of Shalmaneser

IV and Sennacherib—and here mention should be made
also of the Moabite Stone.

The plan of the books is prevailingly

4, Plan chronological, although at tlmes the ma-
—8 15, the Elisha stories).


terial is arranged in groups (e.g. 2 K 2 1

V. Composition.—The Books of K are of the
nature of a compilation. The compiler has fur-
nished a framework into which he has


1. Nature arranged the historical matter drawn
of the from other sources. There are chrono-
Books logical data, citations of authorities,


judgments on the character and deeds
of the several rulers, and moral and religious teach-
ings drawn from the attitude of the rulers in matters
of religion, esp. toward heathen cults. The point
of view is that of the prophets of the national party
as one against foreign influence. ‘Both in point of
view and in phraseology the compiler shows himself
to be strongly influenced by Dt.” (The principal
editor is styled RD, i.e. Deuteronomic Redactor.)
The Deuteronomic Jaw was the touchstone, and
by his loyalty to, or apostasy from, that standard,
each king stands approved or condemned. This
influence also appears in passages where the editor
takes liberties in the expansion and adaptation of
material. There is marked recurrence of phrases
occurring elsewhere chiefly or even wholly in Dt,
or in books showing Deuteronomic influence (Bur-
ney in HDB, II, 859f). In 2 K 17 we havea test
of the nation on the same standards; cf also 1 K
23f; 9 1-9; 2K 146; Dt 24 16.
In numerous instances the sources are indicated,
as “the book of the acts of Solomon” (1 K 11 41),
“the chronicles of the kings of Judah”
2. Sources (1 K 14 29), “the chronicles of the
kings of Israel” (1 K 16 31). A
score or more of these sources are mentioned by
title in the several books of the OT. Thus “the
history of Samuel the seer,” “the history of Nathan
the prophet,” ‘the history of Gad the seer” (1 Ch
29 29); “the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite,”
“the visions of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam
the son of Nebat” (2 Ch 9 29; cf 2 Ch 12 15;
13 22; 20 34; 32 32). Thus the “book of the
kings of Israel” is mentioned 17 t (for all kings ex-
cept Jehoram and Hoshea); the “book of the
chronicles of the kings of Judah” is mentioned 15 t
(for all except Ahaziah, Athaliah, Jehoahaz, Je-
hoiachin and Zedekiah). Whether the compiler
had recourse to the archives themselves or to a work
based on the archives is still a question.
Kent, Student’s OT (II, chart, and pp. lx-xxvi), gives


the following scheme for showing the sonrces:
(1) Early stories about the Ark (c 950


3. Kent’s BC or earlier), Saul stories and David
Scheme stories (950-900 BC) were united (c 850
BC) to make early Judacan Saul and


David stories. With these last were combined (c 600
BC) popular Judaean David stories (c 700 BC), later
Ephraimite Samnel narratives (c 650 BC), and very late
popular prophetic traditions (650-600 BC) in a first
edition of the Books of 8.

(2) Annals of Solomon (c 950 BC), early temple
records (950-900 BC), were united (c 800 BC) with
popular Solomon traditions (850-800 BC) in a ‘ Book of
the Acts of Solomon.” A Jeroboam history (900-850
BC), an Ahab history (c 800 BC), and a Jehu history
(c 750 BC) were_united with the annals of Israel (after
950 to c 700 BC) in the “Chronicles of the Kings of
Israel"? (700 or after), Early Ephraimite Elisha narra-
tives (800-750 BC), influenced by_a Samaria cycle of
Elisha stories (750-700 BC) and a Gilgal cycle of Elisha
stories (700-650 BC), were joined about 600 BC with the
‘Book of the Acts of Solomon” and the “' Chronicles of
the Kings of Israel’ in a ‘first edition of the Books of


Kings.” Bed
(3) The first edition of S, the first edition of K and


Kings’ Sepulchres
Kiriath-jearim


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1810


Isa, stories (before 550 BC) were united (c 550 BC) ina
final revision of S and K.

(4) From ‘‘annals of Judah" (before 900 to 650 BC or
after), temple records (before 850 to after 650 BC), and
a Hezekiah history (c 650 BC), was drawn material for
the ‘‘ Chronicles of the kings of Judah’’ (¢c 600 BC).

(5) From this last work and the final revision of 8
and K was taken material for a ‘‘Midhrash of the Book of
the kings of Israel and Judah" (c 300 BC), and from this
work, the final revision of S and K, anda eae temple
history (after 400)—itself from the final revision of 8
and K—came the Books of Ch (c 250 BC).

The distinctions between the great documents of the
Pent do not appear so clearly here. The summary,

(“epitome'') is the work of a Jewish re-
4. Jand E dactor; the longer narratives (eg. 1 K

F 17—2 K 8; 13 14-21) ‘‘are written in a
bright and chaste Heb style, though some of them
exhibit slight peculiarities of diction, due, doubtless (in
part), to their North Israelitish origin’’ (E). The writers
of these narratives are thought to have been prophets, in
most cases from the Northern Kingdom.

VI. Date.—There are numerous data bearing
on the date of K, and indications of different dates
appear in the books. The closing verses bring
down the history to the 37th year of the Captivity
(2 K 25 27); yet the author, incorporating his
materials, was apparently not careful to adjust the
dates to his own time, asin 1 K 8 8; 12 19; 2 K
8 22; 16 6, which refer to conditions that passed
away with the Exile. The work was probably
composed before the fall of Jerus (586 BC), and
was revised during or shortly after the Exile, and
also supplemented by the addition of the account
of the downfall of the Judacan kingdom. There
are traces of a post-exilic hand, as, e.g., the mention
of “the cities of Samaria” (1 K 18 32), implymg
that Samaria was a province, which was not the
case until after the Exile. The existence of altars
over the land (1 K 19 10), and the sanctuary at
Carmel, were illegal according to the Deuteronomic
law, as also was the advice given to Elisha (2 K 3
19) to cut down the fruit trees in time of war (Dt
20 19).


Lirerators.—K. Budde, Das Buch der Richter,
Mohr, Leipzig; John Skinner, ‘‘Kings,'’ in New Century
Bible, Frowde, New York; C. F. Burney, Notes on the
Heb Text of the Books of K, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1903; R. Kittel, Die Bicher der Kénige, Vandenhoeck
and Ruprecht, Leipzig, 1900; I. Benzinger, Die Bucher
.der Kénige, Mohr, 1899; C. F. Kent, Student's OT,
Scribner, 1905; S. R. Driver, Intro io the Lit. of the OT,
Scribner, new rev. ed, 1910; J. E. McFadyen, Jntro
to the OT, Armstrong, New York, 1906; Carl H. Cornill,
Einleitung in die kanonischen Bicher AT, Mohr, 6th ed,
1908; A. F. Kirkpatrick, The Divine Library of the OT,
Macmillan, 1891.

Wa iace N. STearns-

KINGS’ SEPULCHRES (2 Ch 21 20). See Jeru-


saLem, VIII.
KINSFOLK, kinz’fok. See Kinprep.


KINSMAN, kinz’man, KINSWOMAN, kinz’-
woom-an: Most frequently of the xh, goal, the
one who had a right to “redeem”; referring to the
custom of avenging the blood of a slain kinsman;
hence, a blood relative (Nu 5 8; Ruth 2 20; 3
9.12; 4 1.3.6.8.14; cf “performing the part of a
kinsman,” Ruth 3 13); in Ruth 2 1, better ren-
dered “‘acquaintance.” Also AAP, kardbh, one near,
rendered “kinsman” (Ps, 38 11); probably better,
‘neighbor.’ Once, INW, sh’ér, “flesh kin,” ren-
dered “kinsman” (Nu 27 11; cf Lev 18 6; 25 49;
20 19; 21 2, rendered “‘kin’’). scuyyevis, suggenés,
“of same race”’ (cf cvyyévera, suggéneia, “kindred”’),
used of blood relationship of varying degrees of
nearness (Lk 14 12; Jn 18 26; Acts 10 24; Rom
9 3; 16 7.11.21). Rendered “kin” in Mk 6 4,

Kinswoman: “NW, sh°’ér, “kin by blood,” or “by
flesh” (cf above; also Lev 18 121; also ef 18 6,
“near of kin” AV); also same root,’ fem. form,
MIND, sha’drah (Lev 18 17), is tra “kinswoman.”
In Prov 7 4, “Call understanding thy kinswoman”’


might be more accurately rendered, “thy familiar
friend,” RVm (from 9714, médha', acquaintance”);
ef similar rendering of méddha‘ath, under KinpRED.
Lk 1 36 RV, “kinswoman” (cvyyevls, suggenis),
AV “cousin” (suggenés); same is rendered ‘‘kins-
folk” (1 58 RV). Epwarp Bacsy PoLLARD


KIR, ktir, kir (WP, bir): The meaning of Kir is
“ineclosure” or ‘walled place,’’ and it is therefore
doubtful whether it is a place-name
1. Meaning in the true sense of the word. In2 K
16 9 it is mentioned as the place
whither Tiglath-pileser IV carried the Syrian
(Aramaean) captives which he deported from
Damascus after he had taken that city. In Am 1
5 the prophet announces that the people of Syria
(Aram) shall go into captivity unto Kir, and in
9 7 it is again referred to as the place whence the
Lord had brought the Syrians (Aramaeans) as
Israel had been brought out of Egypt, and the
Philis from Caphtor.

Except in one MS (LXX, A), where it appears

as the Libyan Cyrene (2 K 16 9), it is never ren-

dered in the LXX as a place-name.
2. How Thus the place whence the Syrians
Rendered were brought (Am 9 7) is not Ki,
in LXX but “the deep” or “the ditch” (LXX

éx BéGpov, ek béthrou, ‘“pit’’), probably
a tr of some variant rather than of the word ‘Kir’
itself. Comparing the Assyr-Bab kiru (for gtru),
“wall,” “inclosure,” ‘“nterior,’’ or the like, Kir
might have the general meaning of a place parted
off for the reception of exiled captives. Parallels
would be Kir Moab, ‘‘the inclosure of Moab,” Kir
Heres or Kir Hareseth, “the inclosure of brick”
(LXX hoi lithoi tov totchou). It seems probable
that there was more than one place to which the
Assyrians transported captives or exiles, and if their
practice was to place them as far as they could from
their native land, one would expect, for Palestinian
exiles, a site or sites on the eastern side of the Tigris
and Euphrates.

In Isa 22 5 occurs the phrase, ‘‘a breaking down.
of the walls, and a crying to the mountains” (mkar-

kar ktr w*-sh6“* el ha-hdr—‘‘asurround-
3. An ing of the wall,” ete, would be better),
Emendation and the mention of kir and shd«* here
of Isa 22:5 has caused Fried. Delitzsch to suggest

that we have to read, instead of kir,
ko‘, combined with sho“, asin Ezk 23 23. Follow-
ing this, but retaining ir, Cheyne translates ‘(Kir
undermineth, and Shoa‘ is at the mount,’’ but others
accept Delitzsch’s emendation, Winckler conjectur-
ing that the rendering should be “Who stirreth up
Koa‘ and Shoa‘ against the mountain” (Alitest.
Untersuchungen, 177). In the next verse (Isa 22 6)
Kir is mentioned with Elam—a position which a
city for western exiles would require.

The mention of Elam as taking the quiver, and
Kir as uncovering the shield, apparently against
4. Soldiers (the valley of the vision” (in or close

Paar to Jerus), implies that soldiers from


of Kir in
A these two places, though one might
fa expect them to be hostile to the As-


: : _Syrians in general, were to be found
in their armies, probably as mercenaries. See Fried.
Delitzsch, Wo tag das Paradies? 233; Schrader,
COT, 425. T. G. Princess


KIR OF MOAB (A874 “Pp, kir ma’abh; LXX
has 76 teiyos, i6 teichos, ‘the wall,” “fortress”): The
_ ame, at least in this form, appears

1. Identi- only once (Isa 15 1) as that of a city
fication in Moab. It is named with Ar of
R ; _ Moab, with which possibly it may be
identical, since ‘ar or ‘ir is the Heb equivalent of


1811


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Sings’ Sepulchres


Kiriath-jearim


the Moabite Kir. The Tg hence reads ‘‘Kerak in
Moab.” ‘There can be no doubt that the Kerak
here intended is represented by the modern town
of that name, with which, consequently, Kir Moab
is almost universally identified. It must always
have been a place of importance. It is mentioned
as Charakméba (XapaxuoBa) in the Acts of the
Council of Jerus (586 AD) and by the early geog-
raphers. It dominated the great caravan road
connecting Syria with Egypt and Arabia. The
Crusaders therefore directed attention to it, and
held possession from 1167 till it fell again into the
hands of the Moslems under Saladin, 1188. The
Chroniclers speak of it as in el Belka, and the chief
city of Arabia Secunda. Under the title of Petra
Deserti the Crusaders founded here a bishop’s see.
The Gr bishop of Petra still has his seat in Kerak.
‘Kerak stands upon a lofty spur projecting west-
ward from the Moab platean, with Wady ‘Ain
Franjy on the 8., and Wady el-Kerak
2. Descrip- on the N., about 10 miles from the
tion Dead Sea. The sides of the mountain
sink sharply into these deep ravines,
which unite immediately to the W., and, as Wady
_ el-Kerak, the great hollow runs northwestward to
the sea. It is a position of great natural strength,
being connected with the uplands to the E. only by
anarrow neck. It is 3,370 ft. above the level of the
sea. The mountains beyond the adjacent valleys
are much higher. The place was surrounded by a
strong wall, with five towers, which can still be
traced in its whole length. The most northerly
tower is well preserved. The most interesting build-
ing at Kerak is the huge castle on the southern side.
It is separated from the adjoining hill on the right
by a large artificial moat; and itis provided with a
reservoir. A moat also skirts the northern side of
the fortress, and on the E. the wall has a sloped or
battered base. The castle is then separated from
the town. The walls are very thick, and are well
preserved. Beneath the castle is a chapel in which
traces of frescoes are still visible. In days of an-
cient warfare the place must have been practically
impregnable. It could be entered only by two
roads passing through rock-cut tunnels. The main
danger must always have been failure of water
supply. There are springs immediately outside
the city; but those alone would not be sufficient.
Great cisterns were therefore constructed in the town
and also in the castle. The half-nomadic inhabit-
ants of Kerak today number some 1,140 families
(Musil, Arabia Petraea, III, 97). The Gr church
claims about 2,000 souls; the rest are Moslems.
They are wild and fearless people, not greatly in-
clined to treat strangers with courtesy and kindness.
In the spring of 1911 the town was the center of a
rising against the government, which was not
quelled until much blood had been shed.
W. Ewine
KIRAMA, ki-ra’ma, kir’a-ma (Kipapé, Kiramd;
AV Cirama): The people of K. returned with
Zerubbabel from Babylon (1 Esd 6 20); the
“Ramah” of Ezr 2 26 (q.v.).


KIR-HARESETH, kér-har’&seth, -ha-ré’seth
(MBWITVP , kir-hdreseth, Isa 16 7; in 2 K 3 25
AV reads Kir-haraseth [pausal form]); KIR-HERES
(WY VP, kir heres, Jer 48 31.36; in Isa 16 11
AV yeads Kir-haresh [pausal form]): Modern
scholars unanimously identify this city with Kir
of Moab. In Jehoram’s invasion of Moab it alone
withstood his attack; and on the city wall the king
of Moab sacrificed his son (2 K 3 25 ff). It was
obviously the capital, ie. Kir Moab. The name
ig generally taken to mean “city of the sun.”
Cheyne, however, points out (ZB, s.v.): (1) that


this explanation was unknown to the ancients;
(2) that ‘‘kir” is nowhere supposed to mean “‘city,”’
except in the compound names Kir-heres, Kir-
hareseth, and Kir Moab; (8) that heres, “sun,”’
nowhere has a fem. ending, and (4) that Isa 16
7 (LXX and Aq.) indicates d and not r in the second
part of the name (Aéceé, Déseth). He suggests,
therefore, that we should possibly read NWN Np,
kiryath hddhashah, “new city.” W. Ewine


KIRIATH, kir’i-ath (O74P, kiryath, “city”; AV
Kirjath): Mentioned (Josh 18 28) as a city of
Benjamin; has been identified with Kuriet el
‘Enab, “town of grapes,” a prosperous town on the
highroad between Jerus and Jaffa; it is sometimes
spoken of by the inhabitants as Kurieh. It is,
however, generally thought that Kiriath here stands
for Kirrara-sEarm (q.v.). See PHF, III, 132,
Sh XVII.


KIRIATHAIM, kir-i-a-tha’‘im (ODP, kirya-
thayim, “two cities”; AV Kirjathaim):

(1) A city in the uplands of Moab formerly held
by Sihon, and given by Moses to Renben, who is .
said to have fortified it (Nu 32 87; Josh 13 19).
It is named along with Elealeh and Nebo in the
former passage, and with Sibmah in the latter. It
was in the hands of Moab in Mesha’s time, and he
claims to have fortified it (M§,1.10). For Jeremiah
(48 1.23) and Ezekiel (25 9) it is a Moabite town.
Onom identifies it with Coraitha, a Christian vil-
lage 10 Rom miles W. of Madeba. This is the
modern Karaiyaét, about 11 miles W. of Madeba,
and 5 miles E. of Machaerus. This, however, may
represent Kerioth, while the towns with which it
is named would lead us to look for Kiriathaim to the
N. of Wady Zerka Ma‘in. From this city was
named Shaveb-kiriathaim, “the plain of Kiria-
thaim” (Gen 14 5).

(2) A city in the territory of Naphtali, assigned
to the Gershonite Levites (1 Ch 6 76), correspond-
ing to “Kartan” in Josh 21 32. W. Ewinae

KIRIATH-ARBA, kir-i-ath-ir’ba. See Hzesron.
KIRIATH-ARIM, kir-i-ath-a’rim (Ezr 2 25).
See KiniaTH-JEARIM.

KIRIATH-BAAL, kir-i-ath-ba’al.
JEARIM.


See Krrrata-


KIRIATH-HUZOTH, kir-i-ath-hi’zoth, k.-hi’ 26th
(Mz np, kiryath hugoth, “city of streets”;
LXX reads modes erratrewv, péleis epailedn, “city
of villages,” from which we may infer a reading
MEN, hdcérath, for TEN, hucdth; AV Kirjath-
huzoth): A place to which, after their meeting,
Balak and Balaam went together (Nu 22 39).
They met at “the City of Moab” (ver 36), which
is probably identical with Kir or Moas (q.v.);
Kiriath-huzoth was probably therefore not far from
that city. Some would identify it with Kiriathaim;
some with Kerioth; as yet there is no certainty.


KIRIATH-JEARIM,, kir-i-ath-jé’a-rim, k.-jé-a/rim
(BMT NM DP, kryath-y“arim, “city of thickets” ;
LXX 4 més "Iapelp, he pdlis Iareim; AV Kirjath-
jearim): One of the four chief cities of the Gibeon-
ites (Josh 9 17); a city of Judah (Josh 16 60),
evidently an ancient Sem “high place,” hence the
name ‘‘Kiriath-Baal” (ib); it was one of the places
on the border line between Judah and Benjamin
(Josh_18 14.15; 15 11 [where it is called ‘“Baalah’’];
ef 1 Ch 13 6). It is mentioned as in Judah (Josh
15 60; 18 14; Jgs 18 12), but if Kiriara (q.v.)


Kiriath
Kiss


is identical with it, it is mentioned as belonging to
Benjamin (Josh 18 28; in 2 8 6 2, Baale-judah).
Jgs 18 12 records that the men of Dan set forth
out of Zorah and Eshtaol and encamped in Mahan-
eh-dan behind (W. of) Kiriath-jearim.
1. Scrip- (InJgs 18 25 Mahaneh-dan [“thecam
ture Refer- of Dan’’] is described as between Zora
ences and Eshtaol; see MAHANEH-DAN.) To
this sanctuary the ark of Jeh was
brought from Beth-shemesh by the people of Kiriath-
jearim, and they “brought it into the house of


Ruined Church at Kuriet.


Abinadab in the hill [m ‘‘Gibeah’’], and sanctified
Eleazar his son to keep the ark of Jeh” (1 S 7 1).
Here it abode twenty years (ver 2; 2 S 6 2-4; cil
Ch 13 6; 2 Ch 14). Clearly it was in the hills
somewhere to the E. of Beth-shemesh.

The prophet Uriah-ben-Shemaiah, killed by Jehoi-
akim, belonged to Kiriath-jearim (Jer 26 20f).

In Ezr 2 25 (cf Neh 7 29), this place occurs
under the name “‘Kiriath-arim.” In 1 Esd 5 19
the name occurs as “Kiriathiarius.”’

The exact position of this important Israelite
sanctuary has never been satisfactorily settled.

Some of the data appear to be contra-
2. Position dictory. For example, Jos (Ant, VI,

i, 4) says it was a city in the neigh-
borhood of Beth-shemesh, while Eusebius and
Jerome (Onom) speak of it (“Cariathiareim’’) in
their day as a village 9 or 10 miles from Jerus on the
way to Lydda. But it is open to doubt whether
the reputed site of their day had any serious claims.
Any suggested site should fulfil the following condi-
tions: (1) It must harmonize with the boundary
line of Judah and Benjamin between two known
points—the ‘‘waters of Nephtoah,” very generally
supposed to be Lifta, and Chesalon, certainly
Keslé (Josh 16 10). (2) It should not be too far
removed from the other cities of the Gibeonites—
Gibeon, Chephirah and Beeroth—but those places,
which are all identified, are themselves fairly widely
apart. (3) Mahaneh-dan (‘‘the camp of Dan’’)
is described as between Zorah and Eshtaol, and
was W. of Kiriath-jearim; this, and the statement
of Jos that it was in the neighborhood of Beth-
shemesh, makes it probable that the site was near
the western edge of the mountains of Judah.
Zorah (now Sara‘), Eshtaol (now Esha‘a) and Beth-
shemesh (now ‘Ain Shems), are all within sight of
each other close to the Vale of Sorek. (4) The site
should be a sanctuary (or show signs of having been
such), and be at least on a height (Gibeah, 1 S 7
im). (5) The name may help us, but it is as well
to note that the first part of the name, in the form
“Kirathiarius” (1 Esd 5 19), appears to have sur-
vived the exile rather than the second.

The first suggested identification was that of
Robinson (BR, II, 11,12), viz. Kuriet el ‘Enab, the
“town of grapes,” a flourishing little town about
9 miles W. of Jerus on the carriage road to Jaffa.
The district around is still fairly well wooded (cf


“Jearim THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1812


y*drim=“‘thickets”). This village is commonly
known as Abu Ghésh, from the name of a robber
chieftain who, with his family, flour-


3. Sug- ished there in the first half of the last
gested century. Mediaeval ecclesiastical tra-
Identifi- dition has made this place the Anathoth
cations of Jer, and ahandsome church from the


time of the Crusades, now thoroughly
repaired, exists here to mark this tradition. This
site suits well as regards the border line, and the
name Kuriet is the exact equivalent of Kiriath 3 it
also fits in with the distance and direction given
in the Onom, but it cannot be called satisfactory in
all respects. Séba, in the neighborhood, has, on
account of its commanding position, been selected,
but except for this one feature it has no special
claims. The late Colonel Conder has very vigor-
ously advocated the claims of a site he discovered
on the south side of the rugged Wady Ismae‘n, called
Khurbet ‘Erma, pointing out truly that ‘Erma is
the exact equivalent of ‘Arim (Ezr 2 25), Un-
fortunately the 2d part of the name would appear
from the references in 1 Esd and in Onom to be that
part which was forgotten long ago, so that the
argument even of the philological—the strongest—
grounds cannot be of much value. The greatest
objections in the minds of most students are the
unsuitability of the position to the requirements of
the Judah-Benjamin frontier and its distance from
the other Gibeonite cities.

The present writer suggests another site which,
in his opinion, meets at least some of the require-
ments better than the older proposals. Standing
on the hill of Beth-shemesh and looking N.W., with
the cities of Zorah (Sur‘ah) and Eshtaol (Eshi’a) full
in view, a lofty hill crowned by a considerable
forest catches the eye. The village a little below
the summit is called Beit Mahsir, and the hilltop
itself is the shrine of a local saint known as Sheikh
el Ajam. So “‘holy” is the site, that no trees in this
spot are ever cut, nor is fallen brushwood removed.
There is a Wely or sanctuary of the saint, and
round about are scores of very curious and appar-
ently ancient graves. Southward from this site
the eye follows the line of Judaean hills—probably
the Mt. Jearim of Josh 15 10—until it strikes the
outstanding point of Keslé (Chesalon), some 2 miles
to the S. If the ark was taken here, the people of
Beth-shemesh could have followed its progress
almost the whole way to its new abode. Although
the name, which appears to mean “‘besieged’”’ or
“confined,” im no degree helps, in all the other re-
spects (see 2 above), this site suits well the condi-
tions of Kiriath-jearim.

Lirerature.—See PEFS, 1878, 196-99; PEF, III,
43-52; HGHL, 2251; BR, II, 111; Buhl, GAP, Index.

E. W. G. Masterman

KIRIATH-SANNAH, kir-i-ath-san’a (730 MP,
kiryath sannah; AV Kirjath Sannah): In Josh 15 49
it is called ‘‘Debir,” and is identical with Kirrata-
SEPHER (q.v.). As 7éds ypauudrwr, pdlis grammd-
ton, “city of books,” is the reading in LXX, the
most natural explanation is that M50, sanndah, is
a copyist’s error for "BO, sépher, but Sayce con-
siders this an ancient Can. name meaning “city
of instruction,” and that it occurs in the Am Tab
in the form “‘Bit’ sani.”


KIRIATH-SEPHER, kir-i-ath-se'fér (7DO NP,
kiryath spher; tri by many, as if it were Heb, as
“house of books.” LXX qwéAts ypappdrwv, pélis
grammdion; AV Kirjath Sepher; other suggestions
have been made: ‘“‘border-town” [Moore] or “‘toll-
town” [G. A. Smith]): In two || passages (Josh
16 15f; Jgs 1 11f), it is mentioned as identical
with Desir (q.v.), which has been frequently
identified with edh-Dhaheriyeh. Sayce would place


1813


Kiriath-sepher to the W. of Gath. See PEFS,
1893, 33-35.


KIRJATH, kir’jath, kir’jath. See Kiriars.


KIRJATH-ARBA, kdr-jath-ar'ba, kir-jath-ar’ba.
See K1R1aATH-aRBA,


KIRJATH-BAAL, kir-jath-ba’al, kir-jath-ba’al.
See KrriaTH-JEARIM.


KIRJATHAIM, kdr-ja-tha’im, kir-ja-tha’im. See
KiriaTHaM.


KISEUS, kis-é'us (Kicets, Kisevis; LXX, B
(Swete] reads Keisaios; AV Cisai): The great-
grandfather of Mordecai (Ad Est 11 2). See
Kisu, (5).


KISH, kish (W°P, kish; Kls, Kis, Kels, Kets,
“bow,” “power”): The name of five persons men-
tioned in the Bible:

(1) The son of Abiel and the father of Saul, the
first king of Israel. He was of the tribe of Benja-
min, of the family of the Matrites (1 8 9 1; 14 51;
ef Acts 13 21; 1 § 10 21). According to 1 Ch 8
33 and 9 39, “‘Ner begat K.” By reading ‘“Ner
begat Abner’ (cf 1S 14 51; 1 Ch 26 28), the
difficulty is at least partly overcome. In 1 Ch 12
1, K. is also mentioned as the father of Saul, and
again in 2 § 21 14, we are told that the sepulcher
of K. was located in the country of Benjamin, in
Zela. His place of residence seems to have been
at Gibeah.

(2) Another K. is mentioned (1 Ch 8 29f;
9 35 f) as the son of Jeiel and his wife Maacah. He
is usually supposed to be the uncle of Saul’s father.

(3) A Levite, the son of Mahli the Merarite
(1 Ch 23 211; cf 24 29).

(4) Another Merarite Levite in the time of Heze-
kiah (2 Ch 29 12).

(5) The great-grandfather of Mordecai, of the
tribe of Benjamin (Est 2 5). WILLIAM BAuUR


KISHI, kish’t (Wp, kishi, “‘snarer,” ‘“fowler’):
Father of Ethan, one of the singers David “set over
the service of song’’ in the house of the Lord (1 Ch
6 31); the ‘“Kushaiah” of 1 Ch 15 17 (cf 1 Ch 6
44).


KISHION, kish’i-on, kish’yon (JMWP, kishyon):
A city in the territory of Issachar (Josh 19 20),
given to the Gershonite Levites (21 28; AV wrongly
“Kishon”). The || passage in 1 Ch 6 72 reads
“Kedesh’’ instead of “Kishion.”” The true reading
is probably JIWIP, kidhshon. Conder suggests a
likely identification with Tell Aba Kedes, not far
from Taanach.


KISHON, ki’shon, kish’on (J1W°?, bishon;
Keaodév, Keisin): The “watercourse” or ‘torrent
stream” along the banks of which the great battle
was fought between Israel, led by Deborah and
Barak, and the army of Sisera, in the waters of which
so many perished (Jgs 4 7, etc). It is probably
certo earlier as ‘the brook that_is before
Jokneam” (Josh 19 11; see JoxngzaM). It appears
again as the scene of Elijah’s slaughter of the
prophets of Baal (1 K 18 40). “The torrent” par
excellence in the district is the modern el-Mukatia‘,
a stream which drains all the plain of Esdraelon to
the W. of the watershed—a line drawn from Iksdl
to Nain, and thence to el-Fuleh and Zer‘in. All the
water E. of this line, from the Nazareth hills, Tabor
and Little Hermon, flows down Wddy esh-Sherrar
and Nekr Jalad into the Jordan. The Kishon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA iiath-jearim


collects the streams from the western slopes of Gil-
boa in the rainy season; and the water from the
strong spring at Jenin. Contributions also come
from the copious fountains in the neighborhood
of Megiddo. At Sa‘adiyeh, again, some 3 miles
E. of Haifa, its volume is largely increased by
springs rising at the base of Carmel, on the edge of
the plain of Acre. From Jenin in the 8.E., the
deep torrent bed follows a westerly direction, with
numerous windings cutting the plain in two, until
it reaches the pass at’the northeastern base of
Carmel. Through the gorge between the moun-
tain and the hills of Galilee it reaches the plain of
Acre. From Sa‘adiyeh it flows in a deep sluggish
stream through the marsh-land to the sea near
Haifa. In this part the crocodile is said to have
been seen at times.

In the summer season the water from the springs is
largely ahsorbed by irrigation, and the upper reaches of
the river are soon dry. The bed runs along the bottom
of a trench some 20 ft. deep through the plain. It is
easily crossed at the fords by those who know how to
avoid the localities of the springs. In time of heavy
rains the trench is swiftly filled, and the soft soil of the
plain goes to mud. Remembering this, it is easy to
understand the disaster that overwhelmed the heavily
armed cavalry and chariots of Sisera. The chief ford
for long was to the W. of the gorge where the stream
issues into the plete of Acre, on the highway from Haifa
to Nazareth. ere it is now spanned by a substantial
bridge, while the railway crosses a little higher up.
At the mouth of the river it is generally easily forded
on‘the sand bank thrown up by the waves beating against
the current of the stream. The main traffic here is now
carried hy a wooden bridge.


The phrase nahal k*dhimim in Jgs 6 21 is not
easy of interpretation. EV translates, ‘that an-
cient river’; G. A. Smith, “torrent of spates”;
while others think it may refer to a stream other
than the Kishon. Guthe suggests that both names
may be derived from those of places adjoining the
river. Kishén may possibly mean the “tortuous”
stream, referring to the windings of its course.

W. Ewine

KISLEV, kis'lef (1202, kisléw; AV Chisleu, RV
“Chislev’’): The 9th month of the Jewish year,
corresponding to December. The word is found
in Neh 1 1 and Zec 7 1. The derivation is un-
certain. See Catennar.


KISS (pW), ndshak; idéw, philéd, naracidréw
kataphiléd, pnp, philéma): The kiss is common
in eastern lands in salutation, etc, on the cheek, the
forehead, the beard, the hands, the feet, but not
(in Pal) the lips (Cheyne, EB, s.v. ‘‘Salutations’’).
In the Bible there is no sure instance of the kiss in
ordinary salutation. Wehave in the OT nashak,
‘to kiss,”’ used (1) of relatives (which seems the origin
of the practice of kissing; cf Cant 8 1, “Oh that
thou wert as my brother . . . . 1 would kiss thee;
yea, and none would despise me”); Gen 27 26.27
(Isaac and Jacob); 29 11 (Jacob and Rachel); 33 4
(Esau and Jacob); 45 15 (Joseph and his brethren);
48 10 (Jacob and Joseph’s sons); 60 1 (Joseph and
his father); Ex 4 27 (Aaron and Moses); 18 7
(Moses and Jethro, united with obeisance); Ruth
1 9.14 (Naomi and her daughters-in-law—a fare-
well); 2S 14 33 (David and Absalom); 1 K 19
20 (Blisha and his parents—a farewell); see also
Gen 29 13; 31 28.55; Tob 76; 10 12. (2) Of
friendship and affection; cf 1S 20 41 (David and
Jonathan); 28 16 5 (Absalom and those who
came to him); 19 39 (David and Barzillai—a fare-
well); 20 9 (Joab and Amasa); Prov 27 6 (‘‘the
kisses [n’shthah] of an enemy’); 1 Esd 4 47 (“the
king stood up, and kissed him”). (3) Of love; cf
Cant 1 2, “Let him kiss me with the kisses [nshi-
kah] of bis mouth”; Prov 7 13 (of the feigned love
of “the strange woman’), (4) Of homage, perhaps;
ef 1 S 10 1 Samuel after anointing David king);


Kite
Know


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1814


Gen 41 40, ‘Unto thy word shall all my people be
ruled,’? RVm “order themselves,” or “‘do homage,”
AVm “Heb be armed or kiss” (ndshak); Ps 2 12,
“Kiss the son” (ARV), ERVm ‘Some versions
render, ‘Lay hold of [or receive] instruction’;
others, ‘Worship in purity’’’; some ancient VSS
give ‘Kiss [or, do homage] purely.’ (5) Of ¢dolatrous
practices; cf 1 K 19 18; Hos 18 2 (cf 8 5.6; 10
5); Job 31 27, probably, “kissing the hand to the
sun or moon”? (cf vs 26.27). See ApoRaTION. (6) A
figurative use may be seen in Ps 85 10; Prov 24 26;
Ezk 3 13, where “touched” is ndshak (see AVm).
(7) In Ad Est 18 13 we have “I could have been
content ... . to kiss the soles of his feet,” and in
Ecclus 29 5, “Till he hath received, he will kiss a
man’s hands”—marks of self-humiliation or abase-


ment.

In the NT we have philed, “‘to kiss,” “to be
friendly,” and kataphiles, “to kiss thoroughly,”
“to be very friendly’’—the first in Mt 26 48; Mk
14 44; Lk 22 47, of the kiss with which Judas
betrayed his Master. This was probably meant
to be taken as an expression of special regard, which
is expressed by the kataphiled of Mt 26 49; Mk 14
45; the same word is used of the woman who kissed
the feet of Christ (Lk 7 38.45); of the father’s
greeting of the returning prodigal (15 20); and of
the farewell to Paul of the Ephesian Christians
(Acts 20 37); philéma, “a kiss,” “a mark of friend-
ship,’”’ is used by Our Lord as that which Simon
omitted to give him (which may refer to ordinary
hospitality), but which the woman had bestowed
so impressively (Lk 7 45); of the kiss of Judas (Lk
22 48); and of the “holy kiss’? wherewith Christians
greeted each other, which, according to the general
usage we have seen, would be as the members of
one family in the Lord, or as specially united in
holy love (Rom 16 16; 1 Cor 16 20; 2 Cor 13 12;
1 Thess 5 26; 1 Pet 56 14). There is reason to
believe that, as a rule, men only thus greeted men,
and women, women. In the Apos Const (3d cent.)
it is so enjoined. W. L. WaLkKErR


KITE, kit (TN, ’ayyah; Ucrivos, tktinos; Lat
Milvus tetinus or regalis): A medium-sized member
of the hawk tribe (see Hawk). This bird is 27 in.
long, of bright reddish-brown color, has sharply
pointed wings and deeply forked tail. It issupposed
to have exceptionally piercing eyes. It takes moles,
mice, young game birds, snakes and frogs, as well
as carrion for food. Its head and facial expression
are unusually eagle-like. It was common over
Pal in winter, but bred in the hills of Galilee and
rough mountainous places, so it was less conspicu-
ous in summer. It is among the lists of abomina-
tions (see Lev 11 14 and Dt 14 13). Itis notable
that this is the real bird intended by Job to be used
as that whose eye could not trace the path to the
silver mine: :

“That path no bird of prey knoweth,

Neither hath the falcon's eye seen it’ (Job 28 7).
The word used here in the original Heb is ’ayyah,
which was the name for kite. Our first translators
used ‘vulture’; our latest efforts give “falcon,” a
smaller bird of different markings, not having the
kite’s reputation for eyesight.

GENE StTRaTTon-PoRTER


KITHLISH, kith’lish (W729), kithlish). See.


CHITLISH.


KITRON, kit’ron (IIOP, kitrén): An unidenti-
fied place in Zebulun, not possessed by the tribe
(Jgs 1 30). It may be identical with Kattath of
Josh 19 15. In the Talm it is identified with
Sepphoris, which is represented by the modern
village of Seffariyeh.


KITTIM, kit’im (O°M3, kittim, Isa 23 12; Jer
210; EMM, kittzyim, apparently pl. of kictt [not
found, but cf (4) below]; Kyro,


1. Two Kétioi, Klrwo, Kitiot, Knyrvelp, Ke-
Usages of tieim, Jer 210; Xerrielp, Chetiteim,
the Name Xertielv, Chetiiein): In Gen 10 4


the word is applied to the descendants
of Javan, and indicates, therefore, the Gr-Lat races,
whose territory extended along the coasts of the
Mediterranean, and included its islands. By the
side of Kittim are mentioned Elishah, Tarshish, and
Dodanim (=Rodanim of 1 Ch 1 7), generally ex-
plained respectively as Sicily with Southern Italy,
Spain and Rhodes. In its narrower sense Kittim
appears simply to have stood for the island of Cyprus
——it is mentioned between Bashan (=Pal) and the
isles of Elishah in Ezk 27 6.7, and with this Isa 23
1.12 agree, Kittim occurring in these passages be-
tween Tarshish, Tyre and Sidon.
The oldest etymology is apparently that of Jos,
who connects Kittim with the well-known old
Cypriote city Kition (Citium) (Ant,


2. In Its I, vi, 1), testifying to the settling of
Limited the Kittim on the island. This word
Sense he further connects with Chethima,


from Chethimus, and states that it
was on account of Cyprus being the home of those
people that all islands were called Chethim by the
Heb. The derivation of an ancient Chethim from
Chethimus, however, would make the m to be a
radical, and this, with the substitution of Ch (= Kh)
for K, renders his proposed etymology somewhat
doubttul.
The statement of Jos, that “all islands, and the
greatest part of the sea-coast, are called Chethim
[=Kittim] by the Hebrews,” on the


3. InIts other hand, must be taken as the tes-
Extended timony of one well acquainted with the
Sense opinions of the learned world in his


time. In Jer 210 and Ezk 27 6
the isles of Kittim are expressly spoken of, and this
confirms the statement of Jos concerning the ex-
tended meaning of the name. This would explain
its application to the Rom fleet in Dnl 11 30 (so
the Vulg), and the Macedonians in 1 Macc 1 1
(Xerrielu, Chetiteim) and 8 5 (Kitians). In the
latter passage the Gr writer seems to have been
thinking more of the Cyprian Kition than of the
Heb Kittim.

According to Herodotus (vii.90), Cyprus was
colonized from Greece, Phoenicia, and Ethiopia.
Referring to the plundering of the
4. Coloniza- temple of Aphrodite at Askalon by
tion of the Scythians (1.105), he states that her
Cyprus temple in Cyprus was an offshoot from
that ancient foundation, as reported
by the Cyprians themselves, Phoenicians having
founded it at Cythera, on arriving from Syria. The
date of the earliest Phoen settlements in Cyprus is
unknown, but it has been suggested that they were
anterior to the time of Moses. Naturally they
brought with them their religion, the worship of the
moon-goddess Atargatis (Derceto) being introduced
at Paphos, and the Phoen Baal at Kition. If
Kition_be, then, a Sem word (from the same root
as the Heb Kittim), it has been transferred from the
small band of Phoen settlers which it at first desig-
nated, to the non-Sem Japhethites of the W. Kition
occurs in the Phoen inscriptions of Cyprus under the
forms K(i)t(t) and K(z)t(t)t, the latter being by far
the more common (CIS, I, 1, 10,11,14,19, etc).
_ The early history of Cyprus is uncertain. Accord-
ing to the Assyr copy of Sargon of Agade’s omens,
that king (about 3800 BC in the opinion of Naboni-
dus; 2800 BC in the opinion of many Assyriolo-
gists) is said to have crossed ‘‘the sea of the setting
sun” (the Mediterranean), though the Bab copy


1815


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Kite
Know


makes it that of “the rising sun’”’—i.e. the Pers Gulf.
Be this as it may, General Cesnola discovered at
Curium, in Cyprus, a seal-cylinder


5. Its Suc- apparently inscribed ‘‘MAr-Istar, son.


cessive


of Ilu-bani, servant [worshipper] of
Masters


N arim-Sin,” the last named being the
deified son of Sargon. In the 16th cent.
BC, Cyprus was tributary to Thothmes III. About
the year 708 BC, Sargon of Assyria received the
submission of the kings of the district of Ya’, in
Cyprus, and set up at Citium the stele bearing his
name, which is now in the Royal Museum at Berlin.
Esarhaddon and his son AsSSur-bant-Apli each re-
ceived tribute from the 10 Cyprian princes who
acknowledged Assyr supremacy. The island was
conquered by the Egyp king Amasis, and later
formed part of the Pers empire, until the revolt
of Evagoras in 410 BC. The Assyrians knew the
island under the name of Yad(a)nanu, the ‘‘Wedan”
(Vedan) of Ezk 27 19 RV (ayce, PSBA, 1912, 26).

If the orthodox date for the composition of Gen
be accepted, not only the Phoenicians, but also the
Greeks, or a people of Gr-Lat stock,


6. The must have been present in Cyprus,
Races before the time of Moses, in sufficient
Therein number to make them the predomi-
and Their nant portion of the population. As
Languages far as can be judged, the Phoenicians


occupied only the eastern and southern
ortion of the island. Paphos, where they had
Built a temple to Ashtoreth and set up an ’dshérah
(a pillar symbolizing the goddess), was one of their
principal settlements. The rest of the island was
apparently occupied by the Aryans, whose presence
there caused the name of Kittim to be applied to
all the Gr-Lat countries of the Mediterranean.
Gr and Phoen were the languages spoken on the
island, as was proved by George Smith’s demon-
stration of the nature of the non-Phoen text of the
inscription of King Melek-yathon of Citium (370
BC). The signs used in the Gr-Cyprian inscrip-
tions are practically all syllabic.
The many influences which have modified the
Cyprian race are reflected in the ancient art, which


shows the effect of Bab, Egyp,
7. The Phoen and Gr contacts. Specimens
Testimony are to be found in many museums, but
of Cyprian the finest collection of examples of
Art Cyprian art is undoubtedly that of


the Metropolitan Museum of Art in
New York. Some of the fulltength figures are
life-size, and the better class of work is exceedingly
noteworthy. See Cyprus. T. G. Pincuses


KNEADING, néd’ing. See Brean, III, 2.


KNEE, né, KNEEL, nél (‘‘knec,” 2, berekh;
Aram, M278, ‘arkhubbah; yévu, gonu; “kneel”;
J2B, barakh; Aram. JR, berakh; yovuwerta,
gonupetés): Most of the uses are obvious, and the
figurative use of “knees” as the symbol of strength
(Job 4 4; He 12 12, etc) needs no explanation.
The disease of the knees mentioned in Dt 28 35
is perhaps some form of leprosy. In Job 3 12 the
“d:nees” seem to be used for the lap, as the place
where a child receives its first care. Three times
in Gen the knees appear in connection with primi-
tive adoption customs. In 30 3 a fiction is enacted
that, purports to represent Rachel as the actual
mother of Bilhah’s children. By a somewhat
similar rite in 48 12, Jacob (the “‘knees” here are
Jacob’s, not Joseph’s) adopts Ephraim and Manas-
seh, so that they are counted as two of the twelve
patriarchs and not as members of a single Joseph
tribe. In the same way Machir’s children are
adcpted by Joseph in 50 23, and this is certainly
connected with the counting of Machir (instead of


Manasseh) as one of the tribes in Jgs 6 14. See
Trises; and for the idea underlying this paternal
adoption, ef Turco. From among classical instances
of the same customs compare Homer, Odyssey, xix.
401 ff, where Autolukos, grandfather of Ulysses, re-
ceives the newborn grandchild on his knees and
gives him hisname. Thus also we have to under-
stand the numerous representations in Egyp sculp-
ture, showing the king as an infant on the knees or
the lap of a goddess.

Kneeling was less commonly an attitude of prayer
among the Jews than was standing, but references
to kneeling are of course abundant. For kneeling
(or prostrating one’s self) before a superior, see
ATTITUDE, 2; SALUTATION.

Burton Scorr Easton

KNIFE, nif: (1) M9979, ma’ dkheleth, lit. an in-
strument for eating; but used of large knives for
slaying animals, cutting up a carcase or a sacrificial
victim (Gen 22 6.10; Jgs 19 29; Prov 30 14).
(2) AW, herebh, rendered generally “sword,” but
in Josh 5 2.3 of stone knives for circumcision (cf
Ex 4 25), probably of similar knives in 1 K 18
28, used by Baal prophets in gashing themselves.
In Ezk 6 12 AV, “knife,” probably better RV,


Egyptian Stone Knives.


Assyrian Bronze Knives.
(Brit. Mus.)


“sword.”? (3) 2K, ta‘ar, usually rendered “razor,”
in combination with \DOM, ha-sdphér, ‘knife of the
writer,” or “penknife” (Jer 36 23). (4) Dop>rya,
mahdlaphim, “‘slaughter-knives’” (Ezr 19). (5)
P2W, sakkin, Aram., “knife” (Prov 23 2). Early
knives were commonly made of sharp stones, esp.
of flint, later of bronze and iron. The former re-
mained in use in religious ceremonies long after the
latter were in common use. Knives were not gen-
erally used at meals, meats being cut into bits before
served, and bread being broken into fragments.
Herod used a knife for paring apples, and attempted
suicide with the instrument (Jos, Ant, XVII, vii, 1;
BJ, I, xxxiii, 7). Epwarp Bacspy PoLLarD


KNOCK, nok (kpotw, krovd): The oriental
house was fitted with heavy doors which were bolted
and locked with wooden keys too large to be carried
about, so that even a member of the household could
not secure entrance until in response to his knock
or call the door should be opened by someone
within. At night the delay would be increased
by the difficulty of arousing the inmates sleeping
within the inner chambers. To persons familiar
with such experiences, the words of Jesus concern-
ing a higher entrance, “Knock, and it shall be
opened unto you” (Mt 7 7; Lk 12 36), would
have a unique force not easy for us to appreciate.

Russe_L BenyamMin MILLER

EKNOP, nop: In Ex 25 31 ff; 37 17 ff (kaphtor),
part of the ornaments of the golden candlestick;
in 1 K 6 18; 7 24 (p*ka'tm), gourd-like ornaments
of the lining of Solomon’s temple, and of the brazen
sea (in 1 K 6 18, RVm “‘gourds’’). See Canpiz-
stick, GoLDEN; TEMPLE; Sra, Tor Morten.


KNOW, né, KNOWLEDGE, nol’ej, nol'ij Gn
Heb chiefly 91), yadha‘, noun NYT, datath; in Gr
ywaoko, gindskd, of8a, ofda; “to know fully,”


Koa
Korahites


emiywaoke, epigindskd, noun yvaors, gnésis, émlyva-
os, epignésis): Knowledge strictly is the appre-
hension by the mind of some fact or truth in accord-
ance with its real nature; in a personal relation the
intellectual act is necessarily conjoied with the
element of affection and will (choice, love, favor, or,
conversely, repugnance, dislike, etc). Knowledge
is distinguished from “‘opinion” by its greater cer-
tainty. The mind is constituted with the capacity
for knowledge, and the desire to possess and in-
crease it. The character of knowledge varies with
its object. The senses give knowledge of outward
appearances; the intellect connects and reasons
about these appearances, and arrives at general
laws or truths; moral truth is apprehended through
the power inherently possessed by men of dis-
tinguishing right and wrong in the light of moral
principles; spiritual qualities require for their ap-
prehension spiritual sympathy (‘‘They are spiritu-
ally judged,” 1 Cor 2 14). The highest knowledge
possible to man is the knowledge of God, and while
there is that in God’s infinity which transcends
man’s power of comprehension (Job 11 7.9), God
is knowable in the measure in which He has revealed
Himself in creation (Rom 1 19.20, “that which is
known of God,” etc), and supremely in Jesus Christ,
who alone perfectly knows the Father, and reveals
Him to man (Mt 11 27). This knowledge of God
in Jesus Christ is “life eternal” (Jn 17 3). Knowl-
edge is affirmed of both God and man, but with
the wide contrast that God’s knowledge is absolute,
unerring, complete, intuitive, embracing all things,
past, present, and future, and searching the inmost
thoughts of the heart (Ps 139 1.23); whereas man’s
is partial, imperfect, relative, gradually acquired,
and largely mixed with error (“Now we see in a
mirror darkly .. .. in part,” 1 Cor 13 12). All
these points about knowledge are amply brought
out in the Scripture usage of the terms. A large
part of the usage necessarily relates to natural
knowledge (sometimes with a carnal connotation,
as Gen 4 1.17), but the greatest stress also is laid
on the possession of moral and spiritual knowledge
(e.g. Ps 119 66; Prov 1 4.7.22.29; 8 10, etc; Lk
177; Rom 15 14; 2 Pet 1 5.6). The_ highest
knowledge, as said, is the knowledge of God and
Christ, and of God’s will (Hos 6 6; Rom 11 33;
Eph 1 17; 4 13; Phil 1 9; 3 8; Col 1 9.10, etc).
The moral conditions of spiritual knowledge are
continually insisted on (“If any man willeth to do
his will, he shall know of the teaching, whether it is
of God,” Jn 7 17). On the other hand, the pride
of intellectual knowledge is condemned; it must be
joined with love (‘Knowledge puffeth up,’’ 1 Cor
8 1). The stronger term epignésis is used to de-
note the full and more perfect knowledge which is
possessed in Christ, the conditions of which are
humility and love. Of knowledge as connoting
favor, choice, on the part of God, there are many
examples (Ps 1 6, ‘Jeh knoweth the way of the
righteous”; Gal 4 9, ‘know God, or rather to be
known by God”; cf Rom 8 29, “whom he fore-
knew”). See FoREKNOWLEDGE. James ORR


KOA, ko’a Op, ko"): A people named with
Pekod and Shoa as enemies of Jerus (Ezk 23 23).
Their location was probably N.E. of Babylonia.


KOHATH, ko’hath, KOHATHITES, ko’hath-its
(MNP, kehath, P., kohathi; Kaé0, Kadth): Second
son of Levi, and ancestor of Moses and Aaron (Gen
4611; Ex 6 16-20; Nu 317; 1 Ch61, etc).
The Kohathites formed one of the three divisions
of the tribe of Levi; the other two being the Ger-
shonites and the Merarites (Nu 3 17 ff). The
Kohathites consisted of four families, the Amramites,
the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the Uzzielites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1816


(Nu 3 19.27, etc). Their place in the wilderness
was on the southern side of the tabernacle (Nu 3
29), and their number is given (from a month old)
as 8,600 (ver 28). Their special charge was ‘“‘the
ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the
altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith
they minister, and the screen, and all the service
thereof” (ver 31; cf 7 9). After the conquest 23
cities were assigned thera by lot (Josh 21 4.5 ff).
In David’s time and after, Heman, a Kohathite,
and his family had a prominent place in the service
of the music of the sanctuary (1 Ch 6 33 ff; 16
41 fi; 26 1 ff); David likewise divided the Levites
into courses (the Kohathites, 23 12-20; 24 20-25).
We read of the Kohathites in the reign of Jehosha-
phat at Engedi (2 Ch 20 19), and in connection
with the cleansing of the temple under Hezekiah
(2 Ch 29 12.14). JAMES ORR


KOHELETH, ké-hel’eth (MOMP, kaheleth). See
Ecc.estastes.


KOLAIAH, ké-la’ya, ké-li’a (M2'P, kalayah,
“voice of Jeh’’):

(1) A Benjamite, son of Maaseiah (Neh 11 7).

(2) Father of Ahab, a false prophet and a lecher-
ous man (Jer 29 21-23).


KONAE, ko’né (Kova, Kond): Some MSS have
xéyas, kémas, from which we have in AV “‘the vil-
lages.”’ The name occurs in the account of the
measures taken to secure the country against
Holofernes (Jth 4 4). If Kéna be correct, we may
possibly identify the place with Cyamon.


KOPH, kof (P, kdph): The 19th letter of the Heb
alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopaedia as
k (intense). It came also to be used for the num-
ber 100. For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


KOR, kor. See Cor.


KORAH, k6’ra (MJP , korah, “baldness,” possibly;
Képe, Kére):

(1) One of the 3 sons of Oholibamah, Esau’s
Hivite wife. The account says that the 3 were born
in Canaan before Esau withdrew to the Seir
mountain country. They are mentioned 3 t in the
brief account from 3 points of view (Gen 36 5.14.
18; 1 Ch 1 35), the 3d mention being in the list
of “chiefs.”

(2) One of the sons of Eliphaz, the son of Adah,
Esau’s Hittite wife (Gen 36 16). He is mentioned
as one of the Edomite ‘‘chiefs.”

If one has the habit, finding a statement any-
where, of thinking that the statement ought to be
changed into something else, he will be interested in
the attempts to identify these Edomite Korahs with
Korah (8).

(3) A son of Hebron (1 Ch 2 43), the son of
Mareshah, mentioned in the Caleb group of families
in Judah.

(4) Theson of Izhar the son of Kohath the son
of Levi (Ex 6 16 ff; Nu 16 1; 1 Ch 6 18.31-38),
a@ younger contemporary of Moses. There may
have been generations, omitted in the record,
between Izhar and K.; that is a natural way of
accounting for Amminadab (1 Ch 6 22-30).

This Korah is best known as the man whom the
opening earth is said to have swallowed up along

with his associates when they were
1. The challenging the authority of Moses
Catastrophe and Aaron in the wilderness (Nu 16,
in the 17). K. is presented as the principal
Wilderness in the affair. The company is spoken

of as his company, and those who were
swallowed up as being “all the men that apper-


1817


tained unto K.” (Nu 16 11.32). It is under his
name that the affair is referred to (Nu 26 9; 27 3).
But Dathan and Abiram of the tribe of Reuben are
not much less prominent than K. In Nu 16 and
26 they are mentioned with K., and are mentioned
without him in Dt 11 6 and Ps 106 17. Another
Reubenite, On, the son of Peleth, was in the con-
spiracy. Jt has been inferred that he withdrew,
but there is no reason either for or against the infer-
ence. Haually baseless is the inference that Zelo-
phehad of Manasseh joined it, but withdrew (Nu
27 3). The account implies that there were other
Levites in it besides K. (Nu 16 7-10), and it par-
ticularly mentions 250 “men of renown,’’ princes,
such men as would be summoned if there were
a public assembly (Nu 16 2.17.35). These men,
apparently, were of different tribes.

The position taken by the malcontents was that
“all the congregation are holy, every one of them,”
and that it was therefore a usurpation for Moses
and Aaron to confine the functions of an incense-
burning priest to Aaron alone. Logically, their
objection lay equally against the separation of
Aaron and his sons from the rest of the Levites, and
against the separation of the Levites from the rest
of the people. On the basis of this, Moses made
expostulation with the Levites. He arranged that
K. and the 250, along with Aaron, should take their
places at the doorway of the tent of meeting, with
their censers and fire and incense, so that Jeh might
indicate His will in the matter. Dathan and
Abiram insolently refused his proposals.

The record says that K.’s “whole congregation,”
including himself and the 250 with their censers,
met Moses and Aaron and “all the congregation’
of Israel at the doorway of the tent of meeting.
For the purposes of the transaction in hand the
tent was now “the mishkan of K., Dathan and
Abiram,” and their followers. Jeh directed Moses
to warn all other persons to leave the vicinity.
Dathan and Abiram, however, were not at the
mishkan. The account says that Moses, followed
by the elders of Israel, went to them to their tents;
that he warned all persons to leave that vicinity
also; that Dathan and Abiram and the households
stood near the tents; that the earth opened and
swallowed them and their property and all the ad-
herents of K. who were on the spot; that fire from
Jeh devoured the 250 who offered incense. The
narrative does not say whether the deaths by fire
and by the opening of the earth were simultaneous.
It does not say whether K.’s sons participated in the
rebellion, or what became of K. himself. In the
allusion in Nu 26 we are told, apparently, that
K. was swallowed up, and that “the sons of K. died
not.’ The deaths of the principal offenders, by
fire and by being swallowed up, were followed by a
plague in which 14,700 perished (Nu 16 49 [Heb
17 14)).

Any appreciative reader sees at once that we have here
either a history of certain miraculous facts, or a wonder-

story devised for teaching religious lessons.


As a story it is artistically admirable—


2. Critical Sumeiently complicated to be interesting,


Treatments but clear and graphic and to the point. In
of This the feb there are 2 or 3 instances of in-

complete grammatical construction, such
Story as abound in the early literary products


of any language, when these have been
fortunate enough to escape editorial polishing. In such
a case it is possibly not unwise just to take a story as it
stands. Nothing will be added to either its religious or
its literary value by subjecting it to doubtful alleged

iti rocesses. y came

ea Cer one has committed himself to certain criti-
cal traditions concerning the Hex, that brings him under
obligation to lead this story into conformity with the rest
of his theory. Attempts of this kind have been numer-
ous. Some hold that the K. of this narrative is the
Edomite K., and that Peleth means Phili, and that our
story originally grew out of some claim made by Edom-
ites and Philis. Itis held that the story of K. was origi-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Koa
Korahites


nally one story, and that of Dathan and Abiram an-
other, and that someone manipulated the two and put
them together. See the treatments of the Book of Nu
in Driver, Intro; Addis, Documents of the Hex; Carpen-
ter and Battersby, Hex; Bacon, Ez; Paterson on Nu, in
the Polychrome Buble. These and other like works give
source-analyses of our story. Some of the points they
make are plausible. In such a case no one claims any
adequate basis of fact for his work; each theory is simply
a congeries of ingenious guesses, and no two of the
guessers guess alike.

As in many other Blb. instances, one of the results of
the alleged critlcal study is the resolving of a particularly
fine story into two or more supposed earlier stories each
of which is absolutely bald and crude and uninteresting,
the earlier stories and the combining of these into their
present form betas alike regarded as processes of legend-
ary accretion. The necessary inference is that the fine
story we now have was not the product of some gifted
mind, gulded by facts and ey literary and religious in-
spiratlon, but is an accidental result of mere patchwork.
Such a theory does not commend itself to persons of lit-
erary appreciation.

Witus J. BescHer

KORAHITES, ko’ra-its CMP, korht), SONS
OF KORAH (3p "23, bené korah; in AV appears
also as Korhite, Kohathite, Kore): This phrase is
used to denote Assir and Elkanah and Abiasaph,
Korah’s 3 individual sons (Ex 6 24; cf Nu 26 11).
But its more frequent use, and that to which interest
attaches, is in the titles of some of the Pss.


The genealogical details concerning K. are rather full.
In 3 places we find the list of the 7 successive generations
closing with the prophet Samuel and his son Joel (1 Ch
6 31-38.22-30; 1 11.20; 8 2); the two in Ch
mention most of the generations between K. and Joel.
The fragmentary lists in 1 Ch 9, 25, 26 connect the
list with the 4 generations following Joel (1 Ch 6 33;
9 19-31, 26 1ff), and with 2 generations in the very
latest Bible times (1 Ch 9 31).

The adj. “Korhite"’ appears also in AV as ‘Korathite,”
“Kore,"’ and ‘‘Korahite,"’ the last being the form pre-
ferred in ERV. lt is used 4 t in the sing. Once it
designates an individual (1 Ch 9 31); 3 _t it denotes
the successors of K. taken collectively (Ex 6 24; Nu
26 58; 1 Ch 26 19); 4 t it is used in the pl., denoting
the members of this succession of men (1 Ch 9 19; 12
6; 26.1; 2.Ch 20 19). As variants of this use, ‘‘the
sons of the Korahites'’ appears once, and ‘‘the children of
the Korahites"’ once (1 Ch 26 19; 2 Ch 20 19).


In these various passages the K. families are
counted like the other Levitical families. In 1 Ch
12 6 we have an account of 5 men who are desig-
nated as “the Korahites,” who joined David when
he was at Ziklag—Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer,
Jashobeam. They are described as expert warriors,
esp. with the bow and sling, and as being “of Saul’s
brethren of Benjamin.” Some of them may plausi-
bly be identified with men of the same name men-
tioned elsewhere. These Korahites may have been
cousins of the Samuel family, and they may have
resided not very far apart.


The record speaks with some emphasis of a line
of K. doorkeepers.


In the latest OT times one Mattithiah, “the first-born
of Shallum the Korahite,’’ held ‘‘the office of trust over
the things that were baked in pans" (1 Ch 9 31).
Shallum was ‘‘the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the
son of Korah.'"’ In this expression 15 or more genera-
tions are omitted between Ebiasaph and Kore, and per-
haps as many between Kore and Shallum. The record

roceeds to supply some of the omitted names between

ore and Shallum. The representative of the line in
David's time was “Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah’'
{ver 21). In all periods the Korahites were ‘‘ keepers of
the thresholds of the tent.’' Back in the time of ‘“‘Phine-
has the son of Eleazar,”’ ‘‘ their fathers had been over the
camp of Jeh”’ (vs 19.20). Zechariah was, in his time,
“porter of the door of the tent of meeting'’ (ver 21), and
Shallum was still the chief of the porters (ver 17). ‘he
record for David's tlme supports and supplements this.
It says that the doorkeepers, ane to the arrange-
ments made by David, included a K. contingent, its
leading men being Meshelemiah and his son Zechariah
(1 Ch 26 1.2.9.14), and that Meshelemiah was ‘‘the
son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.’ Adopting the com-
mon conjecture that Asaph is here a variant for Ebiasaph,
we have here the same abridgment of the genealogical
list asin 1 Ch 9.


More interesting, however, than the fighting
Korahites of Benjamin, or the doorkeeping Kora-


Korahites
Lacedaemonians


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1818


hites who claimed succession from Moses to Nehe-
miah, are the “sons of Korah” who were somehow
connected with the service of song. One of the
genealogies is introduced by the statement: ‘These
are they whom David set over the service of song
in the house of Jeh, after that the ark had rest.
And they ministered with song before the taber-
nacle of the tent of meeting, until Solomon had built
the house of Jeh in Jerus” (1 Ch 6 31.32). Then
the writer proceeds to mention first ‘“Heman the
singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel,” and so
on, carrying the genealogy back to Korah and Levi.
After thus mentioning Heman, he speaks of “his
brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand,” and
traces Asaph’s descent back to Gershom the son of
Levi; and then says, “and on the left hand their
brethren the sons of Merari.” Of these the prin-
cipal leader is Ethan (otherwise called Jeduthun),
and his descent is here traced back to Levi.

In this way we are introduced to David's 3 great lead-
ers in choral and orchestral music. Among them Heman
the Korahite has at first the place of primacy, though
Asaph, later, comes to the front. The events just re-
ferred to are mentioned again, more in detail, in the
account of David's hringing the ark to Jerus. ‘There it
is said that at the suggestion of David ‘‘the Levites
appointed Heman the son of Joel,’’ and also Asaph and
Ethan, ‘‘and with them” several others, ‘their brethren
of the second degree’ (1 Ch 15 17.18). The record
proceeds to speak of the services of “the singers, Heman,
Asaph, and Ethan," and their associates, in the pageantry
of the bringing of the ark to Jerus. After that, it says,
Asaph had charge of the services of thanksgiving and
praise before the ark in Jerus, while Heman and Jedu-
thun served in the high place at Gibeon (1 Ch 16 4 ff.
37.39-42). Later, the record says (1 Ch 25), David
made an elaborate organization, under Asaph and Heman
and Jeduthun, for prophesying with song and instru-
mental music.

As the records of David’s time, according to the
Chronicler, thus attribute to him great achieve-
ments in sacred music and song, so the records of
subsequent times reiterate the same thing. David's
interest in sacred music is mentioned in connection
with Solomon’s temple, in connection with the
times of Joash and Hezekiah and Josiah, in connec-
tion with the institutions and exploits of the times
after the exile (e.g. 2 Ch 7 6; 23 18; 29 25 ff;
35 15; Ezr 3.10; Neh 12 2436.45.46). Asaph
and Heman and Jeduthun led the magnificent choir
and orchestra at the dedication of the temple (2 Ch
6 12). One of the sons of Asaph prophesied, and
the sons of the Korahites sang at the crisis in the
time of Jehoshaphat (2 Ch 20 14.19). The sons
of Asaph and the sons of Heman and the sons of
Jeduthun were present, and there was instrumental
music and lond singing, according to the appoint-
ment of David and his associates, at the time of
Hezekiah’s Passover (2 Ch 29 18 ff). Singing,
and Asaph and Heman and Jeduthun and David
have an important place in the record concerning
Josiah. And the records of the post-exilian times
make the singers and the “sons of Asaph” and the
arrangements of David as conspicuous as the law
of Moses itself.

Add to this that the names Asaph or Heman or
Ethan or Jeduthun, or the designation ‘the sons
of Korah” are attached to 25 or more of the Pss
(e.g. Pss 42-49, 50, 62, 72-85), and we have a body
of testimony that is at least abundant and intelli-
gible. It is to the effect that there was elaborate
organization, on a large scale, in connection with
the musical services of the temple at Jerus; that
this began in the time of David, as a part of the
preparation for building the temple, under the in-
fluence of the family traditions of the prophet


Samuel; and that the movement continned in the
generations following David, either surviving the
exile, or being revived after the exile. In connec-
tion with this movement, the phrases ‘“‘sons of
Korah,” “sons of Asaph,” ‘sons of Heman,’’ ‘“‘sons
of Jeduthun” denote, in some cases, merely lineal
descent; but in other cases they denote each an
aggregate of persons interested in sacred song and
music—a guild or society or succession or group—
arising out of the movement which originated in
David’s time. See, for example, “sons of Asaph”
(1 Ch 25 1.2; 2 Ch 20 14; cf ver 19; 29 13;
36 15; Ezr 2 41; 3 10; Neh 7 44; 11 22) and
“sons of Korah’’ in the titles of Pss 42-49 and 84,
85, 87-89. Traces of these aggregates appear in
the times of Solomon, of Jchoshaphat, of Joash, of
Hezekiah, of Josiah, of Zerubbabel, of Ezra and
Nehemiah.

If a person holds that the mention of an event
in Ch is to be regarded as proof that the event
never occurred, that person will of course deny that
the testimony thus cited is true to fact. He is
likely to hold that the guilds of singers arose in the
exile, and that, some generations after Nehemiah,
they fabricated for themselves the ecclesiastical
and physical pedigrees now found in the Books of
Ch. If, however, we accord fair play to the Chron-
icler as a witness, we shall be slow to discredit the
minute and interfitting testimony which he has
placed before us. Wiuus J. BEECHER


_KORATHITES, ko’rath-its: In AV for ‘Kora-
hites,”” Nu 26 58. See Korag, 4.


KORE, ko'ré (7p , kare’, “one who proclaims’’):

(1) A Levite of David’s time, descended from
Kohath and Korah. See Koray, 4. Shallum,
chief doorkeeper in the latest Bible times, is de-
scribed as ‘‘the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph,
the son of Korah” (1 Ch 9 19). This expression
omits the generations between Shallum and K.,
and those between K. and Ebiasaph, perhaps 15
generations or more in each case. The context
supplies two of the omitted names, of the time of
David, Meshelemiah and his son Zechariah (1 Ch 9
21.22). The record for the time of David mentions
these two, with some particulars, callmg Meshel-
emiah the son of K. (1 Ch 26 1.2.9.14). It de-
scribes them as “‘Korahites” “of the sons of Asaph.”
It is usual to regard this last clanse as a variant
for ‘‘the son of Ebiasaph,’”’ thus making the de-
scription identical with that in 1 Ch 9 19. With
this understanding, the text claims that ‘the
Korahites,” K. and Meshelemiah and Zechariah,
come midway in a line of sanctuary ministrants,
extending continuously from Moses to Nehemiah.

(2) “The son of Imnah the Levite, the porter at
the east gate,”’ who ‘was over the freewill-offerings,”
in the time of Hezekiah (2 Ch 31 14). Very
likely in the same line with (1) above.

(3) In 1 Ch 26 1 AV for Koranrrss (q.v.).

Wiis J. BeEcuar
KORHITES, kér’hits: In AV for ‘Korahites”


in Ex 624; 1Ch 126; 261; 2 Ch 2019.
See Koraug, 3.
KOZ, koz. See Haxxoz.


KUSHAIAH, kti-sha’ya, k-shi’a (AMBP , kusha-
yah, “bow of Jeh”): A Merarite Levite (1 Ch 15
17), called in 1 Ch 6 44 Kisuz (q.v.).


1819


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


\

LAADAH, 1a’a-da ("399 . la‘dah): A descendant
of Judah (1 Ch 4 21).

LAADAN, la’a-dan. See Lapan.

LABAN, 1a’ban: The person named Laban ap? ;
labhan; AaBdv, Labdn, possibly connected with the
v¥ meaning ‘‘to be white,” from which in Heb the adj.
meaning ‘white’ has just this form) is first intro-
duced to the reader of Gen in the story of the wooing
of Rebekah (ch 24). He belonged to that branch of
the family of Terah that was derived from Abraham’s
brother Nahor and his niece Milcah. The gene-
alogy of this branch is traced in Gen 22 20-24;
but, true to its purpose and the place it occupies
in the book, this genealogy brings the family down
to Rebekah, and there stops without mentioning
Laban. Accordingly, when Rebekah is introduced
in the narrative of ch 24, she is referred to (vs 15.24)
in a way that recalls to the reader the genealogy
already given; but when her brother Laban is
introduced (ver 29), he is related to his sister by the
express announcement, ‘‘And Rebekah had a
brother, and his name was Laban.” In this ch he
takes prominent part in the reception of Abraham’s
servant, and in the determination of his sister’s
future. That brothers had an effective voice in
the marriage of their sisters is evident, not only
from extra-Bib. sources, but from the Bible itself;
see e.g. Cant 8 8. In Gen 24, however, Laban is
perhaps more prominent than even such custom can
explain (cf vs 31.50.55), and we are led to see in
him already the same forcefulness and egotism that
are abundantly shown in the stories from his later
life. The man’s eager hospitality (ver 31), coming
immediately after his mental inventory of the gifts
bestowed by the visitor upon his sister (ver 30), has
usually, and justly, been regarded as a proof of the
same greed that is his most conspicuous character-
istic in the subsequent chapters. | ietoe:

The story of that later period in Laban’s life is
so interwoven with the career of Jacob that little
need here be added to what is said of Laban in
Jaco, III, 2 (q.v.). By the time of Jacob’s arrival
he is already a very old man, for over 90 years
had elapsed since Rebekah’s departure. Yet even
at the end of Jacob’s 20 years’ residence with him
he is represented as still energetic and active (31
19.23), not only ready for an emergency like the
pursuit after Jacob, but personally superintending
the management of his huge flocks.

His home is in Haran, “‘the city of Nahor,” that
is, the locality where Nahor and his family remained
at the time when the rest of Terah’s descendants
emigrated to Canaan (11 31; 12 5). Since Haran,
and the region about it where his flocks fed, be-
longed to the district called Aram (see Pappan-
ARAM; Mesopotamia), Laban is often called _‘‘the
Aramaean” (EV ‘the Syrian,” from LXX 6 Ztpos,
ho Stiros); see 26 20; 28 5; 81 20.24. It is uncer-
tain how far racial affinity may be read into this
term, because the origin and mutual relationships
of the various groups or strata of the Sem family
are not yet clear. For Laban himself it suffices
that he was a Semite, living within the region early
occupied by those who spoke the Sem dialect that
we call Aramaic. This dialect is represented in the
narrative of Gen as already differentiated from the
dialect of Canaan that was Jacob’s mother-tongue;
for “the heap of witness,’ erected by uncle and
nephew before they part (31 47), is called by the
one Jegar-saha-dutha and by the other Galeed—
phrases which are equivalent in meaning, the former


L


Korahitea
Lacedaemonians


Aram., the latter Heb. (Ungnad, Hebrdische Gram-
matik, 1912, $6, puts the date of the differentiation
of Aram. from ‘‘Amurritish” at “about 1500 BC”;
Skinner, “Genesis,” JCC, argues that ver 47 is a
gloss, following Wellhausen, Dillmann, et al.)

The character of Laban is interesting to observe.
On the one hand it shows a family likeness to the
portraits of all his relations in the patriarchal group,
preéminently, however, to his sister Rebekah, his
daughter Rachel, and his nephew Jacob. The
nearer related to Laban such figures are, the more
conspicuously, as is fitting, do they exhibit Laban’s
mingled cunning, resourcefulness, greed and _self-
complacency. And, on the other hand, Laban’s
character is sui generis; the picture we get of him
is too personal and complex to be denominated
merely a “type.” It is impossible to resolve this
man Laban into a mythological personage—he is
altogether human—or into a tribal representative
(e.g. of “Syria” over against ‘Israel’ = Jacob) with
any degree of satisfaction to the world of scholar-


ship. Whether a character of reliable family tra-


dition, or of popular story-telling, Laban is ‘‘a char-
acter’’; and his intimate connection with the chief
preraeee in Israel’s national recollections makes it
ighly probable that he is no more and no less his-
torical than Jacob himself (cf Jacos, VI).
J. Oscar Boyp
LABANA, lab’a-na (AaBavd, Laband, 1 Esd 5
29): Called Lebanah in Ezr 2 45.


LABOR, 1a’bér (2°39, y*ghi*, bap , ‘dmal; kémos,
képos): The word (noun and vb.) denoting hard
work or “toil” (thus in RV of Dt 26 7; Josh 7 3;
Rev 2 2) represents several Heb and Gr words,
chiefly those above. Occasionally, as in Hab 3
17 (ma‘éséh), it stands for ‘fruit of labor.” Some-
times, in conjunction with “travail,” it refers to
childbirth (Gen 35 16.17, ydladh; cf 1 Thess 2 9;
2 Thess 3 8). Examples of the word in the ordi-
nary sense are: of y*ghi*, Gen 31 42; Job 39 11.
16; Ps 128 2; of ‘amal, common in Eccl 1 3.8;
2 10.11.18, etc; of kopos, 1 Cor 16 58 (“your
labor is not vain,” etc); 1 Thess 1 3 (‘‘work of
faith and labor of love’; ef He 6 10); 1 Tim 5
17 (“labor in the word and in teaching’). See
Work; SLAVERY. JAMES ORR


LACCUNUS, lak’i-nus (Aakkotvos, Lakkovnos;
AV Lacunus): One of the sons of Addi who returned
with Ezra and had married a foreign wife (1 Esd
9 31). The name does not, as might have been
expected, occur in Ezr 10 30. See note on the
passage (in Lange’s Comm.) as to the reconciliation
of the lists in 1 Esd and Ear.


LACE, las Gane , pathil, variously rendered
in Gen 38 18.25; Ex 39 3; Nu 16 38; 19 15;
Jgs 16 9; Ezk 40 3): In modern Eng. the noun
“lace’’ usually denotes a delicate ornamental fabric,
but in the word in the sense of ‘‘that which binds”
is still in perfectly good use, esp. in such combina-
tions as “shoelace,” etc. It is this latter signif-
icance that is found in Ex 28 28 (‘‘They shall
bind .... with a lace of blue’); 28 37; 39 21.
31, and in Sir 6 30 AV, kddcua, klésma (RV “rib-
and”’).


LACEDAEMONIANS, las-é-dé-m3’ ni-anz
(Zraptidrar, Spartidtat; once only AakeSainévio,
Lakedaiménioi, 2 Macc 5 9): The inhabitants of
Sparta or Lacedaemon with whom the Jews claimed
some kinship and formed alliances (1 Macc 12


Lachish
Laish


2.5.6.20.21; 14 20.23; 15 23; 2 Macc 6 9). The
alliance mentioned in 1 Macc 12 5-23 is based,
among other grounds, on that of a common descent
of Jews and Lacedaemonians from Abraham, for
which the only probable presumption—suggested
by Ewald—is the similarity of names, “Pelasgi”
and Peleg son of Eber (Gen 10 25; 11 16). This
has been reasonably objected to, and perhaps the
most that can be said on this point is that the
belief in some relationship between the Jews and
the Lacedaemonians seems to have prevailed when
1 Mace was written. The alliance itself is said to
have been formed (1 Mace 12 20) between Areus,
king of the Lacedaemonians and Onias the high
priest; but it is not easy to make out a consistent
chronology for the transaction. For the renewal
of the alliance (c 144 BC) by Jonathan (1 Macc
12 5-18) and again by Simon (1 Mace 14 16-23),
something can be said, as the Greeks had finally
been deprived of independence in 146 BC, and
Sparta was only obliged to lend assistance to Rome
and may be supposed to have been doing so in help-
ing the Jews against Syria. It is possible, too, that
as against Syrian Hellenism the Jews were anxious
to show that they had the assistance of distinguished
Greeks, though the actual power of Sparta was much
reduced from that of former times. The facts, at
least of the alliance and the correspondence, seem
to be sufficiently attested, though it is not easy to
reconcile all the particulars. Jos (Ant, XII, iv, 10;
X11, v, 8; XIV, xii, 2.3) gives the correspondence
at greater length than the writer of the Maccabees.
: J. Hurcsison

LACHISH, la’kish (72D, lakhish; LXX Aaxls,
Lachis [Josh 15 39], Maxés, Machés): A town in
the foothills of the Shephelah on the

1. Location border of the Phili plain, belonging to
Judah, and, from the mention of Eglon

in connection with it, evidently in the southwestern
portion of Judah’s territory. Onom locates it 7
miles from Eleutheropolis (Beit Jibrin) toward
Daroma, but as the latter place is uncertain, the
indication does not help in fixing the siteof L. The
city seems to have been abandoned about 400 BC,
and this circumstance has rendered the identifica-
tion of the site difficult. It was formerly fixed at
Umm Lokis, from the similarity of the name and
because it was in the region that the Bib. references
to L. seem to indicate, but the mound called Tell
el- Hesy is now generally accepted as the site. This
was first suggested by Conder in 1877 (PEFS,
1878, 20), and the excavations carried on at the
Tell by the Pal Exploration Fund in 1890-93 con-
firmed his identification. Tell el-Hesy is situated
on a wady, or valley, of the same name (Wédy el-
Hesy), which runs from a point about 6 miles W.
of Hebron to the sea between Gaza and Askelon.
It is a mound on the very edge of the wady, rising
some 120 ft. above it and composed of débris to the
depth of about 60 ft., in which the excavations
revealed the remains of distinct cities which had
been built, one upon the ruins of another. The
earliest of these was evidently Amorite, and could
not have been later than 1700 BC, and was perhaps
two or three centuries earlier (Bliss, Mound of
Many Cities). The identification rests upon the
fact that the site corresponds with the Bib. and
other historical notices of L., and esp. upon the dis-
covery of a cuneiform tablet in the ruins of the same
character as the Am Tab, and containing the name
of Zimridi, who is known from these tablets to have
been at one time Egyp governor of L. The tablets,
which date from the latter part of the 15th or early
part of the 14th cent. BC, give us the earliest in-
formation in regard to L., and it was then an Egyp
dependency, but it seems to have revolted and joined
with other towns in an attack upon Jerus, which was


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Se


1820


also an Egyp dependency. It was perhaps com-
pelled to do so by the Khabiri who were then raiding
this region. The place was, like Gaza, an impor-
tant one for Egypt, being on the frontier and on the
route to Jerus, and the importance is secn in the


fact that it was taken and destroyed and rebuilt so


many times.

We first hear of it in the history of Israel when
Joshua invaded the land. It was then an Amorite
city, and its king, Japhia, joined the
confederacy formed by Adonizedek,
king of Jerus, to resist Joshua. They
were defeated in the remarkable battle at Gibeon,
and the five confederate kings were captured and

ut to death at Makkedah (Josh 10 passim; 12 11).
‘- was included in the lot of Judah (15 39), and it
was rebuilt, or fortified, by Rehoboam (2 Ch 11
5.9). It was besieged by Sennacherib in the reign
of Hezekiah and probably taken (2 K 18 13)
when he invaded Judah and besieged Jerus, but
the other references to the siege leave it doubtful


2. History


STKE?

FO Ry

Sennacherib on His Throne before Lachish.
Layard's Monuments of Nineveh,


(Kouyunjik.)


(2 K 18 14.17; 19 8; 2 Ch 32 9; Isa 36 2; 37
8). The Assyr monuments, however, render it cer-
tain that the place was captured. The sculptures
on the walls of Sennacherib’s palace picture the
storming of L. and the king on his throne receiving
the submission of the captives (Ball, Light from
the East, 190-91). ‘This was in 701 BC, and to this
period we may assign the enigmatical reference to

. in Mic 1 13, ‘Bind the chariot to the swift
steed, O inhabitant of Lachish: she was the begin-
ning of sin to the daughter of Zion.” The cause of
the invasion of Sennacherib was a general revolt in
Phoenicia, Pal, and Philistia, Hezekiah joining in
it and all asking Egypt for aid (Rawlinson, Five
Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World,
ch ix). Isaiah had warned Judah not to trust in
Egypt (Isa 20 5.6; 30 1-5; 31 1), and as L. was
the place where communication was held with
Egypt, being a frontier fortress, perhaps even
having an Egyp garrison, it would be associated
with the “sin” of the Egyp alliance (HGHL, 234).

_ The city was evidently rebuilt after its destruc-
tion by Sennacherib, for we find Nebuchadnezzar
fighting against it during his siege of Jerus (Jer 34
7). It was doubtless destroyed by him, but we are
informed by Nehemiah (11 30) that some of the
returned Jews settled there after the captivity. It
is very likely that they did not reoccupy the site
of the ruined city, but settled as peasants in the
territory, and this may account for the transference
of the name to Umm Lakis, 3 or 4 miles from Tell


1821


el-Hesy, where some ruins exist, but not of a kind
to suggest Lachish (Bliss, op. cit). No remains
of any importance were found on the Tell indicating
its occupation as a fortress or city later than that
destroyed by the king of Babylon, but it was oceu-
pied in some form during the crusades, Umm Lakis
eing held for a time by the Hospitallers, and King
Richard is said to have made it a base of operations
in his war with Saladin (HGHL). The Tell itself,
if occupied, was probably only the site of his camp,
and it has apparently remained since that time
without inhabitants, being used for agricultural
urposes only. See further, PaLestine (REcENT
XPLORATION), III, 1. H. Porter


LACK (forms of 101) , hagér, “to lack,” PR, ’ayin,
‘nought’’): This word in its various forms has the
usual meaning of “want,” “need,” ‘‘deficiency.”
There is but little change in the use of the word in
the different VSS. Sometimes one of the common
synonyms is exchanged for the word itself, e.g. in
the OT, 1 8 21 15 RV has “lack” (“Do I lack
madmen?) where AV has ‘need of’; Prov 5 23,
‘for lack,’’ instead of ‘‘without’; 6 32, ‘void of”
for “lacketh”; 10 21, “lack” for “want”; 31 11,
“lack” for “need”; Isa 59 15, “lacking’”’ for “fail-
eth.” In the NT “lack” is the tr of vorepéw, hus-
teréd, lit. “to be behind,” and évdeyjs, endeés, “in
want.” In Lk 8 6, RV reads “had no’ instead of
“lacked” in AV. In 2 Cor 11 9, RV gives “my
want” for ‘which was lacking to me” in AV; in
Col 1 24 “that which is lacking” for “that which is
behind”; Jas 2 15 “lack” for “destitute.” It will
readily be seen that sometimes the slight variation
helps to explain the meaning.

G. H. GERBERDING

LACUNUS, la-kii’nus. See Laccunus.


LAD: In the OT this word occurs as the tr of
na‘ar, “young person,” “child,” “servant,” RV
properly ‘substituting “servant” in 2 K 4 19; Jgs
16 26 is another passage where either sense of the
original word may be intended. The word occurs
in the NT in Jn 6 9 as the tr of waddpiov, paidd-
rion; in Acts 20 12, ais, pats (AV ‘‘young man”).


LADAN, 1a’dan (7792, la‘dan; AV Laadan):

(1) A descendant of Ephraim, and an ancestor
of Joshua (1 Ch 7 26).

(2) A Levite of the family of Gershon (1 Ch 23
7.8.9; 26 21), also called Lrsni (q.v.).


LADANUM, lad’a-num (U2, ld): Gen 37 25
RVm; elsewhere Myrru (q.v.).

LADDER, lad’ér. See S1zaz, 4, (¢).

LADDER OF TYRE (1H katpag [dard ris kAlpaxos|
Tépov, Hé klimax [apd tés klimakos] Tirou): Not
mentioned in the OT or the NT, butin Apoc (1 Mace
11 59), where it is said that Antiochus VI, after
having confirmed Jonathan in the high-priesthood,
appointed his brother Simon captain over the terri-
tory included between the Ladder of Tyre and the
borders of Egypt. The Ladder has been located
at different points on the coast between Tyre and
Acre, such as the Ras el-‘Abyadh (“Promontorium
Album” of the ancient geographers), about 7 miles
§. of Tyre, and Ras en-Nakirah, about 6 miles
farther 8., and Ras el-Musheirifeh, a little farther
on. These are capes jutting westward into the
sea from the ridge which runs parallel to the general
line of the coast. These capes project more than
a mile into the sea, and present a very bold and pre-
cipitous front from 200 to 300 ft. in height. The
ascent on either side of the promontory is very


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE. ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lachish
Laish


steep, and at Ras el-‘Abyadh steps were cut in the
white rock, which led to the identification of this
point with the Ladder, but a reference to Jos (BJ,
II, x, 2) leads to a different conclusion. He locates
it 100 stadia N. of Acre, which corresponds fairly
well with the southern limit of the whole promon-
tory, which is about 12 miles N. of Acre, but not
at all with Ras el-‘Abyadh. The altitude of el-
Musheirifeh is greater than that of el-‘Abyadh and
may have had steps cut in it similar to the latter.
It is more probable that the L. was here, or at en-
Nakéarah, but the term applied to the whole prom-
ontory, which offered a serious obstacle to the
passage of armies, or even caravans, since the ap-
proach is precipitous on either side, and at Ras
el-‘Abyadh the road skirts the edge of a sheer preci-
pice, where a misstep would hurl one into the sea
some 200 ft. below. The application of the term
to the whole promontory seems to be indicated by
Jos, since he speaks of 1t as one of the mountains
which encompass the plain of Ptolemais (Acre) and
the highest of all. This would not be true of any
one of the three capes mentioned, but would be if
the hills behind, which form their base, were in-
cluded. That it was designated as the Ladder of
Tyre rather than of Acre was probably due to the
fact that the promontory is nearer the former city
(see Thomson, LB, II, ed 1882; SWP, name-lists,
8.V.). H. Porter


LADE, lad, LADING, lad’ing: ‘To lade” in the
sense of ‘‘to load’ is retained by RV in nearly all
passages where the word occurs in AV (but cf AV
and RV reading of Ps 68 19; Isa 46 1), ‘They
laded us with such things’ (Acts 28 10 AV). The
érirlOnus, epitithémi, ‘to put on,’ is rendered by
RV, “They put on board such things.” Lk 11 46
RV reads “‘ye load”’ instead of AV “ye lade.”

Lading (gopriov, phortion) is found in Acts 27
10 in its usual meaning, ‘‘the lading of a ship.”


LADY, 1la’di: This word should be taken in the
sense of “mistress” in Isa 47 5.7 (Heb g*bhereth)
(so ARV). In Jgs 5 29; Est 1 18 it is the tr of
another Heb word (sarah), best rendered “princess”
(so RV in Est, but not in Jgs). In 2 Jn vs 1.5 it
is the tr of xuvpia, kurta, which some interpreters
regard as a proper name. See Cyria; Joun,
EpistLes oF; Exect Lapy.


LAEL, la’el (8D, la él, “belonging to God”):
Father of Eliasaph, the prince of the father’s house
of the Gershonites (Nu 3 24).


LAHAD, la’had (12, lahadh): A descendant
of Judah (1 Ch 4 2),


LAHAI-ROI, la-hi’roi, la-hi-r6'i, la’/hi-roi (12
“N71, lahay rd’t). See BEER-LAHAI-ROI.


LAHMAM, 1a’mam (D'9"? , lahmam): A town in
the Judaean Shephelah (Josh 15 40, RVm “Lah-


mas’), possibly the modern el- Lahm, 23 miles 8. of
Beit Jibrin.


LAHMAS, la’mas. See Laumam.


LAHMI, la’mi ("7A , lahmi): According to 1 Ch
20 5, the brother of Goliath of Gath. See EL-
HANAN.


LAISH, la‘ish (89 , layish):

(1) A city in the upper Jordan valley, apparently
colonized by the Sidonians, which was captured by
the Danites and called Dan (q.v.) (Jgs 18 7, ete;


ee THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 1822
Isa 10 30 AV). In Josh 19 47 the name appears | 11 6, “the portion of their cup.” In En 67 4ff


as ‘‘Leshem.”’

(2) A Benjamite, father of Palti or Paltiel, to
whom Michal, David’s wife, was given by Saul
(1 S 25 44; 28 3 15).


LAISHAH, 1a-i’sha, 14’ish-a (ma , layshah, AV
Laish): A place named in Isa 10 30 with Gallim
and Anathoth. It should apparently be sought on
the N. of Jerus. Some would identify Gallim with


Beit Jala, near Bethlehem. Conder suggests ‘Psawi-
yeh on the eastern slope, to the N.N.E. of the
Mount of Olives.


LAKE, lak (Alpvy, imné): The word is used
(Lk 5 1.2; 8 22.23.33) of the Lake of Gennesaret
or Sea of Galilee, and (Rev 19 20; 20 10.14.15;
21 8) of the “lake of fire and brimstone.” Lakes are
not abundant in Syria and Pal. The Dead Sea,
which might be called a lake, is in most places
in EV called the Salt Sea. It is called by the
Arabs Bahr Lit, Sea of Lot. It is a question
whether the Waters of Merom (Josh 11 5.7) can
be identified with the Haleh, a marshy lake in the
course of the Upper Jordan, N. of the Sea of Galilee.
E. of Damascus on the edge of the desert there are
saltish lakes in which the water of the rivers of
Damascus (see 2 K & 12) is gathered and evapo-
rates. Inthe Lebanon W. of Ba‘albek is the small
Lake Yamméneh, which is fed by copious springs,
but whose water disappears in the latter part of
the summer, being drained off by subterranean
channels. The Lake of Humg on the Orontes is
artificial, though ancient. On the lower Orontes
is the Lake of Antioch. ALFRED ELy Day


LAKE OF FIRE (Aipvn rot aupés, limnd tov
purés): Found in Rev 19 20; 20 10.14(bis).15.
Rev 21 8 has ‘‘the lake that burneth with fire and
brimstone.” The brimstone in connection with
“the lake of fire” occurs also in Rev 19 20 and 20
10, the latter being a backward reference to the
former passage. In Rev 20 14 the words, ‘‘This
ig the second death, even the lake of fire,” are
either a gloss originally intended to elucidate ver
15 through a reference to 20 6, or, if part of the text,
formed originally the close of ver 15, whence they
became displaced on account of the identity of the
words once immediately preceding them in ver 15
with the words now preceding them in ver 14. The
‘dake of fire’ can be called ‘‘the second death” only
with reference to the lost among men (ver 15), not
with reference to death and Hades (ver 14). In
all the above references “the lake of fire” appears
as a place of punishment, of perpetual torment, not
of annihilation (20 10). The beast (19 20); the
pseudo-prophet (19 20; 20 10); the devil (20 10);
the wicked of varying description (20 15; 21 8),
are cast into it. When the same is affirmed of
death and Hades (20 14), it is doubtful whether
this is meant as a mere figure for the cessation of
these two evils personified, or has a more realistic
background in the existence of two demon-powers
so named (cf Isa 26 8; 1 Cor 15 26.54 ff; 2 Esd
731). The Scriptural source for the conception
of “the lake of fire’ lies in Gen 19 24, where already
the fire and the brimstone occur together, while the
locality of the catastrophe described is the neigh-
borhood of the Dead Sea. The association of the
Dead Sea with this fearful judgment of God, to-
gether with the desolate appearance of the place,
rendered it a striking figure for the scene of escha-
tological retribution. The two other OT passages
which have “fire and brimstone’ (Ps 11 6; Ezk
88 22) are dependent on the Gen passage, with
which they have the figure of “‘raining”’ in common.
In Rev 21 8, ‘‘their part’ seems to allude to Ps


the Dead Sea appears as the place of punishment for
evil spirits. Of late it has been proposed to derive
“the lake of fire’ from “the stream of fire” which
destroys the enemies of Ahura in the Zoroastrian
eschatology; so Bousset, Die Offenbarung Johannis,
1906, 483, 434. But the figures of a stream and
a lake are different; cf 2 Esd 13 9-11, where a
stream of fire proceeds from the mouth of the Mes-
siah for the destruction of His enemies. Besides,
the Pers fire is, in part, a fire of purification, and not
of destruction only (Bousset, 442), and even in the
apocalyptic Book of En, the fires of purification
and of punishment are not confounded i En 67 4
with 90 20). The OT fully explains the entire
conception. GEERHARDUS Vos

LAKE OF GENNESARET, ge-nes’a-ret. See
GALILEE, SEA OF.


LAKK0DM, Jak’um (BAp?, lakkam; AV Lakum):
An unidentified town on the border of Naphtali,
named with Adami, Nekeb and Jabneel, apparently
nearer the Jordan (Josh 19 33).


LAMA. See Ext, Exit, nama SABACHTHANI.


LAMB, lam: (1) The most used word is wap,


kebhes, “a young ram’; cf Arab. eee kebsh,
“ram”; often of sacrifices; (fem.) nwa , kabhsah,
or MWAD, kibhsah, ‘ewe lamb” (2 8 12 3); by
transposition AWD, kesebh, and fem. MAW, kisbah
(Gen 80 40; Lev 3 7; 6 6). (2) "3, kar, “lamb”
(Dt 82 14; 18 169; 2K 3 4). (3) MW, seh,
“one” of the flock (Gen 22 7; Lev 5 7). (4) JRZ-
Ze


ca’n, ‘‘sheep,” “goats,” “flock”; cf Arab. ,. La,
da’n, “sheep” (Ex 12 21); and JRX JB, ben ¢o'n
(Ps 114 4). (5) MPC, dalek, “young lamb”; cf
Arab. Ab: , tali, “young lamb”; and DNrD,


tl@im (18 7 9; Isa 40 11; 65 25). (6) PTaN ,
’immerin (zr 6 9.17; 7 17). (7) &pvas, drnas, acc.
pl. (Lk 10 3); dim. apvlov, arnion (Jn 21 15; Rev
5 6, etc). (8) apvés, amnds (Jn 1 29.36; Acts 8
32; 1 Pet 119). See SHeEp.
ALFrep E1ty Day
LAMB OF GOD (6 dpvés rod Qcot, ho amnéds
tor theo): This is a title specially bestowed upon
Our Lord by John the Baptist (Jn 1 29-36), ‘‘Be-
hold, the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of
the world!” In XIJ P—an apocryphal book, prob-
ably of the 2d_cent.—we have the term used for
the Messiah, ‘Honor Judah and Levi, for from them
shall arise for you the Lamb of God, saving all na-
tions by grace.” But the term does not seem to
have been of any general use until it received its
distinctly Christian significance. It has been gen-
erally understood as referring to the prophetic lan-
guage of Jer 11 19, and Isa 53 7.
It is far more probable, however, that the true
source of the expression is to be found in the impor-
‘ tant place which the “lamb” occupies
1. Sacrifi- in the sacrifices, esp. of the PC. In
cial Sense these there was the lamb of the daily
of the Term morning and evening sacrifice. How
‘ familiar this would be to the Baptist,
being a member of a priestly family! On the Sab-
bath the number of the offerings was doubled, and
at some of the great festivals a still larger number
were laid upon the altar (see Ex 29 38; Nu 28
3.9.13). The lamb of the Passover would also
occupy a large place in the mind of a devout Israel-


1823


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Laishah
Lamech


ite, and, as the Passover was not far off, it is quite
possible that John may have referred to this as well
as to other suggested ideas connected with the lamb.
The sacrificial significance of the term seems to be
far more probable than the mere comparison of the
character of Our Lord with meekness and gentle-
ness, a8 suggested by the words of the prophets,
although these contain much more than the mere
reference to character (see below). That this
became the clearly defined conception of apostolic
teaching is clear from passages in Paul and Peter
(1 Cor 6 7; 1 Pet 1 18f). In the Book of Rev
the reference to the Lamb occurs 27 t. The word
here used differs from that in Jn. The amnés of
the Gospel has become the arnion of the Apocalypse,
a diminutive form suggestive of affection. This is
the word used by Our Lord in His rebuke and for-
giveness of Peter (Jn 21 15), and is peculiarly
touched therefore with an added meaning of_pa-
thetic tenderness. Westcott, in his Comm. on Jn 1
29, refers to the conjecture that there may have
been flocks of lambs passing by on their way to
Jerus to be used at the feast. This is possible, but
fanciful. : As applied to Christ, the term certainly
suggests the meekness and entleness of Our Lord’s
nature and work, but could not have been used by
John without containing some reference to the place
which the lamb bore in the Judaic ritualism.
The significance of the Baptist’s words has been
variously understood. Origen, Cyril, Chrysostom,
among the ancients, Lucke, DeWette,
2. As Meyer, Ewald, Alford, among the
Variously moderns, refer it to Isa 58 7; Grotius,
Understood Bengel, Hengstenberg, to the paschal
lamb; Baumgarten-Crusius, etc, to the
sin offering; Lange strongly urges the influence
of the passage in lsa 53, and refers to John’s de-
scription of his own mission under the influence of
the second part of Isa, in which he is supported
by Schaff. The importance of the_Isa-thought
is found in Mt 8 17; Acts 8 32; 1 Pet 2 22-25.
It is to be observed that the LXX in Isa 63 _7
translates the Heb word for sheep (seh), by the Gr
word for lamb. ver 10, the


8. As Set prophet’s “suffering one” is said to
Forth by have made “his soul an offering for
Isaiah sin,” and in ver 4 “he hath borne our


griefs,” where bearing involves the

conception of sin offering, and as possessing Justi-
fying power, the idea of “taking away.” John
indeed uses not the LXX word ¢épew (phérein), but
alpe (airein), and some have maintained that
this simply means “put away,” or “support,” or
“endure.” But this surely loses the suggestion of
the associated term “lamb,” which John could not
have employed without some reference to its sacri-
ficial and therefore expiatory force. What Lange
calls a “germ perception” of atonement must cer-
tainly have been in the Baptist’s mind, esp. when
we recall the Isa-passages, even though there may
not have been any complete dogmatic conception
of the full relation of the death of Christ to the sal-
vation of a world. Even the idea of the bearing of
the curse of sin may not be excluded, for it was
impossible for an Israelite like John, and esp. with
his surroundings, to have forgotten the significance
of the paschal lamb, both in its memorial of the
judgment of Egypt, as well as of the deliverance of
Tsrael. Notwithstanding every effort to take out of
this striking phrase its deeper meanings which
involve most probably the combination of all the
sources above described, it must ever remain one
of the richest mines of evangelical thought. It
occupies, in the doctrine of atonement, a position
analogous to that brief word of the Lord, “God isa
Spirit” (Jn 4 24), in relation to the doctrine of God.
The Lamb is defined as “of God,” that is, of Di-


vine providing. See Isa 53; Rev 5 6; 13 8. Its
ae and appointed office is indicated by the
definite article, and whether we refer the conception
to a specific sacrifice or to the general place of a lamb
in the sacrificial institution, they all, as being ap-
pointed by and specially set apart for God, suggest
the close relation of Our Lord to the Divine Being,
and particularly to His expiatory sacrifice.
Lu. D. Bevan

LAME, lim (MOB, piséh, MD), nakhth; xwrés,
cholés): a: ;

(1) The condition of being unable or imperfectly
able to walk, which unfitted any descendant of
Aaron so afflicted for service in the priesthood (Lev
21 18), and rendered an animal unsuitable for sac-
rifice (Dt 16 21). The offering of animals so blem-
ished was one of the sins with which Malachi
charges the negligent Jews of his time (Mal 1 8-13).

(2) Those who suffered from lameness, such as
Mephibosheth, whose limbs were injured by a fall
in childhood (28 4 4; 93). In the prophetic
description of the completeness of the victory of the
returning Israelites, it is predicted that the lame
shall be made whole and shall leap like a hart (Jer
31 8; Isa 36 6). The unfitness of the lame for
warfare gives point to the promise that the lame
shall take the prey (Isa 33 23). Job in his graphic
description of his helpfulness to the weak before
his calamity says, ‘‘And feet was I to the lame”
(Job 29 15). The inequality of the legs of the
lame is used in Prov 26 7 as a similitude of the
inaptness with which a fool uses a parable.

In the enigmatical and probably corrupt passage
describing David's capture of Jerus, the lame and blind
are mentioned twice. In 2 8 § 6 it was a taunt on
the are of the Jebusites that even a garrison of cripples
would suffice to keep out the Israelites. The allusion
in ver 8 may be read, ‘‘Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites
let him . . . . slay hoth the lame and blind, which hate
David's soul,” asitisin LXX. The Vulg says, “David
had offered a reward on that day to the man who should
smite the Jebusite and reach the water pipes of the
houses, and remove the blind and lame who hated
David's soul.'' It is possible, however, that Budde's
emendation is more correct and that it is_a threat
agalnst the indiscriminate slaughter of the Jebusites:
““Whoso slayeth a Jebusite shal! bring his neck into

eril; the lame and blind are not hated of David's soul."’
Khe proverbial saying quoted in ver 8 cannot be correct
as rendered in_AV, for we read in Mt 21 14 that the
lame came to Our Lord in the temple and were healed.

The healing of the lame by Our Lord is recorded
in Mt 11 5; 16 30.81; 21 14; Lk 7 22; 14 18.
For the apostolic miracles of healing the lame, see
Crippte. In He 12 13 the Christians are coun-
seled to courage under chastisement, lest their
despair should cause that which is lame to be “turned
out of the way.” Auex, MAcALISTER


LAMECH, 1a’mek (7799, lemekth; Adpex, Lémech,
“s strong youth’’[?]):

(1) The name is first mentioned in Gen 4 18-24.
Here L., the son of Methushael, is named as the
last of the descendants of Cain. He was the father
of Jabel, Jubal, Tubal-cain, and Naamah. As the
husband of two wives, viz. Adah and Zillah, he
furnishes the first recorded instance of polygamy.
It is very instructive to note that this “father of
polygamy” at once becomes the first blustering
tyrant and a braggadocio; we are fully permitted
to draw this conclusion from his so-called “sword-
lay’ (Gen 4 23f). He does not put his trust in
God, but in the weapons and implements invented
by his sons, or rather these instruments, enhancing
the physical and material powers of man, are his
God. He glories in them and misconstrues the
Divine kindness which insured to Cain freedom
from the revenge of his fellow-men.

(2) Another L. is mentioned in Gen 5 25.28
(ef 1 Ch 1 3; Lk 3 36), the son of Methuselah


Lamedh
Lamp


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1824


and the father of Noah. His words (Gen 6 29)
show the great difference between this descendant
of Seth and the descendant of Cain. While the
one is stimulated to a song of defiance by the
worldly inventions of his sons, the other, in pro-
phetical mood, expresses his.sure belief in the coming
of better times, and calmly and prayerfully awaits
the period of comfort and rest which he expected to
be ushered in by his son Noah. Wriii1am Baur


LAMEDH, 18’meth (5): The 12th letter of the
Heb alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopaedia
asl. It came also to be used for the number 30.
For name, etc, see ALPHABET.

LAMENT, la-ment’. See Music.


LAMENTATION, lam-en-ta’shun.
III, 2; IV, 4, 5, 6.


See Buriat,


LAMENTATIONS, lam-en-ta’shunz, BOOK OF
—The Lamentations of Jeremiah: This is a col-
lective name which tradition has given
to 5 elegies found in the Heb Canon
that lament the fate of destroyed Jerus.
The rabbis call this little book ’Hkhah (D8,
“how’’), according to the word of lament with which
it begins, or kinoth (12). On the basis of the
latter term the LXX calls it Sp%vor, thrénot, or
Lat Threni, or ‘“Lamentations.”

The little book consists of 5 lamentations, each
one forming the contents of a chapter. The first
4 are marked by the acrostic use of the
alphabet. In addition, the kinah
(“elegy”) meter is found in these
hymns, in which a longer line (8 or 4 accents) is
followed by a shorter (2 or 3 accents). In chs 1
and 2 the acrostic letters begin three such double
lines; in ch 4, however, two double lines. In ch 3
a letter controls three pairs, but is repeated at the
beginning of each line. In ch 6 the alphabet is
wanting; but in this case too the number of pairs
of lines agrees with the number of letters in the
Heb alphabet, i.e. 22. In chs 2, 3 and 4, the letter
‘ayin follows pé, as is the case in Ps 34. Ch 1,
however, follows the usual order.

These 5 hymns all refer to the great national
catastrophe that overtook the Jews and in par-

ticular the capita] city, Jerus, through
3. Contents the Chaldaeans, 587-586 BC. The

sufferings and the anxieties of the city,
the destruction of the sanctuary, the cruelty and
taunts of the enemies of Israel, esp. the Edomites,
the disgrace that befell the king and his nobles,
priests and prophets, and that, too, not without
their own guilt, the devastation and ruin of the
country—all this is described, and appeal is made
to the mercy of God. A careful sequence of thought
cannot be expected in the lyrical feeling and in the
alphabetical form. Repetitions are found in large
numbers, but each one of these hymns emphasizes
some special feature of the calamity. Ch 3 is
unique, as in it one person describes his own peculiar
sufferings in connection with the general calamity,
and then too in the name of the others begins a
psalm of repentance. This person did not suffer
so severely because he was an exceptional sinner,
but because of the unrighteousness of his people.
These hymns were not written during the siege, but
later, at a time when the people still vividly remem-
bered the sufferings and the anxieties of that time
and when the impression made on them by the
fall of Jerus was still as powerful as ever.

_Who is the author of these hymns? Jewish tra-
dition is unanimous in saying that it was Jeremiah.
The hymns themselves are found anonymously in


1. Name


2. Form


the Heb text, while the LXX has in one anadditional
statement, the Heb style of which would lead us to

conclude that it was found in the origi-
4, Author nal from which the version was made.
This statement reads: “And it came
to pass, after Israel had been taken away captive
and Jerus had been laid waste, that Jeremiah sat
weeping, and uttered this lamentation over Jerus
and said.” The Tg also states that Jeremiah was
the author. The rabbis and the church Fathers
have no doubts on the subject. Jerome (cf on
Zec 12 11) thinks that 2 Ch 36 25 refers to
these hymns. The same is said by Jos (Ant,
X, v, 1). If this were the case, then the writer
of Ch would have regarded Lam as having been
written because of the death of Josiah. But this
misunderstanding is not to be ascribed to him. It
was easily possible that he was acquainted with
lamentations of such a nature, but which afterward
were lost. At all events, Jeremiah was by nature
adapted to the composition of such elegies, as is
proved by his book of prophecies.

Only in modern times has the authorship of these
hymns by Jeremiah been seriously called into ques-
tion; and it is now denied by most critics. For
this they give formal and material reasons. The
language of these lamentations shows many simi-
larities to the discourses of Jeremiah, but at the
same time also many differences. The claim that
the alphabetical scheme is not worthy of Jeremiah
is a prejudice caused by the taste of our times.
Heb poets had evidently been making use of such
methods for a long time, as it helps materially in
memorizing. At the time of the first acute suffer-
ing on account of the destruction of Jerus, in fact,
he would probably not have made use of it. But
we have in this book a collection of lamentations
written some time after this great catastrophe.
The claim has also been made that the views of
Jeremiah and those of the composer or the com-
posers of these poems differ materially. It is said
that Jeremiah emphasizes much more strongly the
guilt of the people as the cause of the calamity than
is done in these hymns, which lament the fate of the
people and find the cause of it in the sins of the
fathers (5 7), something that Jeremiah is said not
to accept (Jer 31 29f). However, the guilt of the
people and the resultant wrath of God are often
brought out in these hymns; and Jeremiah does not
deny (81 29 f) that there is anything like inherited
guilt. He declares rather that in the blessed future
things would be different in this respect. Then,
too, we are not to forget that if Jeremiah is the
author of these patriotic hymns, he does not speak
in them as the prophet and the appointed accuser
of his people, but that he is at last permitted to
speak as he humanly feels, although there is no lack
of prophetical reminiscences (cf Lam 4 21f). In
these hymns he speaks out of the heart that loves
his Jerus and his people, and he utters the priestly
prayer of intercession, which he was not allowed to
do when announcing the judgment over Israel. The
fact that he also evinces great reverence for the
unfortunate king and his Divinely given hereditary
dignity (4 20), although as a prophet he had been
compelled to pronounce judgment over him, would
not Ne unthinkable in Jeremiah, who had shown
warm sympathies also for Jehoiachim (22 24.28).
A radical difference of sentiment between the two
authors is not to be found. On the other hand, a
serious difficulty arises if we claim that Jeremiah
was not the author of Lam in the denunciations of
Lam over the prophets of Jerus (2 14; 4 13).
How could the great prophet of the Destruction be
so ignored if he himself were not the author of
these sentiments? If he was himself the author, we
can easily understand this omission. In his book


1825


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lamedh
Lamp


of prophecies he has spoken exactly the same way
about the prophets. To this must be added, that
Lam 3 forces us to regard Jeremiah as the author,
because of the personal sufferings that are here
described. Compare esp. 8 14.37 f. 53 ff. 61.63.
What other person was during the period of this
catastrophe the cynosure of all eyes as was the
prophet, esp., too, because he was guiltless? The
claim that here, not an individual, but the personi-
fied nation is introduced as speaking, is altogether
improbable, and in some passages absolutely im-
possible (vs 14.48).

This little book must accordingly be closely con-
nected with the person of Jeremiah. If he himself
is the author, he must have composed it in his old
age, when he had time and opportunity to live over
again all the sufferings of his people and of himself.
It is, however, more probable, esp. because of the
language of the poems, that his disciples put this
book in the present shape of uniform sentential
utterances, basing this on the manner of lamenta-
tions common to Jeremiah. In this way the origin
of ch 3 can be understood, which cannot arti-
ficially be shaped as his sayings, as in this case the
personal feature would be more distinctly expressed.
It was probably compiled from a number of his
utterances.

In the Heb Canon this book is found in the third
division, called kthabhim, or Sacred Writings,
t gether with the Pss. However, the LXX adds
t's book to Jer, or rather, to the Book of Bar, found
rext after Jer. The Hebrews count it among the
5 meghillath, or Rolls, which were read on promi-
nent anniversary days. The day for the Lamenta-
tion was the 9th of Ab, the day of the burning of
the temple. In the Roman Catholic church It is
read on the last three days of Holy Weck.


: Lirerature.—Comms. of Thenius, Ewald, Nigels-
bach, Gerlach, Keil, Cheyne, Oettli, Léhr, Budde; art.
by Robertson Smith on ‘‘Lamentations’’ in ZB.
C. von ORELLI

LAMP, LAMPSTAND, lamp’stand (173, 73, 3;
nir, nér, pd, lappidh, Phoen “p> , lampadh,
whence Aaprds, lampds; X5x vos, lichnos, is also used):
Nér or nir is properly “light” or “a light-giving
thing,” hence “lamp,” and is so rendered in RV, but
often “candle’ in AV. Its use in connection with
the tabernacle and the temple (Ex 26 37 ff; 2 Ch
4 20 f), where oil was employed for light (Ex 35 14;


Lamps: Figs. 1, 2.


Lev 24 2), shows that this is its proper meaning.
Lappidh is properly “a torch” and is thus rendered
generally in RV, but “lamp” in Isa 62 1, where it
is used asa simile. AV renders it “lamp’’ usually,
but “torch” in Nah 2 31; Zee 12 6. In Job 12 5
RV renders it “for misfortune,’ regarding it as
composed of the noun 3", pidh, and the preposi-
tion 2, 1. Lampas in Gr corresponds to it, but
luchnos is also rendered in RV “lamp,” while AV
gives “candle,” as in Mt 5 15 and corresponding
passages in the other Gospels.


Lamps were in use in very remote times, though
we have few allusions to them in the early history
of Egypt. There are indications that

1. Forms they were used there. Niches for
and History lamps are found in the tombs of Tell
el-Amarna (Arch. Survey of Egypt, Am

Tab, PartIV, 14). Lampstands are also represented
(ib, Part III, 7). Torches were of course used before
lamps, and are mentioned in Gen (15 17 RV), but
clay lamps were used in Canaan by the Amorites
before the Israelites took possession. The excava-


Lamps:


tions in Pal have furnished thousands of specimens,
and have enabled us to trace the development from
about 2000 BC onward. The exploration carried
out at Lachish (Tell Hesy) and Gezer (Tell Jezer) by
the Pal Exploration Fund has given ample material
for the purpose, and the numerous examples from
tombs all over Pal and Syria have supplied a great
variety of forms. :

“Lamp” is used in the sense of a guidein Ps 119
105; Prov 6 23, and for the spirit, which is called
the lamp of Jeh in man (Prov 20 27),
and it of course often signifies the light
itself. It is used also for the son who
is to succeed and represent his father
(1 K 165 4), and it perhaps is employed in this
sense in the phrase, “The lamp of the wicked shall
be put out” (Job 21 17; Prov 13 9; and perhaps
Job 18 6).

The early Can. or Amorite lamp was a shallow,
saucer-like bowl with rounded bottom and vertical
rim, slightly pointed or pinched on one side where
the lighted end of the wick
was placed (Fig. 1). This
form continued into Jew-
ish times, but was gradu-
ally changed until the
spout was formed by
drawing the rim of the
sides together, forming a
narrow open channel, the
remainder of the rim being
rolled outward and flat-
tened (Fig. 2), the bottom
being also flattened. This
was the early Heb pattern
and persisted for centu-
ries. The open bowl was
gradually closed in, first
at the spout, where the
rim of one side was lapped over the other, and finally
the whole surface was closed with only an orifice
in the center for receiving the oil, and at the same
time the spout was lengthened. This trausforma-
tion is seen in Fig. 3, a lamp of the Seleucid period,
or from 300 BC. These lamps have usually a cir-
cular foot and sometimes a string-hole on one side.
The next development was a circular bowl with a
somewhat shorter spout, sometimes being only a
bulge in the rim, so that the orifice for the wick falls
in the rim, the orifice for filling being quite small


2. Figura-
tive Use


Lamp: Fig. 5.


Lamp
Language of NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


at the bottom of a saucer-like depression in the
center of the bow]. There is sometimes a loop
handle affixed on the side opposite to the spout.
Sometimes the handle is horizontal, but commonly
vertical (Fig. 4). This form is called Roman, and
the bowl is often ornamented with mythological
human or animal figures (Fig. 5). Other forms are


Lamps: Figs. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
elongated, having numerous wick holes (Fig. 6).
The mythological and animal forms were rejected
by the Jews as contrary to their traditions, and they
made lamps with various other designs on the bowl,
such as vine leaves, cups, scrolls, ete (Figs. 7-11).
One very marked Jewish design is the seven-
branched candlestick (Ex 25 32) of the temple
(Fig. 12). The lamps of the parable of the Ten
Virgins were probably similar to these (Mt 25 1 ff).
The latest form of the clay lamp was what is called
Byzantine, the bowl of which has a large orifice in
the center and tapers gradually to the spout (Fig.
13); they are ornamented commonly with a palm
branch between the cen-
tral orifice and the wick-
hole, or with a cross.
Sometimes there is an in-
scription on the margin
(Fig. 13). The words on
this read ws xv[piov] deve
macwKadrn? Phés kulriou]
pheni pasin kalé,“Thelight
of the Lord shines to all
(beautifully ?7].’ Others
read, ‘‘The Lord is my
light”; “beautiful light,”
etc. These inscriptions
determine the period as
being Christian. In Rom times, and earlier also,
bronze was much used for the finer lamps, often
with covers for the orifice and sometimes with chain
and ring for hanging (Fig. 14). Very elaborate
designs in this material occur.

These terra-cotta lamps are found in the tombs
and burial places throughout Pal and Syria, and
they were evidently de-
posited there in connec-
tion with the funeral rites.
Very few are found in
Can. tombs, but they be-
come numerous in later
times and esp. in the early
Christian centuries. The
symbolism in their use for
funeral purposes is indi-
cated by the inscriptions
above mentioned (see
PEFS, 1904, 326 ff; Er-
plorationsin Pal, by Bliss.
Macalister and Wunsch,
4to, published by the Pal
Exploration Fund). These
lamps were used by the
peasants of the country
downto recent times, when
petroleum has superseded olive oil for lighting.
The writer has seen lamps of the Jewish and Rom


Lamp: Fig. 12.


Lamp: Fig. 13.


1826


period with surface blackened with recent usage.
Olive oil was commonly used, but terebinth oil also
(Thomson, LB, III, 472). H. PorTER


LAMPSACUS, lamp’sa-kus. See SampsaMezs.


LANCE, lans, LANCER, lan’sér, LANCET, lan’-
set. See Armor, ITI, 4, (3); 1 K 18 28 RV “lances.”


LAND ([1] PS, ’erec; [2] MATS, ’ddhamah, [3]
71D , sadheh, ‘“‘a piece of land”; [4] yf, gé, “earth”;
[5] aypds, agrés, ‘field’; [6] x#pa, chdra, “region”;
[7] xeplov, chérion, dim. of chéra; [8] &qpés, zérés,
“dry land’; [9] MIS, ’ezrah, “native,” AV “born
in the land,” “born among you,” RV ‘home-born”
[Lev 19 34; 24 16; Nu 16 30]; “‘like a green tree
in its native soil’ [Ps 37 35]): ’Ereg occurs hun-
dreds of times and is used in much the same way as
’ddhamah, which also occurs often: e.g. ‘land of
Egypt,” ’ereg migrayim (Gen 13 10), and ’adhmath
micgrayim (Gen 47 20). The other words occur
less often, and are used in the senses indicated above.
See Country; Earru. Autrrep Ery Day


LAND-CROCODILE (RV), Jand-crok’é-dil (03,
koth; LXX yopasdtéwv, chamailéon, Lev 11 30; AV
Chameleon): 6h is found only here, meaning an
animal, the fifth in the list of unclean ‘creeping
things.”’ Elsewhere is it tr4 ‘‘strength” or “power,”
and it has been thought that here is meant the
desert monitor, Varanus griseus, a gigantic lizard,
which is common in Egypt and Pal, and which
attains the length of 4 ft. “Chameleon,” which AV
has here, is used by RV for tinshemeth (AV ‘‘mole’),
the eighth in the list of unclean “creeping things”
(ef nasham, ‘‘to breathe”; tr4 “swan” in ver 18 m).
While it is by no means certain what animal is
meant, there could be no objection to “monitor”
or “desert monitor.” ‘‘Land-crocodile”’ is objec-
tionable because it is not a recognized name of any
animal. See CHAMELEON; LIZARD.

Atrrep Exty Day

LAND LAWS. See Acrarian Laws.


LANDMARK, land’mark (Daag, gbhal, lit.
“boundary”): The boundary may have been
marked, as at present, simply by a furrow or stone.
The iniquity of removing a landmark is frequently
insisted on (Dt 19 14; 27 17; Prov 22 28; 23
10; Job 24 2 [g*bhalah]), its removal being equiva-
lent to theft.


LANE, lan (popm, rhvimé): An alley or bypath
ofacity. Occursoncein Lk 14 21, ‘Go out quick-
ly into the streets and lanes of the city’; elsewhere
tr? “street,” e.g. Mt 6 2; Acts 9 11; Ecclus 9 7;
Tob 13 18.


LANGUAGE, lan’gw4j, OF THE NEW TESTA-
MENT (Greek). See Arnamatc Lanauaag, also:
I. aoe VERNACULAR koin€é tHe LANGUAGE OF THE


1. The Old Point of View

2. The Revolution

3. The Proof of the New Position
3) The Papyri

® The Ostraka

vs


The Inscriptions
Modern Greek

(5) Historical and Comparative Grammar

4, Characteristics of the Vernacular koing


TI. Literary ELEMENTS IN THE

III. Tue Semitic Inriuusnce

IV. Inpivipvar Pecuriarities oF THE NT Writers
V. THE koiné Spoken sy Jesus


LITERATURE


I. The Vernacular ‘*koine’’ the Language of
the NT.—The ghost of the old Purist controversy
is now laid to rest for good and all. The story


1827


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 42™?


Language of NT


of that episode has interest chiefly for the historian
of language and of the vagaries of the human in-

tellect. See Winer-Thayer, Grammar
1. The Old of the Idiom of the NT, 1869, 12-19,
Point of and Schmiedel’s Winer, § 2, for a sketch
View of this once furious strife. In the 17th

cent. various scholars tried to prove
that the Gr of the NT was on a par with the literary
Attic of the classic period. But the Hebraists won
the victory over them and sought to show that it
was Hebraic Gr, a special variety, if not dialect, a
Bib. Gr. The 4th ed of Cremer’s Biblico-Theo-
logical Lexicon of NT Gr (tr4 by W. Urwick, 1892)
quotes, with approval, Rothe’s remark (Dogmatik,
1863, 238):

“We may appropriately speak of a language of the
Holy Ghost. ‘or in the Bible it is evident that the Holy
Spirit has been at work, moulding for itself a distinct-
ively religious mode of expressiou out of the language
of the country which it has chosen as its sphere, and
transforming the linguistic elements which it found ready
to hand, and even conceptions already existing, into
a shape and form “Appropriate to itself and all its own.”’

: e


Cremer adds: have a very clear and striking
proof of this in NT Gr.”


This was only twenty years ago and fairly repre-
sented the opinion of that day. Hatch in 1889
(Essays in Bib. Gr, 34) held that with most of the
NT words the key lay in the LXX. But Winer
(Winer-Thayer, 20) had long ago seen that the
vernacular koiné was “‘the special foundation of the
diction of the NT,” though he still admitted “a
Jewish-Gr, which native Greeks did not entirely
understand” (p. 27). He did not see the practical
identity of NT Gr with the vernacular koiné—
(“common’” Greek), nor did Schmiedel in the 8.
Auflage of Winer (I. Theil; II. Theil, erstes Heft
1894-97). In the second ed of his Grammar of N T
Gr (ET by Thackeray, 1905, 2), Blass sees the dawn
of the new day, though his book was first written
beforeit came. Viteau (tude sur le grec du Nouveau
Testament, I, Le verbe, 1893, II, Le sujet, 1896)
occupies wholly the old position of a Judaic Gr.
An extreme instance of that view is seen in Guuille-
mard’s Hebraisms in the Gr Testament (1879).

A turn toward the truth comes with H. A. A.
Kennedy’s Sources of the NT Gr (1895). He finds

the explanation of the vocabulary
2. The of both the LXX and the NT to be
Revolution the vernacular which he traces back

to Aristophanes. It is a good exercise
to read Westcott’s discussion of the “Language of
the NT” in DB, III (1888), andthen turn to Moulton,
“Language of the NT,” in the 1-vol HDB. West-
cott says: ‘The chief peculiarities of the syntax of
the NT lie in the reproduction of Heb forms.”
Moulton remarks: ‘‘There is noreason to believe that
any NT writer who ever lived in Pal learned Gr
only as a foreign language when he went abroad.”
Still better is it to read Moulton, ‘New Testament
Greek in the Light of Modern Discovery” in Cam-
bridge Biblical Essays (1909, 461-505); Deiss-
mann, Idght from the Ancient Hast (1911); or
Angus, “The koiné, the Language of the NT,”
Princeton Review, January, 1910, 42-92. The
revolution has come to stay. It is now clear that
the Gr of the NT is not a jargon nor a patois. In
all essential respects it is just the vernacular koiné
of the 1st cent. AD, the lingua franca of the Gr-
Rom empire, the legacy of Alexander the Great’s
conquest of the East. This world-speech was at
bottom the late Attic vernacular with dialectical
and provincial influences. It was not a decaying
tongue, but a virile speech admirably adapted _to
the service of the many peoples of the time. The
able article in vol IIT of HDB on the ‘‘Language of
the NT” by Dr. J. H. Thayer appeared in 1900, and
illustrates how quickly an encyclopaedia article


may become out of date. There is a wealth of
knowledge here displayed, as one would expect,
but Thayer still speaks of “this species of Greek,”
“this peculiar idiom,” ‘Jewish Greek,” though he
sees that its basis is ‘‘the common or spoken Greek.”
The last topic discussed by him is “Problems.”
He little thought that the biggest “problem” so
near solution was the character of the language
itself. It was Adolph Deissmann, then of Heidel-
berg, now of Berlin, who opened the new era in the
knowledge of the language of the NT. His Bibel-
studien (zumeist aus den Papyri und Inschrifien
zur Geschichte der Sprache, des Schrifitums und der
Religion des hellenistischen Judentums und des
Urchristentums) appeared in 1895. In this epoch-
making volume he proved conclusively from the
papyri and the inscriptions that many of the seem-
ing Hebraisms in the LXX and the NT were com-
mon idioms in the vernacular koiné. He boldly
claimed that the bulk of the Hebraisms were falsely
so termed, except in the case of translating Gr from
the Heb or Aram. or in “perfect’’ Hebraisms, gen-
uine Gr usage made more common by reason of
similarity to the Sem idiom. In 1897 he produced
Neue Bibelstudien, sprachgeschichtliche Beitrage
zumetst aus den Papyri und Inschriften zur Er-
kldrung des Neuen Testaments.

In 1901 (2d ed in 1903) these two volumes were trd
as one by A. Grieve under the title Bible Studies.
Deissmann's other volumes have confirmed his thesis.
The most important are New Light on the NT (1907),
The Philology of the Gr Bible (1908), Licht vom Osten
(1908), Light from the Ancient East (tr by Strachan,
1910), St. Paul in the Light of Social and Religious His-
tory (1912). In Light from the Ancient Fast, Deissmann
illustrates the NT language with much detail from the
papyri, ostraka and Inscriptions. He is now at work


on a new lexicon of the NT which will make use of the
fresh knowledge from these sources.


The otherwise helpful work of E. Preuschen,
Vollstandiges griechisch-deutsches Handwérterbuch
zu den Schriften des Neuen Testaments und der
uibrigen urchristlichen Literatur (1908-10), fails to
utilize the papyri and inscriptions while drawing
on the LXX and the NT Apoc and other early
Christian literature. But this has been done by
Ebeling in his Griechisch-deutsches Wérterbuch zum
NT, 1913. The next step was made by A. Thumb,
the great philologian, in his Griechische Sprache im
Zeitalier des Hellerismus; Beitrége zur Geschichte
und Beurteilung der “koinz,” 1901, in which the real
character of the koiné was for the first time properly
set forth.

Winer and Blass had both lamented the need of a
grammar of the koing, and that demand still exists, but
Thumb went a long way toward supplying it in this
volume. It is to he hoped that he will yet prepare a
grammar of the koiné. Thumb's interests cover the
whole range of comparative philology, but he has
added in this field ‘‘Die Forschungen tiber die helle-
nistische Sprache in den Jahren 1896-1901," Archiv
fir Papyrusforschung, II, 396 f; ‘‘ Prinzipienfragen der
Koiné-Forschung,"’ Neue Jahrb. fir das ki. Ailt., 1906;
“Die sprachgeschichtliche Stellung des biblischen Griech-
isch,’’ Thevlogische Rundschau, V, 85-99.

The other most important name to add is that of
J. Hope Moulton, who has the credit of being the
first to apply the new knowledge directly to the NT
Gr. His Grammar of NT Gr, I, Prolegomena (1906,
2d ed, 1906, 3d ed, 1908, Ger. tr in 1911, Hinlei-
tung in die Sprache des NT) is a brilliant piece of
work and relates the Gr of the NT in careful detail
to the vernacular koiné, and shows that in all im-
portant points it is the common Gr of the time and
not a Hebraic Gr. Moulton probably pressed his
point too far in certain respects in his zeal against
Hebraisms, but the essential position of Deissmann
and Moulton is undoubtedly sound.

Moulton had previously published the bulk of this
material as ‘‘Grammatical Notes from the Papyri,"
The Expositor, 1901, 271-82; 1903, 104-21, 423-39;


Language of NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1828


The Classical Review, 1901, 31-37, 434-41; 1904, 106-
12, 151-55; ‘‘Characteristics of NT Gr," The Ez-
posttor, 1904,

In 1909 appeared his essay, Greek in the Light of
Modern Discovery (see above). Since 1908, The
Expositor has had a series of papers by J. H. Moul-
ton and George Milligan called ‘Lexical Notes
from the Papyri,’”’ which are very useful on the
lexical side of the language. Thus the study is
fairly launched on its new career. In 1900, A. T.
Robertson produced a Syllabus on the NT _Gr Syn-
tax from the standpoint of comparative philology,
which was rewritten in 1908, with the added view-
point of the papyri researches, as A Short Gram-
mar of the Gr NT (2d ed, 1909, 3d ed, 1912; trans-
lations in Italian in 1910, Ger. and Fr. in 1911,
Dutch in 1912). In October, 1909, S. Angus pub-
lished a good article in the Harvard Theological
Review on “Modern Methods in NT Philology,”
followed in January, 1910, by another in the Prince-
ton Review on “The koiné, the Language of the NT.”
The new knowledge appears also in Jakob Wacker-
nagel, “Die griechische Sprache” (pp. 291-318, 2d
ed, of Die griechische und lateinische Literatur wnd
Sprache, 1907). LL. Radermacher has set forth very
ably “‘die sprachlichen Vorgange in ihrem Zusam-
menhang,” in his Neutestameniliche Grammatik: Das
Griechisch des Neuen Testaments im Zusammenhang
mat der Volkssprache. Itisin reality the background
of the NT Gr and is a splendid preparation for the
study of the Gr NT. A full discussion of the new
knowledge in grammatical detail has been prepared
by A. T. Robertson under the title 4 Grammar of
the Gr NT in the Light of Historical Research (in
press). Moulton and Schmiedel are planning also
to complete their works.

The proof of the new position is drawn from
several sources:

(1) The papyri—These rolls have lain in the
museums of the world many years and attracted

little attention. For lists of the chief


3. The collections of the papyri see Moulton,
Proof of Prolegomena, 259-62; Milligan, Se-
the New lections from the Gr Papyri, xi, xii;
Position Mayser, Grammatik der griechischen


Papyrt aus der Ptolemderzeit; Laut-
und Wortlehre, vii-x; Deissmann, Light from the
Ancient Hast, 20-41; Robertson, Grammar of the
Gr NT, Bibliography. New volumes of papyri as
a result of recent explorations in Egypt are pub-
lished each year. See Papyrus, and in the other
encyclopaedias s.v. Most of the papyri discovered
belong to the period of the koiné (the first three
centuries BC and AD in round numbers), and with
great wealth of illustration they show the life of the
common people of the time, whether in Egypt or
Herculaneum (the two chief regions represented).
There are various degrees of culture shown, as can
be seen in any of the large volumes of Grenfell and
Hunt, or in the handbooks of Lietzmann, Griechische
Papyri (1905), and of Milligan, Greek Papyri (1910).
They come from the scrap-heaps of the long ago,
and are mainly receipts, contracts, letters of busi-
ness or love, military documents, etc. They show
all grades of culture, from the illiterate with phonetic
spelling to the man of the schools. But we have
here the language of life, not of the books. Ina
most startling way one notes the similarities of
vocabulary, forms, and syntax between the lan-
guage of the papyri of the Ist cent. AD and that
of the NT books. As early as 1778, F. W. Sturz
made use of the Charta Borgiana, ‘‘the first papyrus
ever brought to Europe” (Deissmann, Light from
the Ancient East, 39), and in 1841 Thiersch like-
wise saw the value of the papyri for the philology
of the LXX. But the matter was not pressed.
Lightfoot threw out a hint about the value of letters


of the people, which was not followed till Deissmann -
saw the point; cf Moulton, Prol., 242. It is not
necessary here to illustrate the matter at length.
Deissmann takes up in detail the ‘‘Biblical” words
in Thayer’s Lexicon, and bas no difficulty in finding
most of them in the papyri (or inscriptions). Thus
wrnpopopéw, plérophoréd, is shown to be common in
the papyri. See Deissmann, Bible Studies and
Light from the Ancient East, for extensive lists.
The papyri show also the same meanings for many
words once thought peculiar to the Bible or the NT.
An instance is seen in the official sense of apeofv-
repos, presbiteros, in the papyri, 6 mpeoBurepos
ris xduns, ho presbiteros tés komés (Pap. Lugd.
A 35f), “without doubt an official designation”
(Deissmann, Bible Studies, 155). So ddedpés,
adelphés, for members of the community, dvacrpo¢,
anastrophé, for manner ‘of life, dvrinuyis, antilém-
psis, “help,” Aeroupyta, lettourgta, ‘public service,”
wdpotxos, pdrotkos, ‘‘sojourner,’ ete (Deissmann,
Light from the Ancient East, 107). R. Helbing
(Grammatik der Septuaginta, 1908) and H. St. John
Thackeray (A Grammar of the OT in Gr according
to the LX X, 1909) have applied the new knowledge
to the language of the LXX, and it has been dis-
cussed with much ability in the first volumes. The
use of the papyri for grammatical purposes is made
easier by the excellent volume of E. Mayser,
Grammatik der griechischen Papyri aus der Ptole-
méderzeit; Laut- und Wortlehre (1906), though his
“Syntax,” is still a desideratum. Useful also is G.
Crénert, Memoria Graeca Herculanensis (1903).

(2) The ostraka.—The literature on this subject
is still small in bulk. In 1899 Ulrich Wilcken pub-
lished Griechische Ostraka aus Aegypten und Nubien,
and in 1902 W. E. Crum produced his book of Chris-
tian ostraka called Coptic Ostraca from the Collec-
tions of the Egypt Exploration Fund, the Cairo
Museum, and Others. This was followed in 1905
by H. R. Hall’s Coptic and Gr Teats of the Christian
Period from Ostraka, Stelae, etc. These broken
pieces of pottery were used by the lowest classes
as writing material. It was very widely used
because it was so very cheap. Wilcken has done
more than anyone else to collect and decipher the
ostraka. Deissrnann (Light from the Ancient East,
46) notes that Cleanthes the Stoic “wrote on ostraka
or on leather’ because too poor to buy papyrus.
So he quotes the apology of a Christian for using
potsherd for a letter: ‘“‘“Excuse me that I cannot find
papyrus as I am in the country” (Crum, Coptic
Ostraca, 55). The use of dréxw, apéchd, on an
ostrakon for a receipt in full, illustrates well the
frequent use of this word in the NT (Deissmann,
Light from the Ancient East, 111).

(3) The inscriptions—Here caution must be
used since many of the inscriptions give, not the
vernacular, but the literary language. The official
(legal and military) decrees often appear in very
formal style. But a number do preserve the ver-
nacular idiom and often have the advantage of
being dated. These inscriptions are chiefly on
stone, but some are on metal and there are a few
wax tablets. The material is vast and is constantly
growing. See list of the chief collections in Deiss-
mann’s Light fromthe Ancient East, 10-20. Boeckh
is the great name here. As early as 1779 Walch
(Observationes in Matt. ex graecis_inscriptionibus)
made use of Gr inscriptions for NT exegesis, and
R. A. Lipsius says that his father (K. H. A. Lipsius,
author of Grammatische Untersuchungen viber die
biblische Gracitat) “contemplated a large grammar
of the Gr Bible in which he would have availed
himself of the discoveries in modern epigraphy”
(Deissmann, Light, etc, 15). Schmiedel has made
good use of the inscriptions so far in his revision of
Winer; H. A. A. Kennedy (Sources of NT Gr, 1895),


1829


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Language of NT


H. Anz (Subsidia ad Cogn., etc, 1894), R. Helbing
(Grammatik der Septuaginia, 1908), J. Psichari
(Essai sur le Grec de la Septante, 1908), H. St.
John Thackeray (A Grammar of the OT in Gr
according to the LXX, 1909), and R. Meister (Prol.
zu einer Grammatik der Septuaginia, 1907) turned
to good account the inscriptions for the linguistic
problems of the LXX, as indeed Hatch (Essays in
Bib. Gr, 1889) had already done. W. Dittenberger
added some valuable “Grammatica et ortho-
graphica” to his Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Se-
lectae (2 vols, 1908, 1905). See also E. L. Hicks
and G. F. Hill, Gr Historical Inscriptions (1901),
and Hicks’s paper “(On Some Political Terms Em-
ployed in the NT,” Classical Review, 1887, 4 ff,
42 ff. W. M. Ramsay’s Cities and Bishoprics of
Phrygia (2 vols, 1895, 1897) and his other works
show keen insight in the use of the inscriptions.
Deissmann’s Bible Studies (1895, 1901) applicd
the knowledge of the inscriptions to the L and
to the NT. In his Light from the Ancient East
(1910) copious use is made of the inscriptions for
NT study. Moulton (Prol., 1906, 258 f, for lists)
is alive to the value of the inscriptions for NT
grammar, as indeed was Blass (Grammatik des
neutestamentlichen Griechisch, 1896) before him.

Cf, further, G. Thieme, Die Inschriften von Mag-
nesia am Mdander und das Neue Testament (1906);
'T. Nigeli, Der Wortschatz des Apostels Paulus (1905),
and J. Rouffiac, Recherches sur les caractéres du Grec
dans le NT iagnes les Inscr. de Prigne (1911). Special
treatises or phases of the grammar of the Iinscrip-
tions appear in Meisterhans-Schwyzer, Grammatik der
attischen Inschriften (1900); Nachmanson, Laute und
Formen der magnetischen Inschriften( 1896); Schweizer,
Grammatik der pergamenischen Inschriften (1898).

Moulton and Milligan have drawn freely also on
the inscriptions for their “Lexical Studies” running
in The Expositor (1908-). The value of the in-
scriptions for the Gr of the NT is shown at every
turn. For instance, mpwréroxos, pratétokos, is no
longer a “Biblical” word. It appears in a metrical
inscription (undated) of Trachonitis on a tomb of
a pagan “high priest” and “friend of the gods”
(Deissmann, Light, etc, 88); ef Kaihel, Epigram-
mata Graeca, etc, no. 460. Even_dydrn, agape,
occurs on a pagan inscription of Pisidia (Papers
of the American School of Classical Studies at
Athens, 2, 57). See, further, W. H. P. Hatch’s
“Some Illustrations of NT Usage from Gr Inserip-
tions of Asia Minor,” Journal of Bib. Ivt., 1908,
134-46. ae

(4) Modern Greek.—As early as 1834 Heilmeier
saw that the modern Gr vernacular went back to
the koing (Moulton, Prol., 29), but it is only in
_ reeent years that it was clearly seen that the modern
Cr of the schools and usually in the newspapers 1s
artificial, and not the real vernacular of today.
Mullach’s work (Grammatik der griechischen Vul-
garsprache, 1856) was deficient in this respect. But
Jannaris’ Historical Gr Grammar (1897) carries
the history of the vernacular Gr along with the
literary style. Hatzidakis, Hinleitwng in die neu-
griechische Grammatik, 1892, clears the air very
much and connects the modern Gr with the NT.


But it is to Thumb that we are indebted for the best |.


knowledge of the vernacular (4 dyuorcxy, hé démoatiké)
as opposed to the literary language (9 xaSapeiovea,
ha katharetiousa) of today. Mitsotakis (Praktische
Grammatik, 1891) had treated both together,
though Wied (Die Kunst, die neugriechische Volk-
sprache) gave only the vernacular. But Wied is
only elementary. Thumb alone has given an ade-
quate treatment of the modern Gr vernacular,
showing its unity and historical contact with the
vernacular koin@ (Handbuch der neugriechischen
Volkssprache, 1895; Thumb-Angus, Handbook of
Modern Greek Vernacular, 1912). Thus one can


see the living stream of the NT speech as it has
come on down through the ages. It is impossible
to overestimate the importance of modern Gr
vernacular in the knowledge of NT Gr. The dis-
Brean of the optative, the vanishing of the
infinitive before ta, hina, and itacism are but in-
stances of many others which are luminous in the
light of the modern Gr vernacular. See Psichari,
Essais de grammaire historique néo-grecque (1886-89).
(5) Historical and comparative grammer.—From
this source the koin@ gets a new dignity. It will
take one too far afield to sketch here the linguistic
revolution wrought since the publication of, and
partly caused by, Bopp’s Verglachende Gram-
matik (1857), following Sir Wm. Joncs’s discovery
of Sanskrit. The great work of Brugmann and
Delbriick (Grundriss der vergleichenden Grammatik
der indogermanischen Sprachen, I-V, 1892-1909)
marks the climax of the present development,
though many workers have won distinction in this
field. The point to accent here is that by means of
comparative philology the Gr language is seen in
its proper relations with other languages of the
Indo-Germanic family, and the right interpretation
of casc, preposition, mode, tense, voice, etc, is
made possible. The old traditional empiricism is
relegated to the scrap-heap, and a new grammatical
science consonant with the facts has taken its place.
See Delhriick, Intro to the Study of Language (1882),
Giles, Short Manual of Comparative Philology (1901),
for a résumé of the facts. Wright, Comparative
Grammar of the Gr Language (1912), applies the
new learning to the Gr tongue. The progress in
classical scholarship is well shown by Sandys in
his History of Classical Scholarship (-IiL 1906—-
8) and by Gudeman, Geschichte der klass. Phil-
ologie, 2. Aufl, 1909. Innumerahle monographs
have enriched the lit. of this subject. It is now
feasible to see the Gr language as a whole, and grasp
its historical unity. Seen in this light the koiné
is not a dying tongue ora corrupt dialect. Itisa
normal and natural evolution of the Gr dialects
into a world-speech when Alexander’s conquests
made it possible. The vernacular koiné which has
developed into the moderu Gr vernacular was itself
the direct descendant of the Attic vernacular which
had its roots in the vernacular of the earlier dialects.
The dialectical developments are closely sketched by
Thumb, Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte (1909),
and by Buck, Intro to the Study of Gr Dialects (1910),
not to mention the older works of Hoffmann,
Meister, etc. Jannaris has undertaken in his His-
torical Gr Grammar (1897) to sketch and interpret
the facts of the Gr tongue throughout its long
career, both in its literary and vernacular aspects.
He has succeeded remarkably well on the whole,
though not quite secing the truth about the modern
Gr vernacular. Schanz is seeking to lay the founda-
tion for still better work by his Beitrdge zur his-
torischen Syntax der griechischen Sprache (1882-).
But the NT student must be open to all the new
light from this region, and it is very great. See,
further, Dicterich, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte
der griech. Sprache von der hellen. Zeit (1898).
As already indicated, the Gr of the NT is in the
main just the vernacular koiné of the Ist cent. AD,
though Gr as used by men of ability
4, Charac- and varying degrees of culture. The
teristics of most penne difference between the
the Ver- vernacular koiné and the literary
nacular Attic is seen in the vocabulary. The
“koiné” writers in the literary koing show more
likeness to the classic Attic, but even
they reveal the changes due to the intervening
centuries. There was, of course, no violent break.
The changes came gradually and naturally. It is
mainly at this point that Deissmann has done such


Language of NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1830


brilliant work in his Bible Studies and other books.
He has taken the lists of “Biblical” and “ecclesias-
tical” words, as given by Cremer and Thayer, and
has shown from the papyri, ostraka, inscriptions,
or koiné writers that they are not peculiar to the
Bible, but belong to the current speech of the time.
The proof is so overwhelming and extensive that
it cannot be given here. Some words have not yet
been found im the non-Bib. koing, but they may
be any day. Some few words, of course, belong
to the very nature of Christianity (xpeortavés,
christianés, for instance), but drécrodos, apédstolos,
Barriopss, baptismés, mdpoxos, pdrotkos, cvva-
yoyh, sunagogé, and hundreds of others can no
longer be listed as “Biblical.” New meanings come
to old words also. Cf daudnov, daiménion. It
is interesting to note that the NT shows many of
the words found in Aristophanes, who caught up
the vernacular of his day. The koiné uses more
words from the lower strata of society. Aris-
totle likewise has many words common in the
kotné, since he stands at the parting of the ways
between the old dialects and the new koiné of Alex-
ander’s conquests. The koiné develops a fondness
for compound and even double compound (ses-
quipedalian) words; cf, for instance, dvexdipynros,
anekdiégétos; dvexdddyros, anekldlétos; dvetepedvntos,
anexeretiinétos; dvramoxplvouat, antapokrinomai; olxo-
decmérys, oikodespétés; édcybyuxos, oligépsuchos;
mpocavaTdypsw, prosanaplér66; svvayridapBdvopar,
sunantilambdnomai; brepevrvyxdvu, huperentugchané;
xpvaodaxrinios, chrusodaktilios, etc. The use of
diminutives is also noteworthy in the koiné as in the
modern Gr: cf 6vydrpiov, thugdirion; krwdpov, kli-
nérion; xopdovov, kordsion; xuvdptov, kundrion; évdpuv,
ondrion; épdpr, opsdrion; mhoidpiov, ploidrion;
wriov, dtion, etc. Theformation of words by juxta-
position is very common as in rAnpo-dopéw, pléro-
phorébd, xetpb-ypagov, cheiré-graphon. In phonetics
it is to be noticed that et, o, 9, 7, v, ¢ all had the
value of @é in “feet.” This itaclsm was apparent
in the early koiné. So ai=e and o and » were not
sharply distinguished. The Attic rr became ac,
save in a few instances, like éAdrrw, elditd, xpelr-
twy, kretiton. The tendency toward de-aspira-
tion (cf Jonic) was manifest; cf é¢’ édrids, eph’
helpidz, for the reverse process. Elision is lesa fre-
quent than in Attic, but assimilation is carried
farther. The variable final consonants » and s
are used generally before consonants. We find
-e- for -te- as in ety, Ovéels, outheis, and ynéels,
métheis, are common till 100 BC, when they
gradually disappear before ovdels, oudeis, and
padels, médets. In general there is less sense of
rhythm and more simplicity and clearness. Some
of the subtle refinements of form and syntax of the
classic did not survive in the koiné vernacular. In
accidence only a few points may be noted. In
substantives the Ionic -pys, -rés, is frequent. The
Attic second declension vanishes. In the third de-
clension forms like werav, mikian, show assimilation
to the first. Both xdpuv, chérin, and xdpera, chdrita,
occur. Contraction is sometimes absent (cf Ionic)
as in épéwv, oréon. Adjectives show forms like
dopadiv, asphalén, and indeclinable ri%jpns, plérés,
appears, and wav, pdn, for wdvra, pdnta (cf péyay,
mégan), Svot, dust, for dvotv, duoin. The dual is
gone. Even the dual pronouns éxdrepos, hekd-
teros, and wérepos, péteros, are rare. Tis, tts, is
occasionally used like 8oris, hdstis. “Os édv, hés
edn, is more frequent than és av, hés dn, in the Ist
cent. AD. The two conjugations blend more and
more into one, as the w-forms vanish. There is
some confusion in the use of -éw and -ew-verbs,
and new presents occur like droxrévyw, apokténnd,
énrdvw, optind, otHaw, sléko. The forms ~yivopat,
ginomat, yiwéoxw, gindské, are the rule now. There


is much increase in aorists like érxa, éscha, and
imperfects like efya, eicha. The form -ogav, -osan
(exocav, etchosan, €oxocav, éschosan) occasionally
appears. Quite frequent is a perfect like dédwxap,
dédékan, and the augment is often absent in the plu-
perfect as in dedaxe, dedéket. Per contra, a double
augment occurs in dmrexarécry, apekaiést?, and a
treble augment in #vegxOyoav, Eneéchihésan. The
temporal augment is often absent with diphthong
as in olxodou46y, oikodométhé. The koiné has
-Twoav, -losan, not -vTw», -nién. In syntax the
tendency is toward simplicity, to short sentences,
the paratactic construction, and the sparing use of
articles. The vernacular Koiné avoids both the
bombast of Asianism and the artificiality of Atti-
cism. There is, indeed, more freedom in violating
the rules of concord as to gender, number, and case.
The nominativus pendens is common. The com-
parative does duty often for the superlative adjec-
tive, and the superlative generally has the elative
sense. The accusative 1s increasingly common
with verbs. The line between transitive and _in-
transitive verbs is not a hard-and-fast one. The
growth in the use of prepositions both with nouns
and in composition is quite noticeable, but some of
the older prepositions, like du@t, ampht, are vanish-
ing. The cases used with various prepositions are
changing. The instrumental use of é», en, is very
common. Many new adverbial and prepositional
phrases have developed. The optative is nearly
dead and the infinitive (apart from the use of rod,
lou, év TQ, en 16, els 76, eis t6, with the infinitive) is
decaying before tva, hina. The future part. is rare.
Mj, mé, begins to encroach on o@, ou, with infinitives
and participles. The periphrastic conjugation is
specially common. The direct discourse is more
frequent than the indirect. The non-final use of
ta, hina, is quite noticeable. There are, besides,
dialectical and provincial peculiarities, but these
do not destroy the real unity of the vernacular
koiné any more than do individual traits of separate


- writers.


Il, Literary Elements in the NT.—Deissmann
(Light from the Ancient East, 245) is disposed to
deny any literary quality to the NT books save
the Ep. to the He. “The Ep. to the He shows us
Christianity preparing for a flight from its native
levels into the higher region of culture, and we are
conscious of the beginnings of a Christian world-
literature.” He speaks of it also as ‘a work which
seerns to hang in the background like an intruder
among the NT company of popular books.’”’ One
feels that this is an extreme position and cannot
be justified by the facts. It is true that Peter and
John were dypdéuparot cal t&rat, agrdémmatot kat
idiétat (Acts 4 13), and not men of the schools,
but this was certainly not the case with Luke and
Paul who were men of literary culture in the truest
sense. Luke and Paul were not Atticists, but that
artificial idiom did not represent the best type of
culture. Deissmann admits that the NT has be-
come literature, but, outside of He, he denies any
literary quality in its composition. Paul, for in-
stance, wrote only “letters,” not “epistles.”’ But
Romand Eph confront us. See Milligan, Gr Papyri,
xxxi, for a protest against the sweeping statement
of Deissmann on this point. One need not go to
the extreme of Blass, “Die rhythmische Komposi-
tion des Hebr. Briefes,” Theol. Studien und Kritik,
1902, 420-61; Die Rythmen der asiatischen und
rémischen Kunstprosa, 1905, to find in Hebrews
and Paul’s writings illustrations of the artificial
rules of the Asianists. There is undoubtedly
rhythm in Paul’s eloquent passages (cf 1 Cor 13,
15), but it is the natural poetic quality of a soul
aflame with high passions, not conformity to rules
of rhetoric. To deny literary quality to Luke and


1831


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Language of NT


Paul is to give a narrow meaning to the word
“literary” and to be the victim of a theory.
Christianity did make use of the vernacular koiné,
the wonderful world-speech so providentially at
hand. But the personal equation figured here as
always. Men of culture differ in their conversa-
tion from illiterate men and more nearly approxi-
mate literary style. It is just in Luke, Paul, and
the author of He that we discover the literary
flavor of men of ability and of culture, though free
from artificiality and pedantry. The eloquence of
He is that of passion, not of the art of Asianism.
Indeed, the Gospels all show literary skill in the
use of material and in beauty of language. The
Gospel of Jn has the rare elevation and dignity
of the highest type of mind. There is no Atticistic
tendency in the NT as in Jos, Ant. There is no
osing for the present or for posterity. It is the
anguage of life, the vernacular in the main, but
rising at times from the very force of passion to
high plateaus of emotion and imagination and
poetic grace from the pens of men of real ability,
and in some instances of high culture.

Il. The Semitic Influence.—It is no longer pos-
sible to explain every variation in the NT from the
classic Attic by the term Hebraism. That easy
solution has disappeared. Sooth to say, when the
true character of the vernacular koiné is understood,
there is not very much left to explain. The NT
Gr as a rule is just normal koing. Milligan (Gr
Papyri, xxx) admits on the part of Moulton “an
overtendency to minimize” the “presence of un-
doubted Hebraisms, both in language and gram-
mar.” That is true, and is due to his strong reac-
tion against the old theory of so many Hebraisms.
The Semiticisms (Hebraisms and Aramaisms) are
very natural results of the fact that the vernacular
koiné was used by Jews who read the Heb Bible
and the LXX tr, and who also spoke Aram. as their
native tongue. The LXX, as tr of Gr, directly
from the Heb (or Aram.), has a much greater number
of these Semiticisms. See Swete, An Intro to the
OT in Gr (1900), for the salient facts. Thackeray
in his Grammar of the OT in Gr (1909) shows “‘the
xow}—the basis of Septuagint Gr” in §3, and in
§4 discusses ‘‘the Sem element in Septuagint Gr.”
The matter varies in different parts of the LXX,
but in all parts the Sem influence goes far beyond
what it is in the NT. In the NT we have free
composition in Gr, except in certain portions of the
Gospels and Acts where Aram. originals (oral or
written) lie beyond the Gr text. So in particular
Lk 1, the words of Jesus in Lk 2, and the opening
chapters of Acts. See Dalman, Words of Jesus
(1902), and J. T. Marshall, “The Aram. Gospel,”
Expos, Ser. IV vols H-VIII; see also Aramaic
supra, There is, to some extent, translation-Gr,
as in the LXX. The quotations from the OT
are either from the Heb original, or, a3 most fre-
quently, from the LXX. In either case we have
translation-Gr again. These two classes cover the
more obvious Semiticisms if we add Heb names
(persons and places) and other transliterations like
&Badiev, abaddin, dddndotia, allélovia. The Gr
of the LXX does not, of course, give a true picture
of the Gr spoken by the Jews in Alexandria or
Pal. But the constant reading of the LXX was
bound to leave its impress on the style of the people
(cf the King James Version and the Eng. lenguece):
The surprise, in fact, is not the number of Semiti-
cisms, but, all things considered, the fewness of
them. Luke, just because he was a Gentile and so
noted the Hebraisms in the LXX, shows rather more
of them than the other NT writers: ef mpocééero
rotrov méuyat, prosétheto triton pémpsat (Lk 20
12). Some of the points of style so common in the
LXX find occasional || in the papyri or inscriptions,


like Br\éruv Brérw, blépin bléps, xapG xalpw, chard
chatro, 8»... . durév, hon... . autén. Others
are more obviously imitations of the Heb style, as
in dpécxey dvarriby rivos, aréskein endpidn tinos,
rather than dpéoxev roi, aréskein tint. But there
is a certain dignity and elevation of style so char-
acteristic of the Heb OT that reappears in the NT.
The frequent use of «at, kat, in parts of the NT
reminds one of the LXX and the Heb waw. There
is, besides, an indefinable tone in the NT that is
found in the OT. Swete ( Apocalypse of Si. John,
cxx) laments the tendency to depreciate unduly the
presence of Hebraisms in the NT. The pendulum
may have swung too far away from the truth. It
will strike the level, but we shall never again be
able to fill our grammars and comms. with explana-
tions of so many peculiar Hebraisms in the NT.
On the whole the Gr NT is standard vernacular
koiné.

IV. Individual Peculiarities of NT Writers.—
There is not space for an extended discussion of
this topic. The fact itself calls for emphasis, for
there is a wide range in style between Mark’s Gos-
pel and He, 1 Pet and Rom, Luke’s Gospel and the
Apocalypse. There are no Atticists found in the
NT (cf 4 Mace in the LXX and Jos), but there
are the less literary writings (Mt, Mk, the Johan-
nine books, the other catholic epp.) and the more
literary writings (Luke’s writings, Paul’s Epp., and
He). But even so, no hard-and-fast line can he
drawn. Moulton, Cambridge Biblical Essays, 484,
thinks 2 Pet more like the Atticistic writings, “though
certainly the Atticists would have scorned to own
a book so full of ‘solecisms.’’’ Moulton assumes
that 2 Pet is pseudepigraphic, and does not credit
the notion that the crude ‘‘Babu’”’ Gr, to use Ab-
bott’s term, may be Peter’s own uncorrected style
(cf Acts 4 13), while 1 Pet may have the smoothing
effect of Silvanus’ hand (cf 1 Pet 6 12). A similar
explanation is open concerning the grammatical
lapses of the Apocalypse, since John is also called
aypdyuaros, agrdmmatos, in Acts 4 13, whereas
the Gospel of Jn may have had the revision of the
elders of Ephesus (cf Jn 21 24). But whatever
the explanation, there is no doubt of the wide di-
vergencesof style between different books and groups
of books in the NT list. The Lukan, Johannine,
Petrine, Pauline groups stand apart, but with
cleavages within each group. Harnack (Luke the
Physician, 1907; The Sayings of Jesus, 1908; The
Acts of the Apostles, 1909; The Date of the Acts of
the Apostles, 1911) has accepted and strengthened
the contention of Hawkins (Horae Synopticae,
2d ed, 1909) and of Hobart (Medical Language of
Luke, 1882) that the medical terms in the Gospel
of Luke and of Acts show that the books were
written by the same writer and that a physician,
and so Luke. The diversities in style here and
there are chiefly due to the sources of information
used. Even in the Pauline books, which form so
well-marked a collection, striking diversities of
language and style appear. But these letters cover
a period of some 15 years of intense activity and
mental and spiritual development, and treat a
great variety of topics. They properly reflect the
changing phases of Paul’s preaching of the cross
of Christ in different places and under varying cir-
cumstances and confronting ever fresh problems.
The plays of Shakespeare offer a useful parallel.
Even in Paul’s old age, in the Pastoral Epistles the
stamp of Paul’s spirit is admitted by those who
admit erly Pauline fragments; cf J. Weiss, Bei-
trége zur Paulinschen Rhetorik (1897). The style
is indeed the man, but style is also the function of
the subject, and style varies with different periods
of a man’s life. E. A. Abbott has made an ex-
cellent discussion of the Johannine Vocabulary


Languagesof OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1832


(1905) and of Johannine Grammar (1906), but special
grammars of each writer are hardly to be expected
or desired. But Nageli has begun a study of Paul’s
vocabulary in his Wortschatz des Apostels Paulus
(1905). The Gospel of Mt shows very little of that
Hebraism that’ one would expect from the general
purpose and tone of the book. It is possible, of
course, that the supposed original was in Aram., or,
if in Gr, of a more Hebraistic type. Whether the
present Gr Mt made use of Mark’s Gospel and a
collection of Logia (Q), we do not know. Cer-
tainly Mark’s Gospel is written in colloquial koiné
with little evidence of the culture of the schools.
Mark is a faithful reporter and does his work with
rare simplicity and vividness. He reveals clearly
the Aram. background of Christ’s teaching. The
writings of James and Jude do not show that only
Gr was spoken in the home at Nazareth, nor that
they used only Aram. These two epp. are evidently
free compositions in Gr with much of the freshness
of imagery so manifest in the parables of Jesus
Himself. ‘This brief sketch does not do justice to
the richness and variety of language in the books
of the NT.

V. The ‘‘koine’’ Spoken by Jesus.—See Ara-
marc LancuaGg for proof that Jesus spoke that
language as the vernacular of the people of Pal.
But Christ spoke the koiné also, so that the NT is
not an idiom that was unknown to the Master.
Gwilliam (1-vol HDB, “Language of Christ’) does
still deny that Jesus spoke Gr, while Roberts takes
the other extreme in his book, Gr the Language
of Christ and His Apostles (1888). Per conira
again, Jilicher considers it impossible to suppose
that Jesus used Gr (art. “Hellenism” in #B).
J. E. H. Thomson, ‘The Language of Pal during
the Time of Our Lord” (Temple, Bible Dict.) argues
convincingly that Pal was bi-lingual and that Jesus
knew and spoke Gr as well as Aram. Peter evi-
dently spoke in Gr on the Day of Pentecost and
was understood by all. Paul was understood in
Jerus when he spoke in Gr (Acts 21 37). Jesus
taught in Decapolis, a Gr region, in the region of
Tyre and Sidon (Gr again). Galilee itself was
largely inhabited by Gentiles who spoke Gr. At
the time of the Sermon on the Mount, we read that
people were present from Decapolis and Pcraea,
besides the mixed multitude from Galilee, Judaea,
and Jerus (Mt 4 25; Lk 6 17). Thomson proves
also that in Matthew’s Gospel the quotation from the
OT in the words of Jesus is from the LXX, while
Matthew’s own quotations are from the Heb. The
case seems clear. It is not possible to say always
when Jesus spoke Gr and when Aramaic. That
would depend on the audience. But itis practically
certain that Christ Himself knew and spoke at will
the vernacular koiné, and thus had this linguistic
bond with the great world of that era and with
lovers of the Gr Test. today.


Lirzraturs.—The lit. on this subject is very exten-
sive. The most important volumes have been mentioned
in the discussion above.

A. T. Ropertson


LANGUAGES, lan’gwaj-es, OF THE OLD
TESTAMENT:


I, Tar Semitic LanouacgEs
1. Members of Semitic Famlly
2. The Name Hebrew
8. Old Hebrew Literature
II. History or TRE Hesrew LAnecvuaoEe
. Oldest Form of Language
The Hebrew of the OT
Its Uniformity
The Cause Thereof
Differences Dune to Age
Differences of Style
Forelgn Influences
Poetry and Prose
Home of the Hebrew Language
. Its Antiquity
. When Hebrew Became a Dead Language


ROL SNO oe Mr


iad


III. Cuizr Cuaaractenristics or HEBREW
. Characteristic Sounds
. Letters Representing Two Sounds
Consonants Representing Vowels
The Syllable
Three-Letter Roots
Conjugations or Derived Stems
. Absence of Tenses
The Pronouns
Formatiou of Nouns
. Internal Inflexion
. Syntax of the Verb
. Syntax of the Noun

13. Poverty of Adjectives
IV. BrBricat ARAMAIC

1. Aramaic Portions of the OT -


| all ood cael
WH SONS OUP oto


2. Phonology

3. Grammar

4. Syntax

5. Aramaic More Decadent than Hebrew

V. Lirerary CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SEMITES

1. Concrete and Abstract

2. View of Nature

3. Pictorial Imagination

4. Prose and Poetry

5. Hebrew Easy of Translation
LitERATURB

There were only two languages employed in the
archetypes of the OT books (apart from an Egyp
or Pers or Gr word here and there), namely, Heb
and Bib. Aram., both of which belong to the great
family of languages known as Semitic.

I. The Semitic Languages.—The languages
spoken in Southwestern Asia during the historical
period dealt with in the Bible have been named
Shemitic, after the son of Noah from whom the ma-
jority of peoples speaking these languages—Arabs,
Hebrews, Aramaeans and Assyrians (Gen 10 21 ff)
~—were descended. To show, however, that the
description does not fit exactly the thing described—
the Elamites and Lydians having probably not
spoken a Shemitic language, and the Canaanites,
including Phoenicians, with the colonists descended
from those at Carthage and elsewhere in the Medi-
terranean coast lands, as well as the Abyssinians
(Ethiopians), who did, being reckoned descendants
of Ham (Gen 9 18; 10 6 ff)—the word is now gen-
erally written “Semitic,” aterm introduced by Hich-
horn (1787). These languages were spoken from
the Caspian Sea to the 8. of Arabia, and from the
Mediterranean to the valley of the Tigris.

The following list shows the chief members of this


family:
(1) South Semitie or Arabic, in-
1. Members cluding the language of the Sahaean
of Semitic (Himyaritic) inscriptions, as well as
Family Ge’ez or Ethiopic. Arab. is now
spoken from the Caucasus to Zanzi-
bar, and from the East Indies to the Atlantic.

(2) Middle Sem or Canaanitish, including Heb,
old and new, Phoen, with Punic, and Moabitish
(language of MS).

(3) North Sem or Aram., including (a) East
Aram. or Syrian (language of Syrian Christians),
language of Bab Talm, Mandaean;: (6) West or
Palestinian Aram. of the Tgs, Palestinian Talm
(Gemara), Bib. Aram. (‘‘Chaldee’’), Samaritan,
language of Nabataean inscriptions.

P (4) Hast Sem—language of Assyr-Bab inscrip-
ions.

With the exception of a few chapters and frag-
ments mentioned below, the OT is written entirely

in Heb. In the OT itself this lan-


2. The guage is called “‘the Jews’”’ (2 K 18 26.
Name 28). In Isa 19 18 it is called pocti-
Hebrew cally, what in fact it was, “the lan-


_ guage [Heb “lip”] of Canaan.” In
the appendix to the LXX of Job it is called Syriac;
and in the introduction to Ecclus it is for the first
time—that is, in 130 BC—named Heb. The term
Heb in the NT denotes the language of the OT in
Rev 9 11, but in Jn 6 2; 19 13.17 this term means
the vernacular Aramaic. In other passages it is


1833


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Languages of OT


doubtful which is meant. Jos uses the same name
for both. From the time of the Tgs, Heb is called
“the sacred tongue” in contrast to the Aram. of
everyday use. The language of the OT is called
Old Heb in contrast to the New Heb of the Mish,

the rabbinic, the Spanish poetry, etc.
Of Old Heb the remains are contained almost
entirely in the OT. A few inscriptions have been
recovered, i.e., the Siloam Inscriptions,


3. Old a Heb calendar, a large number of
Hebrew ostraka from Samaria, a score of pre-
Literature  exilic seals, and coins of the Macca-

bees and of the time of Vespasian and
Hadrian.


Literaturs.—EH. Renan, Histoire générale et systems
comparé des langues sémitiques; F. Hommel, Die semit.
Valker u. Sprachen; the comparative grammars of Wright
and Brockelmann; CIS; art. ‘‘Semitic Languages" in Enc
Brit, and Murray's Illustrated Bible Dict.


Il. History of the Hebrew Language.—Heb as it
appears to usin the OT is in a state of decadence
corresponding to the present position of spoken
Arabic. In the earliest period it no doubt resem-
bled the classical Arabic of the 7th and following
centuries. The variations found between the various
strata of the language occurring in the OT are slight
compared with the difference between modern and
ancient Arabic.

Heb was no doubt originally a highly inflected
language, like classical Arabic. The noun had

three cases, nom., gen., and acc., end-


1. Oldest ing in um, im, am, respectively, as in
Form of the Sabaean inscriptions. Both vbs.
Language and nouns had three numbers (sing.,

dual and pl.) and two genders, masc.
and fem. In the noun the dual and pl. had two
cases. The dual and 2d and 3d pers. pl. and 2d


pers. sing. fem. of the impf. of the vb. ended in nan.
In certain positions the m of the endings um, im,
am in the noun was dropped. The vb. had three
moods, indicative, subjunctive, and jussive, ending
in u, a, and - respectively; as well as many forms
or stems, each of which had an active and passive


voice.
In the Heb of the OT most of these inflexions have
disappeared. Of the three cases of the noun only
the acc. am has survived in a few


2. The adverbial forms, such as ’omnam,
Hebrew of “truly.” The dual has entirely dis-
the OT appeared from the vb., and also from


the noun, with the exception of things
that occur in pairs, such as hand, eye, which have
no pl. The nom. case of the dual and pl. of the
noun has disappeared, and the oblique case is used
for both. Except in cases of poetic archaism the
final nan of the vb. has been lost,. and, as the final
vowels have fallen away in vbs., as well as in nouns,
the result is that the jussive forms serve for indic.
and subj. also. Many of the forms or stems have
fallen into desuetude, and the passive forms of two
alone are used. ,
One of the most remarkable facts connected with
the Heb of the OT is that although that lit. extends
through a period of over 1,000 years,
there is almost no difference betwoen
the language of the oldest parts and
that of the latest. This phenomenon
is susceptible of several explanations. In the first
place, nearly the whole of the OT lit. is religious in
character, and as such the earliest. writings would
become the model for the later, just as the Kor4n
—the first prose work composed in Arab. which
has survived—has become the pattern for all future
compositions. The same was true for many cen-
turies of the influence of Aristophanes and Euripides
upon the language of educated Greeks, and, it is said,
of the influence of Confucius upon that of the learned
Chinese.


3. Its Uni-
formity


But a chief cause is probably the fact that the
Sem languages do not vary with time, but with


lace. The Arab. vocabulary used
4. The in Morocco differs from that of Egypt,
Cause but the Arab. words used in each of
Thereof these countries have remained the same


for centuries—in fact, since Arab.
began to be spoken in them. Similarly, the slight
differences which are found in the various parts of
the OT are to be ascribed, not to a difference of
date, but to the fact that some writers belonged to
the Southern Kingdom, some to the Northern, some
wrote in Pal, some in Babylonia (cf Neh 13 23.24;
Jgs 12 6; 18 3).
The OT lit. falls into two main periods: that
composed before and during the Bab exile, and
that which falls after the exile. But
5. Differ- even between these two periods the
ences Due differences of language are compara-
to Age tively slight, so that it is often difficult
or impossible to say on linguistic
grounds alone whether a particular chapter is pre-
or post-exilic, and scholars of the first rank often
hold the most contrary opinions on these points.
For instance, Dillmann places the so-called docu-
ment P before D in the regal period, whereas most
critics date D about 621 and P about 444 BC.
It is needless to add that the various writers differ
from one another in point of style, but these var-
iations are infinitesimal compared with


6. Differ- those of Gr and Lat authors, and are
ences of due, as has been said above, largely
Style to locality and environment. Thus


the style of Hosea is quite different
from that of his contemporary Amos, and that of
Deutero-Isa shows very distinctly the mark of its
place of composition.
A much more potent factor in modifying the lan-
guage was the influence of foreign languages upon
Heb, esp. in respect to vocabulary.
7. Foreign The earliest of these was probably
Influences LEgyp, but of much greater importance
was Assyr, from which Heb gained a
large number of loan words. It is well known that
the Bab script was used for commercial purposes
throughout Southwestern Asia, even before the He-
brews entered Canaan (see Text), but the influence
of Babylon upon Pal seems to have been greatly
exaggerated. The main point of contact is in the
mythology, which may have been common to both
peoples. In the later, esp. post-exilic stages of the
language, many Aramaisms are found in respect
to syntax as well as vocabulary; and in later phases
still, Pers and even Gr words are found.
As in other languages, so in Heb, the vocabulary
of the poetical lit. differs from that of the prose
writers. In Heb, however, there is
8. Poetry not the hard-and-fast distinction be-
and Prose tween these two which obtains in the
classics. _ Whenever prose becomes
elevated by the importation of feeling, it falls into
a natural rhythm which in Heb constitutes poetry.
Thus most of the so-called prophetical books are
poetical in form, Another mark of poetry is a
return to archaic grammatical forms, esp. the
restoration of the final nan in the vb.
The form of Sem which was indigenous in the
land of Canaan is sometimes called Middle Sem.
Before the Israclites entered the
9. Home of country, it was the language of the
the Hebrew Canaanites from whom the Hebrews
Language took it over. That Heb was not the
language of Abraham before his migra-
tion appears from the fact that he is called an
Aramaean (Dt 26 5), and that Laban’s native
language was Aramaic (Gen 31 47). <A further
point is that the word “‘Sea’’ is used for the West


Languagesof OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1834


and “Negeb” for the South, indicating Pal as the
home of the language (so Isa 19 18).
As the aboriginal inhabitants of the land of
Canaan were not Semites, we cannot infer the exist-
ence of the Heb language any_earlier
10. Its than the first immigrations of Semites
Antiquity into Pal, that is, during the third mil-
lennium BC. It would thusbe a much
younger member of the Sem family than Assyr-Bab,
which exhibits all the marks of great antiquity long
before the Heb language is met with.
The Bab exile sounded the death-knell of the Heb


language. The educated classes were deported to

Babylon or fled to Egypt, and those who
11. When remained were not slow to adopt the
Hebrew language used by their conquerors.
Became a The old Heb became a literary and
Dead sacred tongue, the language of every-
Language day life being probably Aramaic.


Whatever may be the exact meaning
of Neh 8 8, it proves that the people of that time
had extreme difficulty in understanding classical
Heb when it was read to them. Yet for the pur-
pose of religion, the old language continued to be
employed for several centuries. For patriotic
reasons it was used by the Maccabees, and by Bar
Cochba (185 AD).

Lirprature.—Gesenius, Geschichte der hebr. Sprache
und Schrift; Bertheau, ‘‘Hebr. Sprache” in RE, 2d ed;
see also ‘‘Literature’’ in the following section.

IIL Chief Characteristics of Hebrew. — The
special marks which particularly distinguish a lan-
guage may be found in its alphabet, in its mode of
inflexion, or in its syntax.

The Heb alphabet is characterized by the large
number of guttural sounds which it contains, and

these are not mere palatals like the
1. Charac- Scotch or Ger. ch, but true throat
teristic sounds, such as are not found in the
Sounds Aryan languages. Hence when the

Phoen alphabet passed over into
Greece, these unpronounceablesounds, 9,7, 7, &,
were changed into vowels, A, E, H, O. In Heb the
guttural letters predominate. “In the Heb dic-
tionaries the four gutturals occupy considerably
more than a fourth part of the volume; the remain-
ing eighteen letters occupying considerably less
than three-fourths.” Besides the guttural, there
are three strong consonants 0, P and &, which are
sounded with compression of the larynx, and are
quite different from our ¢, & ands. In Gr the first
was softened into 6, the other two were dropped
as letters but retained as numerals.

Though the Heb alphabet comprises no more
than 22 letters, these represent some 30 different

sounds, for the 6 letters b, g, d, k, p


2. Letters and #, when they fall immediately after
Represent- a vowel, are pronounced bh(v), gh, dh,
ing Two kh, ph (f) and th. Moreover, the gut-
Sounds turals T and 9 each represent two dis-

tinct sounds, which are still in use in
Arabic. The letter h is sometimes sounded at the


end of a word as at the beginning.
A peculiarity of the Heb alphabet is that the
letters are all consonants. Four of these, however,
were very early used to represent


3. Conso- vowel and diphthong sounds, namely,
nants Rep- N,h, wandy. So long as Heb was a
resenting spoken language no other symbols
Vowels than these 22 letters were used. It


was not until the 7th cent. AD at the

earliest that the well-known elaborate system of

signs to represent the vowels and other sounds was
invented (see Text).

A feature of the Heb language is that no word or

syllable may begin with a vowel: every syllable

begins with a consonant. This is also true of the


other Sem languages, except Assyr-Bab. When in
the course of word-formation a syllable would
begin with a vowel, the slight consonant
4. The Nis prefixed. Moreover, more than
Syllable two consonants may not stand with-
out vowels intervening, as in the Eng.
word ‘“‘strength.” At most, two consonants may
begin a syllable, and even so a slight vowel is
sounded between them, as k*ra’. A word may end
in two consonants without vowels, as ’émart, but
no word or syllable ends in more than two.
The outstanding feature of the Sem family of
languages is the root, consisting of three conso-


nants. Practically, the triliteral root
5. Three- is universal. There are a few roots
Letter with more than three letters, but
Roots many of the quadriliteral roots are


formed by reduplication, as kabkab in
Arabic. Many attempts have been made to reduce
three-letter stems to two-letter by taking the
factors common to several roots of identical mean-
ing. Thus D174, 727, D7, “to be still,” seem all
to come from a root BT. It is more probable, how-
ever, that the root is always triliteral, but may
appear in various forms.
From these triliteral roots all parts of the vbs. are
formed. The root, which, it ought to be stated, is
not the infinitive, but the 3d_ sing.
6. Conjuga- masc. perf. active, expresses the simple


tions or idea without qualification, as shabhar,
Derived “he broke.’”’? The idea of intensity is
Stems obtained by doubling the middle stem


letter, as shibbér, “he broke in frag-
ments”; the passive is expressed by the u-vowel
in the first place and the a-vowel in the last, as
shubbar, “it was broken in fragments.’ The
reflexive sense prefixes an n to the simple root, or a
£(F) to the intensive, but the former of these is often
used as a passive, as nishbar, “it was broken,”
hithkaddésh, ‘“‘he sanctified himself.””’ The causa-
tive meaning is given by prefixing the letter h, as
méalakh, ‘he was king,” himlikh, “he caused [one]
to be king.” A somewhat similar method of vb.
building is found outside the Sem language, for
example, in Turkish. In some of these Sem lan-
guages the number of formations is very numerous.
In Heb also there are traces of stems other than
those generally in use.

There are no tenses in Heb, in our sense of the
word. There are two states, usually called tenses,

the perfect and the imperfect. In the
7. Absence first the action is regarded as accom-
of Tenses plished, whether in the past or future,

as shabhar, “he broke,’ “he has
broken,” “he will have broken,” or (in prophetic
narrative) “he will break’; im the second, the
action is regarded as uncompleted, “‘he will break,”
“he was breaking,” “he is breaking,” ete. The
present is often expressed by the participle.

The different persons, sing. and pl., are expressed
by affixing to the perfect, and by prefixing to the

imperfect, fragments of the personal
8. The pronouns, as shabharit, “T broke,”’ sha-
Pronouns  bharni, “we broke,” nishbar, “we will
. break,” and so on. The fragments
which are added to the perfect to express the nomi-
native of the pronouns are, with some modification,
esp. the change of t into k, added to the vb. to ex-
press the accusative, and to the noun to express
the genitive; for example, shabharia, ‘‘you broke,”
shbharekha, “he broke you,” bathekha, “your house’;
sadpharna, “‘we counted,” s¢phdrani, “he counted
us,” stphrénd, ‘our book.”

The same principles are followed in regard to the
noun as to the vb. Mauy nouns consist solely
of the three stem-letters articulated with one or
with two vowels, except that monosyllables gen-


1835


erally become dissyllabic, owing to the difficulty of
pronouncing two vowelless consonants together:
thus, melekh, “‘king,’”’ s@pher, “‘book,”’


9. Forma-  géren, “‘threshingfloor’’ (instead of mal,
tion of siphr, gorn), dabhar, ‘a word or thing,”’
Nouns karobh, “near.” Nouns denoting place,


instrument, etc, are often formed by
prefixing the letter m to the root, as mishpat,
‘Sustice,’”’ from shaphat, “he judged,” mazlégh, “a
fork.” Intensity is given to the root idea, as in
the vb., by doubling the middle consonant: thus,
horésh, “working,” harash (for harrdsh), “work-
man”; gdnébh, “stealing,” gannabh, “a thief.”
Similarly, words denoting incurable physical defects,
*illem, “dumb,” “iwwer, “blind,” hérésh (for hirrésh),
“deaf and dumb.’ The fem. of nouns, as of the
3d pers. of vbs., is formed by adding the letter
t, which when final is softened to h, g*bhirah,
“queen-mother,”’ “‘mistress,” but g*bhirtekh, “your
mistress.”
The inflexion of both vbs. and nouns is accom-
panied by a constant lengthening or shortening of
the vowels of the word, and this
10. Internal according to two opposite lines. In
Inflexion vbs. with vowel-affixes the penulti-
mate vowel disappears, as halakh,
“he went,” halekha, “they went”; in the noun the
ante-penultimate vowel disappears, as dabhar, “a
word,” pl. d*bharim. As the vowel system, as
stated above, is very late, the vocalization cannot
be accepted as that of the living tongue. It repre-
sents rather the cantillation of the synagogue; and
for this purpose, accents, which had a musical
as well as an interpunctional value, have been
added.
Heb syntax is remarkable for itssimplicity. Simple
sentences predominate and are usually connected
by the conjunction “and.” Subordi-
11. Syntax nate sentences are comparatively rare,
of the Verb but descriptive and temporal clauses
are not uncommon. In the main
narrative, the predicates are placed at the beginning
of the sentence, first simply in the root form (8d
sing. masc.), and then only when the subject, has
been mentioned does the predicate agree with it.
Descriptive and temporal clauses may be recog-
nized by their having the subject at the beginning
(e.g. Gen 1 2). A curious turn is given to the
narrative by the fact that in the main sentences,
if the first vb. is perfect, those which follow are im-
perfect, and vice versa, the conjunction which
coérdinates them receiving a peculiar vocalization
—that of the definite article. In the Eng. Bible,
descriptive and temporal clauses are often rendered
as if they were parts of the main sentence, for ex-
ample, in the first verses of Gen of which the literal
tr is somewhat as follows: “At the beginning of
God’s creating heaven and earth, when the earth
was without form and void, and God's spirit [or, a
great wind] moved upon the face of the water, God
said, Let there be light.”’ It will thus be seen that
the structure of Heb narrative is not so simple as it
appears.
In the Sem languages, compound wards do not
occur, but this deficiency is made up by what is
called the construct state. The old
12. Syntax rule, that the second of two nouns
of the Noun which depend on one another is put
in the genitive, becomes, in Heh, the
first of two such nouns is put in the construct
state. The noun in the construct state loses the
definite article, and all its vowels are made as short
ag possible, just as if it were the beginning of a long
word: for example, ha-bayith, “the house,” but béth
ha-melekh, “the house of the king,” “the palace’’;
dabhar, “a word,” but dibheré rath, “words of wind,”
‘“windy words.”


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Languages of OT


The Heb language is very poor in adjectives, but
this is made up for by a special use of the construct
state just mentioned. Thus to ex-
13. Poverty press magnitude the word ‘‘God’’ is
of Adjec- added in the gen. casc, as in the ex-
tives ample above (Gen 1 2), “a mighty
wind” =a wind of God; Ps 36 6, ‘the
lofty mountains” =the mountains of God (so 68
15); 80 10, “goodly cedars’ =cedars of God; so
“a holy man’? =aman of God; “the sacred box” =
the ark of God, and so on; cf in the NT, Mt 27 54,
“the son of God” =Lk 23 47, “a righteous [man].’’
Matthew was thinking in Aram., Luke in Gr. A
similar use is made of other words, e.g. “stubborn”
=hard of neck; ‘‘impudent’’=hard of face; ‘‘ex-
penalveh ares of hands; ‘miserable’ =bitter of
soul.


LitERATURE.—The articles on the Heb Language in
Schenkel's Bibel-Lexikon, 1875, hy Néldeke; in Enc Brit,
9th ed, by Robertson Smith; 11th ed hy Néldeke; in the
Imperial Bible Dict., 1866, by T. H. Weir; also those in.

Grammars: A. B. Davidson's Elementary Heb Gram-
mar and Syntaz; Gesenius, Heb Grammar, ET by Cow-
ley, 2d ed.

Dictionaries: Brown, Briggs and Driver, Heb and
Eng. Lexicon; Gesenius, Handwérterbuch, 15th ed; Feyer-
abend, Heb-Eng. Pocket Dictionary; Breslau, Eng. and
Heb Dict.

IV. Biblical Aramaic.—The Aram. portions of
the OT are the following: Ezr 4 8—6 18; 7 11-

26; Dnl 2 4—7 28; Gen 31 47 (two
1. Aramaic words); Jer 10 11. The language in
Portions of which they are written used to be
the OT called Chaldee, but is now generally

known simply as Bib, Aram. It repre-
sents a further declension from classical Sem as
compared with the Heb. The following are the
principal points in which Bib. Aram. differs from
Heb.


The accent is placed on the last syllable, the first
vowel disappearing, e.g. ‘dbhadh for Heb ‘aébhadh.
It is curious that the same feature is
2. Pho- found in Algerene and Moroccan Arab.:
nology thus kasr becomes ksar. Dentals
take the place of sibilants: d*habh for
zahabh; tlath for shalésh. The strong Heb X fre-
quently becomes 7, and Heb ¥ becomes &: thus,
’ar'@ for ’eree; ‘uk for cak.

In Heb the definite article is the prefix hal (ha-);

in Aram. the affix a’; the latter, however, has almost

lost its force. The dual is even more
8. Grammar sparingly used than in Heb. The

passive forms of vbs. and those be-
ginning with nin are practically wanting; the pas-
sive or reflexive forms are made by prefixing the
letter é to the corresponding active forms, and that
much more regularly than in Heb, there being three
active and three passive forms.

In regard to syntax there is to be noted the fre-
quent use of the part. instead of a finite vb., as in
Heb; the disuse of the conjunction
“and” with the vocalization of the
article; and the disuse of the con-
struct state in nouns, instead of which a circumlo-
cution with the relative di is employed, e.g. ¢°lém
di dhthabh, ‘‘an image of gold.” The same peri-
phrasis is found also In West African Arabic.

It will thus be secn that if Heb represents a de-
cadent form of an original classical language which

was very similar to classical Arabic,
6. Aramaic Bib. Arab. stands on a still lower
More De- level. It is not to be supposed that
cadent than Heb passed into Aram., though on the
Hebrew analogy of Arab. that view is not un-

tenable. Rather, the different Sem
languages became fixed at different epochs. Arab.
as a literary language crystallized almost at the
source; Heb and the spoken Arab. of the East far


4. Syntax


Languages of OT
Laodiceans, Ep. to


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1836


down the stream; and Aram. and Moroccan Arab.
farthest down of all.

LitERATURE.—Kautzsch, Grammetik; Strack, Abriss
des bibl. Aramaisch; Marti, Bibl. aram. Sprache; the
articles on ‘‘Aramaic’’ or ‘‘Chaldee’"’ in_the Bib.
Dicts. cited under III, and article ARamMaic LanauaGn
In this Encyclopaedia; the Heb text of Ezr, Neh, Dnl,
ed by Baer. Heb Dicts. generally include Bib. Aramaic.

V. Literary Characteristics of the Semites.—The
thinking of the Hebrews, like that of other Semites,
was done, not in the abstract, but in the concrete.

Thus we find the material put for the
1. Concrete immaterial, the expression for the
and Ab- thought, the instrument for the action,
stract the action for the feeling. This mode

of expression frequently gives rise to
striking anthropomorphisms. Thus we have the
eye for watchfulness or care (Ps 33 18); the long
hand for far-reaching powers (Isa 59 1) ; broken
teeth for defeated malice (Ps 3 7); the sword for
slaughter (78 62); haughty eyes for supercilious-
ness (Prov 6 17); to say in the heart for to think
(Ps 10 6). It would be an interesting study to
examine to what extent these expressions have been
taken over from Heb into English.

The Heb does not know the distinction between
animate and inanimate Nature. All Nature is

animate (Ps 104 29). The little hills
2. View of rejoice (65 12); the mountains skip
Nature (114 4); the trees clap their hands

(Isa 56 12); even the stones may cry
out (Lk 19 40). Such expressions are not to be
taken as mere poetical figures of speech; they are
meant quite literally. All Nature is one: man is
merely a part of Nature (Ps 104 23), even if he
be the highest part (8 5). Hence, perhaps, it
arises that there is no neuter gender in the Sem
languages.

The highly imaginative nature of the Heb comes
into play when he is recounting past events or

writing history. To his mind’s eye
3. Pictorial all past events are present. He sees
Imagination history taking place before his eyes as

in a picture. Thus the perfect may
generally be tr4 by the Eng. past tense with “‘have,”
the imperfect by the Eng. present tense with ‘is’
or “is going to.’’ In livelier style the participle is
used: ‘They are entering the city, and behold
Samuel is coming out to mect them” (1 S 9 14).
Hence the oratio recta is always used in preference
to the oratio obligua. Moreover, the historian writes
exactly as the professional story-teller narrates.
Hence he is always repeating himself and returning
upon his own words (1 8 6 1.2).

A result of the above facts is that there is no

hard-and-fast distinction in Heb between prose and
poetry. Neither is there in Heb, or
4. Prose in the Sem language generally, epic
and Poetry or dramatic poetry, because their
prose possesses these qualities in a
greater degree than does the poetry of other races.
All Heb poetry is lyric or didactic. In it there is
no rhyme nor meter. The nearest approach to
meter is what is called the kindh strophe, in which
each verse consists of two parallel members, each
member having five words divided into three and
then two. The best example of this is to be found
in Ps 19 7-9, and also in the Book of Lamenta-
Tions (q.v.), from which the verse has received its
name. ;

From the above description it may be inferred

that the language of the OT is one extremely easy
of translation into foreign tongues
5. Hebrew without loss of meaning or rhythm,
Easy of though it would be extremely difficult
Translation to render any modern language into
classical Heb. Hence the Pss, for
example, are as fine in their Ger. or Eng. versions


as they are in the original. Where the OT has
been tr? into the language of the country, it has
become a classic. The Eng. Bible is as important
for the study of the Eng. language as are the plays
of Shakespeare.


Literaturs.—In addition to the articles cited under
III, Herder, The Spirit of Heb Poetry, tr by J. Marsh,
1833; Ed. Kénig, Séilistik, Rhetorik, Poettk in Bezug
auf die bibl. Litt. komparativisch dargestellt, 1900; the
same author’s brochure on the ‘Style of Scripture” In
HDB, vol V; J. F. McCurdy on the ‘Semites”' in the
same volume; J. Kennedy, Heb Synonyms.

THomas HuNnTER WEIR


LANTERN, lan’térn (bavés, phands, fr. patve,
phaina, “to give light’’): Lanterns were carried
by the mob which arrested Jesus in Gethsemane
(Jn 18 3, probably better ‘‘torches’”’). The word
“Jantern’” in the time of early versions had a much
wider significance than now. The Romans, how-
ever, had lanterns in the times of Christ, made by
use of translucent skins, bladders, or thin plates
of horn.


LAODICEA, 1a-od-i-sé’a (AaoStkla, Laodikia):
A city of Asia Minor situated in the Lycos valley
in the province of Phrygia, and the home of one of
the Seven Churches of Rev (1 11). Distinguished
from several other cities of that name by the appel-
lation Ad Lycum, it was founded by Antiochus II
(261-246 BC) of Syria, who named it for his wife
Laodike, and who populated it with Syrians and
with Jews who were transplanted from Babylonia
to the cities of Phrygia and Lydia. Though Laodi-
cea stood on the great highway at the junction of
several important routes, it was a place of little
consequence until the Rom province of Asia was
formed in 190 BC. It then suddenly became a
great and wealthy center of industry, famous spe-
cially for the fine black wool of its sheep and for
the Phrygian powder for the eyes, which was manu-
factured there (cf Rev 3 18). In the vicinity was
the temple of Men Karou and a renowned school of
medicine. In the year 60 AD, the city was almost
entirely destroyed by an earthquake, but so wealthy
were its citizens that they rejected the proffered
aid of Rome, and quickly rebuilt it at their own
expense (cf Rev 317). It was a city of great
wealth, with extensive banking operations (cf
Rev 3 18). Little is known of the early history
of Christianity there; Timothy, Mark and Epa-
phras (Col 1 7) seem to have been the first
to introduce it. However, Laodicea was early
the chief bishopric of Phrygia, and about 166 AD
Sagaris, its bishop, was martyred. In 1071 the
city was taken by the Seljuks; in 1119 it was
recovered to the Christians by John Comnenus,
and in the 13th cent. it fell finally into the hands
of the Turks.

The ruins, now called Eski Hissar, or old castle,
lie near the modern Gonjellt on the railroad, and
they have long served as a quarry to the builders
of the neighboring town of Denizli. Among them
nothing from before the Rom period has appeared.
One of the two Rom theaters is remarkably well
preserved, and there may still be seen the stadium,
a colonnade, the aqueduct which brought the water
across the valley to the city by an inverted siphon
of stone pipes, a large necropolis, and the ruins of
three early Christian churches. E. J. Banxs


LAODICEANS, 14-od-i-sé’anz, EPISTLE TO
THE (@& rij AaoBiedov exxdycla.... thy bk
Aaodiklas, en té Laodikéin ekklésia . .. . tén ek
Laodikias, “in the church of the Laodiceans .
the epistle from Laodicea,” Col 4 16):


I. Expranations or Paut’s Statement
1. Written by the Laodiceans ?
2. Written by Paul from Laodicea ?
3. An Epistle Addressed to the Laodlceans


1837


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Languages of OT
Laodiceans, Ep. to


II. Evivence Favorino Epistir to Eruestans
. Marcion’s Opinion
. References in Ephesians and Other Epistles
. Ephesian Church Jewish In Origin
. Eph and Col Sister Epistles
. Recapitulation
III. Laopices Dispracep By Errssus
1. A Circular Epistle
2. Proof from Biblical Prologues
IV. Reason For Suce an EPistir

Paul here writes to the Colossians, ‘‘And when
this epistle hath been read among_you, cause that
it be read also in the church of the Lacdiceans; and
that ye also read the epistle from Laodicea.” What
was or what is this epistle?

I. Explanations of Paul’s Statement.—The words
used by the apostle may mean: (1) a letter written
by the Laodiceans; (2) an ep. written by Paul from
Lacdicea; (8) an ep. written to the Laodiceans,
and to be procured from them by the Colossians.

The words may mean a letter written by the Laodi-
ceans. But here it is sufficient to refer to the fact that

Paul enjoins the Colossians to procure


CUR Ne


. Writt and to read “the epistle from Laodicea.”’
i the re How could a command of this kind be
vo given in reference to an ie written by
odiceans? third parties? How could Paul know


that a copy of it had heen made by the Lao-
diceans before sending itoff? How could he tell that the
Laodiceans would be willing to give away a copy of it?
The suppositions involved by this hypothesis are incredi-
ble. Besides, the context regards the Ep. to the Col,
and ‘that from Laodicea,”’ as companion epp., of which
the two churches are to make an interchange, so that
each church is directed to read both.


Or, the words may refer to an ep. written by Paul from .


Laodicea. And it has been suggested that the ep. of
which we are in search may be 1 Tim, 1

2. Written Thess, 2 Thess, or Gal. But in the case
Y of these epp., the prohability is that every
by Paul one of them was written elsewhere than
from from Laodicea. At the time when Paul
Laodicea? wrote to Colossae, he was @ prisoner in


Rome, and for this reason alone, it was
impossible that he could, at any recent
date, have written any ep. from Laodicea. But his
own statement (Col 2 1) is that those in Laodicea had
not seen his face in the flesh. As he had never heen in
Laodicea, he could not have written any ep. from that
city.
A third possibility is a letter written: (1) not by
Paul, but by some other person. But the whole
tone of the passage does not favor this
8. An suggestion in the least; (2) by Paul,
Epistle but that the epistle is lost; this is the
Addressed ordinary interpretation; (3) the apoc-
to the ryphal Lat ep. “To the Laodiceans.”
LaodiceansS —-pnis spurious ep. is a mere compilation
clumsily put together; it has no marks of
authenticity. Lightfoot (Col, 282) gives its general
character thus: it ‘is a cento of Pauline phrases strung
together without any definite connection or any clear
object. They are taken chiefly from the Ep. to the Phill,
but here and there one is borrowed elsewhere, e.g. from
the Ep. to the Gal. Of course, it closes with an injunc-
tion to the Laodiceans to exchange epp. with the Colos-
sians. The apostle’s injunction in Col 4 16 suggested
the forgery, and such currency as it ever attained was
due to the support which that passage was supposed to
give to it. Unlike most forgeries, It had no ulterior
aim. It has no doctrinal peculiarities. It is quite harm-
less, so far as falsity and stupidity combined can ever, he
regarded as harmless’’ (Lightfoot, op. cit., 282). See
APOCRYPHAL EpisTLes.


(4) The only other alternative is that “the epistle
from Lacdicea” is an ep. to the Laodiceans from
Paul himself, which he directs the Colossians to
procure from Laodicea. There seems to be not
only a high degree of probability, but proof, that
the ep. from Laodicea 1s the ep. known as the Ep.
to the Eph. Paul therefore had written an ep. to
Laodicea, a city which he had twice already men-
tioned in the Ep. to the Col, “For I would have
you know how greatly I strive for you, and for them
at Laodicea” (Col 2 1): “Salute the brethren that
are in Lacdicea, and Nymphas, and the church that
is in their house’ (4 15). Accepting Col 4 16 to
mean that he wrote to Laodicea at the same time
as he wrote to Colossae, what has become of the


former ep.? Do we know nothing more of it now
than is contained in this reference to it in Col?
The fact that it was, by Paul’s express command,
to be communicated to at least the two churches in
Colossae and Laodicea, would make its disappear-
ance and loss very strange.

Il, Evidence Favoring Epistle to Ephesians.—
But is there any warrant for concluding that it is
lost at all? A statement of the facts of the case
seems to show that the ep. which Paul wrote to
the Laodiceans is extant, but only under another
title. The lines of evidence which seem to show
that the so-called Ep. to the Eph is in reality the
ep. written by Paul to the Laodiceans are these:

It ig well known that the words ‘at Ephesus”
(Eph 1 1) in the inscription of the ep. are very
doubtful. RV reads in the margin, ‘Some very
ancient authorites omit ‘at Ephesus.” Among
the authorities which omit “at Ephesus” are the
Vatican and Sinaitic MSS, the best and most an-
cient authorities existing.

Tertullian asserts that the heretics, i.e. Marcion,
had altered the title, “the Epistle to the Ephesians,”

to “the Epistle to the Laodiceans.”


1. Mar- But this accusation does not carry with
cion’s it any doctrinal or heretical charge
Opinion against Marcion in this respect. “It


is not likely,” says Moule (Eph, 25),
“that Marcion was guilty here, where the change
would have served no dogmatic purpose.” And the
fact that at that very early period, the first half
of the 2d cent., it was openly suggested that the
destination of the ep. was Laodicea, is certainly en-
titled to weight, esp. in view of the other fact already
mentioned, which is of no less importance, that ‘at
Ephesus” is omitted in the two great MSS, the
Vatican and the Sinaitic.
The “Ep. to the Eph” could not be, primarily
at least, addressed to Ephesus, beeanse Paul speaks
of his readers as persons in regard to


2. Refer- whose conversion from heathenism
ences in to the faith of Christ he had just
Ephesians recently heard: ‘For this cause I also,
and Other having heard of the faith in the Lord
Epistles Jesus which is among you, and the


love which ye show toward all the
saints, cease not to give thanks for you, making
mention of you in my prayers’ (Eph 1 15f).
These words could not well be used in regard to
the church at Ephesus, which Paul himself had
founded, and in reference to persons among whom
he had lived for three years, and where he even
knew personally “every one” of the Christians
(Acts 20 31).

And in Eph 8 1f AV, he writes: “For this cause I,
Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles,
if ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of
God which is given me to you-ward.” But how
could he ever doubt that the elders of the church in
Ephesus (Acts 20 17), as well as the members of
that important church, were ignorant of the fact
that a dispensation of the grace of God had been
given to him? The inquiry, whether his readers
had heard of the one great fact on which his min-
istry was based, could not apply in any degree to
the Christians in Ephesus. The apostle and the
Ephesians had a clear and intimate mutual knowl-
edge. They knew him and valued him and loved
him well. When he bade the elders of the church
farewell, they all fell on his neck and kissed him
(Acts 20 37).

Clearly therefore the statement that he had just
recently heard of their conversion, and his inquiry
whether they had heard that a dispensation of the
grace of God had been intrusted to him, do not
and cannot describe the members of the church in
Ephesus. “It is plain,’ writes Moule (Eph, 26),


Laodiceans, Ep.to Te INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lasciviousness


1838


“that the ep. does not bear an Ephesian destination
on the face of it.”

In the Ep. to the Cor there are many local ref-
erences, as well as allusions to the apostle’s work in
Corinth. In the Ep. to the Gal there are also many
references to his work among the people of the
churches in Galatia. The same is the case in the
Ep. to the Phil, several names being mentioned of
persons known to the apostle. In the two Epp. to
te Thess, references also occur to his work among
them.

Turning to the Ep. to the Col, and to that to the
Rom—Colossae and Rome being cities which he had
not visited previous to his writing to the churches
there—he knows several persons in Colossae; and
in the case of the Ep. to the Rom, he mentions by
name no fewer than twenty-six persons in that city.

How is it then that in ‘‘the Ep. to the Eph” there
are no references at all to the three years which he
spent in Ephesus? And how also is there no men-
tion of any one of the members of the church or of
the elders whom he knew so intimately and so
affectionately? ‘‘Ephesians’’ is inexplicable on the
ordinary assumption that Ephesus was the city
to which the ep. was adie

The other theory, that the ep. was a circular one,
sent in the first instance to Laodicea, involves no
such difficulty.

Another indication in regard to the primary
destination of the ep. is in the words, “ye, the

Gentiles in the flesh, who are called
3. Ephesian Uncircumcision by that which is called
Church Circumcision, in the flesh, made by
Jewishin hands; that_ye were at that time sep-
Origin arate from Christ, alienated from the

commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenants of the promise, having no hope
and without God in the world” (Eph 2 11.12).
Do these words describe the church in Ephesus?
Was the church there gentile in its origin? Very far
from this, for as a matter of fact it began by Paul
preaching the gospel to the Jews, as is narrated at
length by Luke in Acts 18. Then in Acts 19,
Paul comes again to Ephesus, where he went into
the synagogue and spake boldly for the space of
three months, but when divers were hardened and
believed not, but spake evil of the Way before the
multitude, he separated_the disciples, disputing
daily in the school of one Tyrannus.

Here, therefore, is definite proof that the church
in Ephesus was not gentile in its origin. It was
distinctly Jewish, but a gentile element had also
been received into it. Now the church to which
Paul writes ‘‘the Ep. to the Eph” was not Jewish
atall. He does not speak to his readers in any other
way than “you Gentiles.”

But an important consideration is that the “Ep.
to the Eph” was written by Paul at the same sitting

almost as that to the Col. These two
4. Eph and are sister epistles, and these along with
Col Sister the Ep. to Philem were written and
Epistles sent off at the same time, Onesimus

and Tychicus carrying the Ep. to the
Col (Col 4 7.8.9), Onesimus being the bearer of that
to Philem, while Tychicus in addition to carrying
the Colossian ep. was also the messenger who carried
“the Ep. to the Eph” (Eph 6 21).

A close scrutiny of Col and “Eph” shows, to an
extent without a parallel elsewhere in the epp. of
the NT, a remarkable similarity of phraseology.
There are only two verses in the whole of Col to
which there is no parallel in “Eph.” The same
words are used, while the thought is so varied and
so rich, that the one ep. is in no sense a copy or
repetition of the other (see list of parallelisms, ete,
in St. Paul's Epp. to Colossae and Laodicea, T. &
T. Clark, Edinburgh). Both epp. come warm and


instinct with life from the full heart of the great
apostle who had not, up to that time, visited either
city, but on whom, none the less, there came daily
the care of all the churches.


To recapitulate: (1) The words ‘‘at Ephesus”’ in the
inscription of the ep. are wanting in the two oldest and


best MSS. (2) Paul speaks of his readers

5. Reca- as persons of whose conversion to Christ
: ‘ he knew only by report. Similarly he
pitulation speaks of them as knowing only by hear-
say of his commission as an apostle of

Christ. Also, though he had lived in Ephesus for three


years, this ep. does not contain a single salutation. _ B)
He speaks of his readers as forming a church exclusively
of the Gentiles. But the church in Ephesus, so far from
heing exclusively gentile, was actually Jewish in origin.
(4) ‘““Eph”’ was written at the same sitting as Col, and
the same messenger, Tychicus, carried them _ both.
Therefore as the ep. was not, and could not be, addressed
to Ephesus, the conclusion is that it was addressed to
some church, and that it was not a treatise sent to the
Christian church generally. The words of the first verse
of the ep., ‘‘to the saints that are,’’ proves that the name
of the place to which it was addressed is all that is lost
from the MSS, but that the name of the city was there
originally, as the ep. came from Paul's hand. :

Now Paul wrote an ep. to Laodicea at the same time
as he wrote to Colossae. He dispatched both epp. hy
Tychicus. The thought and feeling and even the dic-
tion of the two epp. are such that no other explanation
is possible hut that they came warm from the heart of
the same writer at the same time. On all these grounds
the conclusion seems inevitable that the Ep. to Laodicea
is not lost at all, but that it is identical with the so-called
**Ep. to the Eph.’’


Hf, Laodicea Displaced by Ephesuas.——How then
did Ephesus displace Laodicea? It is explained at
once if the theory is adopted that the


1. ACir- — epistle was a ‘‘circular’’ one addressed
cular not to Laodicea only, but to other
Epistle cities. We know e.g. that the apostle


orders it to be taken to the church in
Colossae and read there. So also it might have
been sent to other cities, such as Hierapolis (Col
4 13) and Ephesus. Hence if the church in Lao-
dicea were not careful to see that the ep. was re-
turned to them, by those churches to whom they
had sent it, it can easily be understood how a copy~
ist in any of those cities might leave out the words
‘Sn Laodicea,”’ as not agreeing with the name of the
city where the MS actually was at the time. As
copies were multiplied, the words “in Ephesus”
would be suggested, as the name of the chief city
of Asia, from which province the ep. had come to
the knowledge of the whole Christian church, and
to which, in point of fact, Paul had sent it. The
feeling would be natural, that it was in keeping
with the fitness of things, that Paul, who had
founded the church in Ephesus, should have written
an ep. to the church there.


2. Proof dictine for January of that year, which
from contained a remarkable article by de
Biblical Bruyze, entitled ‘‘ Biblical Prologues of

1buca Marcionite Origin,” in which the writer
Prologues succeeded in showing that a very widely


sunt Asiani.


in fide. Hos conlaudat apostolus, scribens eis a Roma
de carcere!'


1839


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Laodiceans, Ep. to
Lasciviousness


‘Laodiceans, Colossians.’ It is interesting to observe
how some Lat MSS naively admit this: ‘You must know
that the ep. which we have as that written to the Eph,
the heretics, and esp. the Marcionites, entitle the Ep. to
the Laodiceans.’ ”’

IV. Reason for Such an Epistle.—Assuming
therefore that the ‘‘Ep. to the Eph” is the ep. which
Paul wrote to the Laodiceans, various questions
arise, such as, Why did he write to the church there?
What was there in the state of the church in Lao-
dicea to call for an ep. from him? Was there any
heresy there, like the false teaching which existed
in the neighboring church in Colossae?

The answer to such questions is that though we do
not possess much information, yet these churches in the
poe of Asia had many things in common. They

ad originated at the same time, during the two whole
years of Paul’s residence in Ephesus. hey were com-
osed of men of the same races, and speaking the same
anguages. They were subject to tho same influences of
doctrinal error. The errors into which any one church
fell could not fail to affect the others also. These
churches were permeated to a large extent by the same
ideas, derived both from the current philosophy and from
their ancestral heathen religions. They would, therefore,
one and all, require the same apostolic instruction and
exhortation. This ep., accordingly, bears a close resem-
blance to the Ep. to the Col, just for the reason that the
circumstances of the church in Laodicea were similar
to those of the church in Colossae; and also, that the
thoughts which filled Paul's heart as he wrote to Colossae
were adapted, in the first place, to counteract the false
teaching in Colossae, but they are also the foundation
of all Christian experience, and the very life of all Chris-
tian truth and_ doctrine. These are the great thoughts
of Christ the Creator of all things, Christ the Upholder
of all things, Christ the Reconciler of all things. Such
thoughts filling Paul’s heart would naturally find ex-
pression in language bearing a close resemblance to that
in which he had just written to Colossae.

It is no more astonishing that Paul should have
written to Laodicea, than that he also wrote to
Colossae, which was probably the least important
of all the cities and churches mentioned in the
apostle’s work and career. Neither is it any more
to be wondered at that he should have written so
profound an ep. as that to “the Eph,” than that he
should also have given directions that it be sent
on to Colossae and read there; for this reason, that
the exposition of Christ’s great love to the church
and of His giving Himself for it—the doctrine of the
grace of God—is the very corrective required by
the errors of the false teachers at Colossae, and is
also the groundwork of Christian truth and ex-
perience for all ages. °

Norse.—A very remarkable circumstance in regard
to the apocryphal Ep. to the Laodiceans is mentioned
by Nestle in the preface to his edition of the Lat N is Wa

ublished in Stuttgart in 1906. He writes that the
Ep. to the Laodiceans was for a thousand years part
of very many Lat Bibles, and obtained a place in pre-
Lutheran Ger. Bibles, together with Jerome’s Ep. to
Damasus.””

Joann RUTHERFURD


LAP: The word is the tr of three different Heb
expressions: P'J, hek (Prov 16 33), 133, beghedh
(2 K 4 39), and JXM, hacen (Neh 6 18, besides
j2T, hécen, Ps 129 7). In all these passages the
meaning is that of a part of oriental clothing,
probably the folds of the garment covering the
bosom or lap of a person. The flowing garments
of Orientals invite the use of the same, on the
part of speakers, in driving home certain truths
enunciated by impressive gesticulation. Every
reader of Rom history recalls the impressive in-
cident of Quintus Fabius Maximus (Cunctator),
who, in 219 BC, was ambassador of Rome to Car-
thage, and who, before the city council, holding the
folds of his toga in the shape of a closed pouch,


declared that he held enclosed in the same both
peace and war, whichever the Carthaginians should
desire to choose. When the Carthaginians clam-
ored for war, he opened the folds of his garment
and said: ‘Then you shall have war!’ Very much
like it, Nehemiah, when pleading for united efforts
for the improvement of social order, addressed the
priests of Jerus to get a pledge of their codperation:
“Also I shook out my lap [hécen], and said, So God
shake out every man from his house, and from his
labor, that performeth not this promise; even thus
be he shaken out, and emptied” (Neh 6 18).


In EV the vb. ‘‘to lap” is found, which has no ety-
mological connection with the above-mentioned nouns.
Itis in Heb pp? , lakak, and refers to the loud licking


up of water by dogs (1 K 21 19; 22 38 AV), and in the
story of Gideon's battle against the Midianites, of his 300


warriors (Jgs 7 5 ff).
H. L. E. Lusrine
LAPPIDOTH, lap’i-doth, -dath (n'?p>, lap-
idhath, “flames,” ‘torches’; AV_ Lapidoth):
eborah’s husband (Jgs 4 4). The Heb name is
a fem. pl. like Jeremoth (1 Ch 7 8), Naboth (1 K
211). The pl. is probably intensive. Jewish
interpreters have identified Lappidoth (‘flames’’)
with Barak (‘lightning’). Some have taken the
words rendered “wife of Lappidoth”’ (ésheth lap-
pidhath) as a description of Deborah, and have tr?
them, ‘woman of lights,” i.e. maker of wicks for
the sanctuary; or “woman of flames,” referring to
her prophetic zeal. These explanations are more
interesting than probable. Joun A. LEEs


LAPWING, lap’ wing (MD°357, dukhiphath; trop,
épops): A tr used in early VSS, now universally
admitted to beineorrect. The lapwing had a crest,
and resembled in size and color the hoopoe (Upupa
epops). It appears in the lists of abominations
only (Lev 1119 AV and Dt 1418 AV, RV
Hoopor, q.v.). The lapwing is a plover, and its
flesh and eggs are delicious food.


LASCIVIOUSNESS, la-siv’i-us-nes (aeéAyeua,
asélgeia, ‘‘licentiousness,” ‘‘wantonness,” ‘“un-
bridled lust,” ‘“shamelessness,”’ “outrageousness”) :


Etymologists assign three probable sources of aselgeia,
viz.: (1) from_a compound of a priv. and Zeayn, Sélgé, a
Pisidian city whose inhabitants accord-
ing to Thayer (NT Lexicon) “excelled
in strictness of morals,’ but according to
,. Trench a place whose people ‘were infa-
mous for their vices'’; (2) from a compound of a intense,
and gaacyeiv, salagetn, ‘to raise a disturbance or noise’’:
(3) from a compound of a priv. and c¢Ayuw, sélgd, or GéAyw,
thélgo, ‘exciting disgust or displeasure."’ It evidently
means conduct and character that is unhecoming, inde-
cent, unrestrainedly shameless.


1. Sources


Mk uses it in 7 22 with uncertainty as to the vice
meant. Paul (2 Cor 12 21) classes it with un-
cleanness and fornication as sins to be
2. As Used repented of; also (Gal 5 19; ef Wisd
inthe NT 14 26, ‘“wantonness”) puts it in the
same catalogue with other works of

the flesh; and (Eph 4 19) he refers to some aged .
ones so covetous that they made trade of them-
selves by giving “themselves up to lasciviousness.”’
The same word is tr4 ‘“‘wantonness” in Rom 13 13,
meaning wanton manner, filthy words, unchaste
movements of the body. Peter (1 Pet 4 3) men-
tions those who “walked in lasciviousness, lusts,
winebibbings, revellings, carousings, and abominable
idolatries.”” He speaks (2 Pet 2 2) of “lascivious
doings” (AV “pernicious ways”); (2 7) “lascivious
life’ (AV “filthy conversation”); and (2 18) of
“Jasciviousness” (AV “‘wantonness’’), as a means
“to entice in the lusts of the flesh.” Jude ver 4
probably does not refer to any form of sensuality
in using the word descriptive of ‘ungodly men”


Lasea
Latin Version,


oi@ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1840


who perverted the faith of some and denied our
ouly Master. Witutiam Eywarp RarretTy


LASEA, la-sé’a (Adcaa, Ldsaia): A town on the
8. coast of Crete, 5 miles E. of Fair Havens (Acts
27 8). The ruins were examined in 1856 by Rev.
G. Brown (see CH [Sé.P], ch xxii, 640). If St.
Paul’s ship was detained long at this anchorage, it
would be necessary to purchase stores from Lasea;
and this in addition to the inconvenience of the
roadstead (see Farr Havens) would probably ex-
plain the captain’s reluctance to winter there.


LASHA, 1a’sha (90>, lasha‘): A place named on
the southern boundary of the Canaanites along with
Gomorrah, Adnah and Zeboiim (Gen 10 19).
Onom identifies it with the hot springs at Callir-
rhoé in Wady Zerkad Ma‘in, on the E. of the Dead
Sea; in this agreeing with Tg Jerus. This position,
however, seems too far to the N., and possibly the
site should be sought on the W. of the Arabah.
The absence of the article (cf Josh 15 2) prevents
identification with the promontory el-Lisén, which
tuns into the sea from the eastern shore. Well-
hausen (Comp. des Hex., 15) thinks we should read
nw, lésham, as the letters ‘2 (m) and ¥ (°) are like
each other in their Palmyrene form. We should
then have indicated the boundary from Gaza to the
Dead Sea, and then from the Dead Sea to Leshem,
ie. Dan. This is very precarious. No _identifi-
cation is possible. W. Ewine


LASSHARON, la-sha’ron, la-shar’on gangs,
lashsharon or la-sharén, AV Sharon): A royal city
of the Canaanites taken by Joshua, named with
Aphek (Josh 12 18). Possibly we should here
follow the reading of LX X (B), “‘the king of Aphek
in Sharon.’ Onom (s.v. ‘“Saron’’) mentions a
region between Mt. Tabor and the Lake of Tiberias
called Sarona. This is probably represented by the
ancient site Sarona, on the plateau 63 miles 8.W.
of Tiberias. If MT is correct, this may be the place
intended.


LAST DAY. See Day, Last.
LAST DAYS. See Escuatonocy or tHe OT.


LAST TIME, TIMES (kxaipis tcyaros, kairés
éschatos, xpovos tryaros, chrénos éschatos [also

1.], frxarov tod xpdvov, éschaton tov chrénou, dpa
éoxdrn, héra eschdté): In AV this phrase occurs in
1 Pet 15; 1 20 (pl.); 1 Jn 2 18; Jude ver 18.
RV has, in 1 Pet 1 20, “at the end of the times,’
and in 1 Jn 2 18, ‘‘the last hour,’”’ in closer
adherence to the Gr. The conception is closely
allied to that of ‘‘the last day,” and, like this,
has its root in the OT conception of ‘the end
of days.”’ In the OT this designates the entire
eschatological period as that which the present
course of the world is to issue into, and not, as might
be assumed, the closing section of history. It is
equivalent to what was later called “the coming
aeon” (see Escuatotocy or THE NT). In the
NT, on the other hand, the phrase ‘‘the last time”
does mark the concluding section of the present
world-period, of the present aeon. _ In three of the
NT passages the consciousness expresses itself that
these “last times’’ have arrived, and that the period
extending from the appearance or the resurrection
of Christ until His Second Coming is the closing
part of the present age, that the writer and readers
are living in “the last times.” In one passage
(1 Pet 1 5) “the last time” is projected farther
forward into the future, so that it comes to mean
the’ time immediately preceding the reappearance


of Christ. Both usages can be readily explained.
The days of the Messiah were to the OT writers
part of the future world, although to the later Jew-
ish chiliasm they appeared as lying this side of it,
because differing from the world to come in their
earthly and temporal character. To the early
Christians the days of the Messiah appeared more
closely assimilated in character to the future world,
so that no reason existed on this score for not in-
cluding them in the latter. Still it was also real-
ized that the Messiah in His first appearance had
not brought the full realization of the coming world,
and that only His return from heaven would con-
summate the kingdom of God. Accordingly, the
days in which they lived assumed to them the char-
acter of an intermediate period, marked off on the
one hand from the previous development by the
appearance of the Messiah, but equally marked off
from the coming aeon by His reappearance in glory.
From a formal point of view the representation
resembles the Jewish chiliastic scheme, but with
a twofold substantial difference: (a) the chiliastic
scheme restricts the Messiah and His work to the
last days, and does not carry Him over into the
coming world, whereas to the Christian the coming
world, no less than the last days, is thoroughly
Messianic; (b) to the Jewish point of view both the
days of the Messiah and the coming world lie in the
future, whereas to the Christian the former have
already arrived. It remained possible, however,
from the Christian point of view to distinguish
within the last times themselves between the imme-
diate present and the future conclusion of this
period, and this is done in 1 Pet 1 5. Also in
1 Jn 2 18 the inference that “the last hour’ has
come is not drawn from the presence of the Mes-
siah, but from the appearance of the anti-Christian
power, so that here also a more contracted concep-
tion of the last stage of history reveals itself, only
not as future (1 Pet 1 5), but as present thence
‘hour’? not “time’’).

For literature see EscHaToLocy oF THE NT.

EERHARDUS Vos

LASTHENES, las’the-néz (Aacdévys, Lasthénés):
A highly placed official under King Demetrius II,
Nicator. He is called the king’s “kinsman” (AV
“cousin’’) and “father” (1 Macc 11 31.32; Jos,
Ant, XIII, iv, 9), but these are to be taken as court
titles rather than as denoting blood-relationship.
According to Jos (Ani, XIII, iv, 3) he was a native
of Crete, and raised an army for the king when he
made his first descent upon the coast, and rendered
him ultimately successful in wresting the throne of
Syria from Alexander Balas (1 Macc 10 67; Ant,
XII, iv, 3). The letter addressed to L. indicates
that he was probably prime minister or grand vizier
of the kingdom. J. Hurcuison


LATCHET, lach’et (JIWW, serakh; twas, himds):
Leather thong used for tying on sandals (see Gen
14 23; Mk17||). The stooping to untie the
dusty shoe-latchet was esteemed by Orientals a
service that was at once petty and defiling, and was
usually assigned to menials.


LATIN, lat’in: Was the official language of the
Rom Empire as Gr was that of commerce. In Pal
Aram. was the vernacular in the rural districts and
remoter towns, while in the leading towns both Gr
and Aram. were spoken. These facts furnish the
explanation of the use of all three tongues in the
inscription on the cross of Christ (Mt 27 37; Mk
15 26; Lk 23 38; Jn 19 19). Thus the charge
was written in the legal language, and was techni-
cally regular as well as recognizable by all classes of
the people. The term “Latin” occurs in the NT only
in Jn 19 20, ‘Pwyaicrl, Rhomaisti, and in Lk 23


1841


38, ‘Pwyatkots (ypdupacw), Rhomaikots (grdémmasin),


according to NX ADN. It is probable that Tertullus
made his plea against Paul before Felix (Acts 24)
in Lat, though Gr was allowed in such provincial
courts by grace of the judge. It is probable also
that Paul knew and spoke Lat; ef W. M. Ramsay,
Pauline and Other Studies, 1906, 65, and A. Souter,
“Did Paul Speak Lat?” Eapos, April, 1911. The
vernacular Lat had its own history and develop-
ment with great influence on the ecclesiastical ter-
minology of the West. See W. Bury, ‘The Holy
Latin Tongue,” Dublin Review, April, 1906, and
Ronsch, [tala und Vulgata, 1874, 480f. There is
no doubt of the mutual influence of Gr and Lat
on each other in the later centuries. See W.
Schulze, Graeca Latina, 1891; Viereck, Sermo
Graecus, 1888. :

It is doubtful if the Lat syntax is clearly per-
ceptible in the koiné (see LANGUAGE OF THE NT).
: Deissmann (Light from the Anctent East, 117 f) finds
rte Sidwur, ergastan didémi (operam dare) in an

aeremenus papyrus letter of the vulgar type from 2d
cent. BC (cf Lk 12 58). A lead tablet in Amorgus
has «pive td dixarav, krind t6 dikaion (cf Lk 12 57).
The papyri (2d cent. AD) give cuvaipw Adyor, sunatra
légon (cf Mt 18 23f). Moulton (Ezpos, February,
1903, 115) shows that 7d ixavdv maecv, 16 hikanén
potein (satisfacere), is as old as Polybius. Even ovp-
BovdArov Aap Bdvew, sumbodtlion lambénein (concilium capere),
may go with the rest like ob oy, s% épss (Mt 27 4),
for wideris (Thayer). Moulton (Prol., 21) and Thumb
(Griechische Sprache, 121) consider the whole matter of
syntactical Latinisms in the NT inconclusive. But see
also C. Wessely, ‘Die lateinischen Elemente in der
Gricitit d. agypt. Papyrusurkunden,”’ Wien. Stud., 24;
Laforcade, Influence du Latin sur le Grec, 83-158.


There are Lat words in the NT: In particular
Lat proper names like Aquila, Cornelius, Claudia,
Clemens, Crescens, Crispus, Fortunatus, Julia,
Junia, etc, even among the Christians in the NT
besides Agrippa, Augustus, Caesar, Claudius, Felix,
Festus, Gallo, Julius, etc.

Besides wefind in the NT current Lat commercial,
financial, and official terms like docdpiov, assdrion
(as), 8nvdpiovy, déndrion (denarius), Kevruplwy, ken-
turion (centurio), Kijvoos, kénsos (census), xodpdvrys,
kodrdntés (quadrans), Kohwvia, kolonia (colonia),
xovoerwdla, kaustodta (custodia), Aeyedv, legedn (legio),
Avriov, léntion (linteum), dBeprives, labertinas (liber-
tinus), dtrpa, litra (litra), udxeddov, mdkellon (macel-
lum), peuBpdva, membrana (membrana), pldor, milion
(mille), wbd0s, médios (modius), éorns, xéstés (sex-
tarius), Tparépor, prattorion (praetorium), oixdpws,
sikdrios (stcarius), opextyOov, simikinthion (semi-
cinctium), covddpv, souddrion (sudarium), omexov-
Adrwp, spekouldtor (speculator), rafépra, tabérna
(taberna), rirdos, thtlos (titulus), peddvys, phelénes
(paenula), ¢bpov, phéron (ferum), dpayéddor, phra-
géllion (flagellum), dparyehdbw, phragell6é (flagelio),
xdprns, chdrtés (charta ?), x@pos, chéros (chorus).

Then we meet such adjectives as ‘Hpwdvavel,
Heéradianot, Pdirrjowm, Philippésiot, Xpirriavol,
Christianot, which are made after the Lat model.
Mark’s Gospel shows more of these Lat words out-
side of proper names (cf Rom 16), as is natural if
his Gospel were indeed written in Rome. See also
Latin Version, THE OLD.


Lrrerarurs.—Besides the lit. already mentioned see
Schtirer, Jewish People in the Time of Christ, Div II,
vol I, 43 ff; Krauss, Griechische und lateinische Lehn-
wérter im Talmud (1898, 1899); Hoole, Classical Ele-
ment in the NT (1888); Jannaris, Historical Gr Grammar
(1897); W. Schmid, Atticismus, etc (1887-97); Kapp,
Latinismis merito ac falso susceptis (1726); Georgi, De
Latinismis NT (1733); Draeger, Historische Syntax der
lat. Sprache (1878-81); Pfister, Vulgdrlatein und Vulgdr=-
griechisch (Rh. Mus., 1912, 195-208).

A. T. Ropertson


LATIN VERSION, THE OLD:


I. The Motive of Translation ——_—s_

2. Multipliclty of Latin Translations in the 4th Century
3. The Latin Bible before Jerome

4, First Used in North Africa


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lasea
Latin Version, Old


. Cyprian's Bible

. Tertullian's Blble ‘

. Possible Eastern Origln of Old Latin

. Classification of Old Latin MSS

. Individual Character!stics

10. Value of Old Latin for Textual Criticism


Lirararura
The claim of Christianity to be the one true reli-
gion has carried with it from the beginning the obli-
gation to make its Holy Scriptures,
1. The’ containing the Divine message of sal- .
Motive of vation and life eternal, known to all
Translation mankind. Accordingly, wherever the
first Christian evangelists carried the
gospel beyond the limits of the Gr-speaking world,
one of the first requirements of their work was to
give the newly evangelized peoples the record of
God's revelation of Himself in their mother tongue.
It was through the LXX tr of the OT that the great
truths of revelation first became known to the Gr
and Rom world. It is generally agreed that, as
Christianity spread, the Syr and the Lat VSS were
the first to be produced; and tr* of the Gospels,
and of other books of the Old and NT in Gr, were
in all probability to be found’in these languages
before the close of the 2d cent.
Of the earliest translators of the Bible into Lat
no record has survived. Notwithstanding the care-
ful investigations of scholars in recent


OOD or


2. Multi- years, there are still many questions
plicity of relating to the origin of the Lat Bible
Latin to which only tentative and provisional
Transla- answers can be given. It is therefore


tions in the more convenient to begin a study of
4th Century its history with Jerome toward the

close of the 4th cent. and the com-
mission intrusted to him by Pope Damasus to pro-
duce a standard Lat version, the execution of
which gave to Christendom the Vulg (see VuLGaTE).
The need for such a version was clamant. There
existed by this time a mutiplicity of tr® differing
from one another, and there was none possessed of
commanding authority to which appeal might be
made in case of necessity. It was the consideration
of the chaotic condition of the existing tr®, with
their divergences and variations, which moved
Damasus to commission Jerome to his task and
Jerome to undertake it. We learn particulars from
the letter of Jerome in 383 transmitting to his
patron the first instalment of his revision, the Gos-
pels. “Thou compellest me,” he writes, “to make a
new work out of an old so that after so many copies
of the Scriptures have been dispersed throughout the
whole world I am as it were to occupy the post of
arbiter, and seeing they differ from one another
am to determine which of them are in agreement
with the original Gr.” Anticipating attacks from
critics, he says, further: ‘If they maintain that con-
fidence is to be reposed in the Lat exemplars, let
them answer which, for there are almost as many
copies of tr® as MSS. _ But if the truth is to be
sought from the majority, why not rather go back
to the Gr original, and correct the blunders which
have been made by incompetent translators, made
worse rather than better by the presumption of
unskilful correctors, and added to or altered by
careless scribes?” Accordingly, he hands to the
Pontiff the four Gospels to begin with after a care-
ful comparison of old Gr MSS.

From Jerome’s contemporary, Augustine, we
obtain a similar picture. “Translators from Heb
into Gr,’”’ he says (De Doctrina Christiana, ii.11),
“can be numbered, but Lat translators by no means.
For whenever, in the first ages of the faith, a Gr
MS came into the bands of anyone who had also
a little skill in both languages, he made bold to
translate it forthwith.’”’ In the same context he
mentions “‘an innumerable variety of Lat transla-


Latin Version, Old TW" INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


aver


tors,” “a, crowd of translators.”? His advice to read-


ers is to give a preference to the Itala, “which is
more faithful in its renderings and more intelligible
in its sense.’ What the Itala is, has been greatly
discussed. Formerly it was taken to be a summary
designation of all the VSS before Jerome’s time.
But Professor Burkitt (Texts and Studies, IV)
strongly urges the view that by this term Augustine
designates Jerome’s Vulg, which he might quite
well have known and preferred to any of the earlier
trs. However this may be, whereas before Jerome
there were those numerous tr*, of which he and
Augustine complain, after Jerome there is the one
preéminent and commanding work, produced by him,
which in course of time drove all others out of the
field, the great Vulg edition, as it came to be called,

of the complete Lat Bible.
We are here concerned with the subject of the
Lat Bible before the time of Jerome. The MSS
which have survived from the earlier


3. The period are known by the _ general
Latin designation of Old Latin. When we
Bible ask where these first tr® came into ex-
before istence, we discover a somewhat sur-
Jerome prising fact. It was not at Rome, as


we might have expected, that they
were first required. The language of Christian
Rome was mainly Gr, down to the 3d cent. St.
Paul wrote the Ep. to the Romin Gr. When Clem-
ent of Rome in the last decade of the Ist cent.
wrote an ep. in the name of the Roman church to
the Corinthians, he wrote in Gr. Justin Martyr,
and the heretic Marcion, alike wrote from Rome in
Gr. Out of 15 bishops who presided over the Rom
see down to the close of the 2d cent., only four
have Lat names. Even the pagan emperor Marcus
Aurelius wrote his Meditations in Gr. Ii there were
Christians in Rome at that period whose only lan-
guage was Lat, they were not sufficiently numer-
ous to be provided with Christian literature; at
least none has survived.
It is from North Africa that the earliest Lat lit-
erature of the church has come down to us. The
church of North Africa early received


4, First a baptism of blood, and could point
Used in to an illustrious roll of martyrs. It
North had also a distinguished list of Lat
Africa authors, whose Lat might sometimes


be rude and mixed with foreign idioms,
but had a power and a fire derived from the truths
which it set forth.

One of the most eminent of these Africans was
Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, who won the martyr’s
crown in 257. His genuine works consist of a num-
ber of short treatises, or tracts, and numerous letters,
all teeming with Scripture quotations. It is certain
that he employed a version then and there in use,
and it is agreed that “his quotations are carefully
made and thus afford trustworthy standards of
African Old Latin in a very early though still not
me earliest stage” (Hort, Intro to the NT in Gr,

8).
Critical investigation has made it clear that the
version used by Cyprian survives in a fragmentary

copy of St. Mark and St. Matthew,
6. Cyprian’s now at Turin in North Italy, called
Bible Codex Bobbiensis (k), and in the frag-

ments of the Apocalypse and Acts
contained in a palimpsest at Paris called Codex
Floriacensis (h). It has been found that another
MS, Codex Palatinus (e) at Vienna, has a text
closely akin to that exhibited in Cyprian, although
there are traces of mixture init. The text of these
MSS, together with the quotations of the so-called
Speculum Augustini (m),is known among scholars
as African Old Latin. Another MS with an inter-
esting history, Codex Colbertinus (c) contains also


1842


a valuable African element, but in many parts of
the Gospels it stdes also with what is called the
European Old Latin more than with k ore. Codex
Bobbiensis (k) has heen edited with a learned in-
troduction in the late Bishop John Wordsworth’s
Old Latin Bib. Texts, the relation of & to Cyprian
as well as to other Old Latin texts being the subject
of an elaborate investigation by Professor Sanday.
That Cyprian, who was not acquainted with Greek,
had a written version before him which is here
identified is certain, and thus the illustrious bishop
and martyr gives us a fixed point in the history of
the Lat Bible a century and a half earlier than
Jerome.
We proceed half a century nearer to the fountain-
head of the African Bible when we take up the tes-
timony of Tertullian who flourished
6. Tertul- toward the close of the 2d cent. He
lian’s Bible differed from Cyprian in being a com-
petent Gr scholar. He was thus able
to translate for himself as he made his quotations
from the LXX or the Gr NT, and is thus for us by
no means s0 safe a witness to the character or exist-
ence of a standard version. Professor Zahn (GK,
I, 60) maintains with considerable plausibility that
before 210-240 AD there was no Lat Bible, and that
Tertullian with his knowledge of Gr just tr¢ as he
went along. In this contention, Zahn is not sup-
ported by many scholars, and the view generally
is that while Tertullian’s knowledge of Gr is a dis-
turbing element, his writings, with the copious
quotations from both OT and NT, do testify to the
existence of a version which had already been for
some time in circulation and use. Who the African
Wycliffe or Tindale was who produced that version
has not been recorded, and it may in fact have
been the work of several hands, the result, as Bishop
Westcott puts it, of the spontaneous efforts of
African Christians (Canon of the NT7, 263).
Although the evidence has, up to the present time,
been regarded as favoring the African origin of the
first Lat tr of the Bible, recent investi-
7. Possible gation into what is called the Western


Eastern text of the NT has yielded results
Origin of pointing elsewhere. It is clear from
Old Latin a comparison that the Western type


of text has close affinity with the Syr
witnesses originating in the eastern provinces of the
empire. The close textual relation disclosed between
the Lat and the Syr VSS has led some authorities
to believe that, after all, the earliest Lat version
may have been made in the East, and possibly at
Antioch. But this is one of the problems awaiting
the discovery of fresh material and fuller investiga-
tion for its solution.
We have already noticed the African group, so
designated from its connection with the great
African Fathers, Tertullian and esp.


8. Classi- Cyprian, and comprising k, e, and to
fication of some extent h and m. The antiquity
Old Latin of the text here represented is attested
MSS by these African Fathers.


When we come down to the 4th
cent. we find in Western Europe, and esp. in North
Italy, a second type of text, which is designated
European, the precise relation of which to the
African has not been clearly ascertained. Is this
an independent text which has arisen on the soil
of Italy, or is it a text derived by alteration
and revision of the African as it traveled north-
ward and westward? This group consists of the
Codex Vercellensis (a) and Codex Veronensis (b)
of the 4th or 5th cent. at Vercelli and Verona re-
spectively, and there may be included also the
Codex Vindobonensis (2) of the 7th cent. at Vienna.
These give the Gospels, and a gives for St. John the
text as it was read by the 4th-cent. Father, Lucifer


1843


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Latin Version, Old


Laver


of Cagliari in Sardinia. The Lat of the Gr-Lat
MS D (Codex Bezae) known as d, and the Lat of the
translator of Irenacus are classed with this group.

Still later, Professor Hort says from the middle
of the 4th cent., a third type, called Italic from its
more restricted range, is found. It is represented
by Codex Brixianus (f) of the 6th cent., now at
Brescia, and Codex Monacensis (g) of the 7th cent.,
at Munich. This text is probably a modified form
of the European, produced by revision which has
brought it more into accord with the Gr, and has
given it a smoother Lat aspect. The group has
received this name because the text found in many
of Augustine’s writings is the same, and as he
expressed a preference for the Itala, the group
was designated accordingly. Recent investigation
tends to show that we must be careful how we use
Augustine as an Old Latin authority, and that the
Itala may be, not a pre-Vulg text, but rather
Jerome’s Vulg. This, however, is still uncertain;
the fact remains that as far as the Gospels are con-
cerned, f and g represent the type of text most used
by Jerome.

That all these groups, comprising in all 38 codices,
go back to one original is not impossible. Still there
may have been at first local VSS, and then an official

version formed out of them. When


9. Indi- Jerome’s revision took hold of the
vidual church, the Old Latin representatives
Character= for the most part dropped out of notice.
istics Some of them, however, held their


ound and continued to be copied
down to the 12th and even the 13th cent. Codex
cis an example of this; it is a MS of the 12th cent.,
but as Professor Burkitt has pointed out (Texts and
Studies, IV, “Old Latin,” 11) “it came from Lan-
guedoc, the country of the Albigenses. Only
among heretics isolated from the rest of Western
Christianity could an Old Latin text have been
written at so late a period.’ An instance of an
Old Latin text copied in the 13th cent. is the Gigas
Holmiensis, quoted as Gig, now at Stockholm, and
so called from its great size. It contains the Acts
and the Apocalypse of the Old Latin and the rest
of the NT according to the Vulg. It has to be
borne in mind that in the early centuries complete
Bibles were unknown. Each group of books, Gos-
pels, Acts and Catholic eae Pauline Epp., and
Rev for the NT, and Pent, Historical Books, Pss
and Prophets for the OT, has to be regarded sepa-
rately. It is interesting, also, to note that when
Jerome revised, or even retranslated from the LXX,
Tob and Jth of the Apoc, the greater number of
these books, the Wisd, Ecclus, 1 and 2 Macc, and
Bar were left unrevised, and were simply added to
the Vulg from the Old Latin version. : ;
These Old Latin tr® going back in their earliest
forms to nearly the middle of the 2d cent. are very
early witnesses to the Gr text from
10. Value which they were made. They are
of Old Latin the more valuable inasmuch as they
for Textual are manifestly very literal tr. Our
Criticism great uncial MSS reach no farther
back than the 4th cent., whereas in
the Old Latin we have evidence—indirect. indeed
and requiring to be cautiously used—reaching
back to the 2d cent. The text of these MSS is
neither dated nor localized, whereas the evidence
of these VSS, coming from a particular province of
the church, and being used by Fathers whose period
is definitely known, enables us to judge of the type
of Gr text then and there in use. In this con-
nection, too, it is noteworthy that while the vari-
ations of which Jerome and Augustine complained
were largely due to the blunders, or natural mis-
takes, of copyists, they did sometimes represent
various readings in the Gr originals.


Lrrpraturse.—Wordsworth and White, Old Latin
Biblical Texts, 4 vols; F. C. Burkitt, ‘‘The Old Latin
and the Itala,’’ Texts and Studies, IV; ‘‘Old Lat VSS"
by H. A. A. Kennedy in HDB; ‘“ Bibeliibersetzungen,
Lateinische’’ by Fritzsche-Nestle in PRE; Intros to
Textual Criticism of the NT by Scrivener, Gregory,
Nestle, and Lake.
T. Nrcou


LATTER DAYS. Sce Escuatoioey or THE OT.
LATTICE, lat’is. See Hovuss, II, 1, (9).


LAUD, léd: A vb. meaning “‘to praise,’’ used in
Rom 15 11 AV,and Ps 117 1; 145 4. RV cither
should have avoided the word altogether or else
should have used it much more acer a ame
preferably the latter, as the word is not obsolete
in liturgical Eng.


LAUGHING-STOCK, Jaf’ing-stok: Something
set up to be laughed at; thrice in RV the tr of
PpInw, shok, “laughter,” ete (Job 12 4 bis; Jer
20 7; cf Jer 48 26.27.39; Lam 3 14). See Mock,
Mocxina.

LAUGHTER, laf’tér (PO, ¢ahak, POW, sahak,
“to laugh,” PINW, shok, “laughter”; yeddw, geldo,
karayehdw, katageldd): (1) Laughter as the expres-
sion of gladness, pleasurable surprise, is the tr of
cGhak (Gen 17 17; 18 12.13.15; 21 6), which,
however, should perhaps be “laugh at me,’’ not
“with me,” as AV and RV (so Delitzsch and others;
see also Hastings in HDB), not in the sense of
derision, but of surprise and pleasure. In the same
ver for “God hath made me to laugh,” RV gives
in m, “hath prepared laughter for me,” and this
gave his name to the son, the promise of whose
birth evoked the laughter (Yighak, Isaac); gelad
(Lk 6 21.25) has the same meaning of gladness
and rejoicing; s°hdk, “laughter,’’ has also this sense
(Job 8 21; Ps 126 2). It is, however, “laughed
to scorn” in Job 12 4; RV “laughing-stock’’; so
Jer 20 7; cf 48 26.27.39; Lam 3 14, “derision.”
(2) Sahak is used (except Job 29 24; Eccl 3 4) in
the sense of the laughter of defiance, or derision (Job
5 22; 41 29); in Piel it is often tr? “play,” “play-
ing,’ “merry.” (8) ZLé'agh is “to scorn,” “to
laugh to scorn” (2 K 19 21; Neh 2 19); sdhak
has also this sense (2 Ch 30 10); ¢thok (Ezk 23
32); sthok (Job 12 4); katagelad (Mt 9 24; Mk
6 40; Lk 8 53); the simple gelad occurs only in
Lk 6 21.25; see above. Katagelad is found in Jth
12 12, “laugh to scorn” (Ecclus 7 11; 20 17; 1
Macc 10 70, RV ‘‘derision’’).

For “laugh” (ob 9 23) RV has “mock”; for
“mocked of his neighbor” and “laughed to scorn’’
(Job 12 4) “laughing-stock”; for “shall rejoice in
time to come” (Prov 31 25), “Jaugheth at the time
to come’; “laughter’’ for “laughing” (Job 8 21).

W.L. Watker

LAUNCH, lanch, lénch. See Suips ann Boars,

IH, 1.


LAVER, la’vér (19, kiyor): Every priest in
attendance on the altar of Jeh was required to wash
his hands and his feet before entering
1. In the upon his official duties (Ex 30 19 ff).
Tabernacle To this end a laver was ordered to
be made as part of the tabernacle
equipment (30 17-21; 38 8). Its composition
was of brass (bronze), and it consisted of two parts,
the bow] and its pedestal or foot (30 18, etc). This
first laver was a small one, and was made of the
hand mirrors of the women in attendance upon the
altar (38 8). Its place was between the altar and
the tabernacle (40 30). See Tanzrnacts.
The difficulty as to the washing of parts of the
sacrificial carcases was overcome, in the temple of


Lawinthe NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1844


Solomon, by the construction of ‘10 lavers’ and
a “molten sea” (1 K 7 23-37; 2 Ch 4 2-6; see
Tempter; Sea, Mouren). We learn
2 Inthe from 2 Ch4 6 that the ‘‘sea” was for
Temple the priests to wash in—therefore took
the place of the laver in the taber-
nacle—and the lavers were used as baths for por-
tions of the burnt offerings. The lavers them-
selves were artistic works of unusual merit for that
age. Like that in the tabernacle, each had its own
stand or base, which was cast in a separate piece
from the laver. These bases rested on wheels
which allowed of the laver being moved from one
part of the court to another without being turned
about. Five stood on the north and five on the
south side of the temple. They were ornamented
with “lions, oxen, and cherubim,” and on a lower
level, with a series of wreaths or festoons of flowers
(1 K 7 27-87). In modern speech, the lavers
may be described as so many circular open tanks
for the storage of water. Each laver contained
40 baths (about 320 gals.) of water. Its height
was 5 cubits, the locomotive machinery being 3
cubits in height, and the depth of the bowl or tank,
judging from its capacity, about 2 cubits. The
last we hear of the lavers, apart from their bases,
is that the idolatrous king Ahaz cut off the border
of the bases, and removed the bases from them
( K 1617). During the reign of Jehoiakim, Jere-
mniah foretold that the molten sea and the bases (there
being then no lavers) should be carried to Babylon
(Jer 27 19). A few years later it is recorded that
the bases were broken up, and the brass of which
they were made was carried away (Jer 52 17).
The Gr word (Aourpév, loutrén) occurs twice in
the NT. In Eph 5 26, Paul says that Christ gave
Himself for the church ‘‘that he might


3. The sanctify it, having cleansed it by the
Laver in washing [Gr “laver’’] of water with the
the NT word”; and in Tit 3 5 he says that


we are saved “through the washing
[Gr “laver’’] of regeneration and renewing of the
Holy Spirit.” In these passages the reference is
to the constant physical purity demanded of the
Jewish priests when in attendance upon the temple.
Christians are “‘a holy priesthood,” and are cleansed
not by water only, but, in the former passage, “with
the word” (cf Jn 15 3); in the latter, by the
“renewing of the Holy Spirit” (cf Ezk 36 25; Jn
35). The feet-washing mentioned by Jesus is
emblematic of the same thing (Jn 13 10).
W. Saaw CaupEcotr
LAW, 16, IN THE NEW TESTAMENT.


The Term “Law”; Austin’s Definition of Law
I. Law in Txt Gosre.s
1. The Law in the Teaching of Christ
ql) Aon of the Law Upheld in the Sermon
on the Mount. :
(a) Christ and Tradition
{2 Sin of Murder
ce) Adultery and Divorce
(d) Oaths
(e) Retaliation
(f) Love to Neighbors—Love of Enemies
(2) Other References to the Law in the Teaching
of Christ
(a) Traditions of the Elders and the 5th
Commandment
(b) Christ's Answer to the Young Ruler
o Christ’s Answer to the Lawyer
d) References in the Fourth Gospel
2. The Law in Relation to the Life of Christ
(1) In His Infancy
(2) In His Ministry
3. The Law in Relation to the Death of Christ
(1) Christ Charged with Blasphemy under the
Jewish Law
(2) Christ Charged with Treason under the
Roman Law
4. How Christ Fulfilled the Law in All Its Parts
II. Law in tHe Acts or THE APOSTLES
1. Stephen's Witness
2. Practice of Peter and Paul
3. Allusions to the Roman Law


Ill. Lawin THe EpisTues
1. In Romans

. In Galatians : 2

- In the Other Pauline Epistles

. In the Epistle to the Hebrews

. In the Epistle of James

. In the Epistles of Peter and John


LirERATURE

The Gr word for “law” is véuos, némos, derived
from vépw, némb, “to divide,” “distribute,” “ap-
portion,” and generally meant anything established,
anything received by usage, a custom, usage, law;
in the NT a command, law.

It may not he amiss to note the definition of law given


by a celebrated authority in jurisprudence, the late Mr,
John Austin: ‘‘A law, in the most general


Ot Go bo


Austin’s and comprehensive acceptation in which
Definition the term, in its literal meaning, is em-

7 0 ployed, may be said to be a rule laid down
of Law for the guidance of an intelligent being, by an


éntelligent being having pore over him.”
Under this comprehensive statement, he classifies ‘‘laws
set hy God to His human creatures, and laws set by men
tomen."’ After analyzing the three ideas, command as
the expression of a particular desire; duty or obligation,
signifying that one is bound or obliged by the command
to pursue a certain course of conduct, and sanction, in-
dicating the evil likely to be incurred by disohedience,
he thus summarizes: ‘‘The ideas or notions compre-
hended hy the term command are the following: (1) a
wish or desire conceived by a rational being that another
rational being shall do or forbear; (2) an evil to pro-
ceed from the former and to be incurred by the latter
in case the latter comply not with the wish; (3) an
expression or intimation of the wish by words or other
signs.” This definition makes it clear that the term
“laws of nature’? can he used only in a metaphorical
sense, the metaphorical application being suggested as
Austin shows by the fact that uniformity or stahility
of conduct is one of the ordinary consequences of a law
proper, consequently, ‘‘ Wherever we observe @ uniform
order of events, or @ uniform order of coexisting phe-
nomena, we are prone to impute that order to a law set
by its author, though the case presents us with nothing
that can be likened to a sanction or a duty.” As used
in the NT it will be found generally that the term “law”
bears the sense indicated by Austin, and includes ‘‘com-
mand,” ‘‘duty”’ and ‘‘sanction.”


I. Law in the Gospels.—Naturally we first turn
to the Gospels, where the word “law’’ always refers
to the Mosaic law, although it has different appli-
cations. That law was really threefold: the Moral
Law, as summed up in the Decalogue, the Cere-
monial Law, prescribing the ritual and all the typi-
cal enactments, and what might be called the Civil
or Political Law, that relating to the people in their
national, political life. The distinction is not
closely observed, though sometimes the reference
emphasizes one aspect, sometimes another, but
generally the whole Law without any discrimination
is contemplated. Sometimes the Law means the
whole OT Scriptures, as in Jn 10 34; 12 34; 16
25. At other times the Law means the Pent, as
in Lk 24 44,

The Law frequently appears in the teaching of
Christ. Inthe Sermon on the Mount He refers most

specifically and fully to it. It is fre-
1. The Law quently asserted that He there exposes


in the the imperfection of the Law and sets
Teaching His own authority against its author-
of Christ ity. But this seems to be a super-


; ficial and an untenable view. Christ
indeed affirms very definitely the authority of the
Law: “Think not that I came to destroy the law
or the prophets” (Mt 5 17). Here the term would
seem to mean the whole of the Pent. “I came not
to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you,
Till heaven and earth pass away, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass away from the law, till
all things be accomplished’? (Mt 6 17.18). A
similar utterance is recorded in Lk 16 17: “It is
easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for
one tittle of the law to fall.”

(1) Authority of the Law upheld in the Sermon
on the Mount.—The perfection and permanence of
the Law as well as its authority are thus indicated,


1845


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Lawin the NT


and the following verse in Mt still further empha-
sizes the authority, while showing that now the
Lord is speaking specifically of the moral law of the
Decalogue: ‘Whosoever therefore shall break one
of these least commandments, and shall teach men
so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven:
but whosoever shall do and teach them, he shall
be called great in the kingdom of heaven” (6 19).
These impressive sentences should be borne in
mind in considering the utterances that follow, in
which there seems a contrast between the Law and
His own teaching, and from which has been drawn
the inference that He condemns and practically
abrogates the Law. What Jesus really does is to
bring out the fulness of meaning that is in the Law,
and to show its spirituality and the wideness of its
reach. He declares that the righteousness of His
disciples must exceed the righteousness of the
scribes and Pharisees (ver 20). Their righteous-
ness consisted largely in a punctilious observance
of the external requirements of the Law; the dis-
ciples must yield heart obedience to the inner spirit
of the Law, its external and internal requirements.

(a) Christ and tradition: Jesus then proceeds
to point out the contrast, not so much between His
own teaching and that of the Law, as between His
interpretation of the Law and the interpretation of
other teachers: “Ye have heard that it was said
by them of old time’’ (AV), “to them of old time”
RV (ver 21). Either rendering is grammatically
allowable, but in either case it is evidently not
the original utterance of Moses, but the traditional
interpretation, which He had in view. “Ye have
heard that it was said’; Christ’s usual way of
quoting the OT is, “It is written” or some other
formula pointing to the written Word; and as He
has just referred to the written Law as a whole, it
would be strange if He should now use the formula
“Tt, was said” in reference to the particular pre-
cepts. Evidently He means what was said by the
Jewish teachers.

(b) Sin of murder: This is further confirmed by the
citations: ‘‘Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall
kill shall be in danger of the judgment.’ The second
clause is not found in the Pent as a distinct statement,
but it is clearly the generalization of the teachers. Christ
does not set Himself in opposition to Moses; rather does
He enjoin ohedience to the precepts of the scribes when,
sitting in Moses’ seat, they truly expound the Law (Mt
93 1-8). But these teachers had so expounded the


command as if it only referred to the act of murder; 50
Christ shows the f and true spiritual meaning of it:


“But I say unto you, that every one who is angry with |


his brother shall be in danger of the judgment” (ver
22). See Murper. P
(c) Adultery and divorce: Again, ‘‘ Ye have heard that
it was said, Thou shalt not commit adultery’’ (ver 27).
The traditional teaching confined this mainly to the out-
ward act, ‘But I say unto you,’ says Christ, that adul-
tery pertains even to the lustful thought’ (ver 28). In
dealing with this matter He passes to the law of divorce
which was one of the civil enactments, and did not stand
on the same level with the moral precept against com-
mitting adultery, nay, the very carrying out of the civil
provision might lead to a real breach of the moral pre-
cept, and in the interests of the precept itself, in the very
desire to uphold the authority of the moral law, Christ
ronounces against divorce on any pound save that of
ornication. Later on, as recorded in Mt 19 3-9, He
was questioned ahout this same law of divorce, and again
He condemns the light way in which divorce was treated
by the Jews, and affirms strongly the sanctity of the
marriage Institution, showing that it was antecedent to
the Mosaic code—was from the beginning, and derived
its binding force from the Divine pronouncement in
Gen 2 24, founded upon the nature of things; while
as to the Mosaic law of divorce, He declares that it was
ermitted on account of the hardness of their hearts,
at that no other cause than fornication was sufficient
to dissolve the marriage tie. This civil enactment, justi-
fled originally on account of the inability of the people
to rise to the true moral ideal of the Decalogue, Christ
claims authority to transcend, but in doing so He vindi-
cates and upholds the law which said, ‘‘ Thou shalt not
commit adultery.” See Diverce. *
(d) Oaths: The next precept Jesus cites is one partly
civil and partly ritual, concerning the taking of oaths.
The words are not found in the Pent as a definite enact-


ment; they are rather a gathering up of several utter-
ances (Lev 19 12; Nu 80 2; Dt 28 21), and again
the form of the citation suggests that it is the rabhinical
interpretation that is In question. But the kind of
swearing allowed by the law was the very opposite of
ae 8 profane swearing. It was intended, indeed, to
uard the 3d commandment against taking the name of
eh In vain, Christ in condemning the flippant oaths
allowed by the rahbis was really asserting the authority of
that 3d command; He was enforcing its spirituality_and .
claiming the reverence due to the Divine name. Into
the question how far the words of Christ hear upon oath-
taking in a court of law we need not enter. His own
response to the adjuration of the high priest when
ractically put upon His oath (Mt 26 63.64) and other

T instances (Rom 1 9; 2 Cor 1 23; Gal 1 20; Phil
18; 1 Thess 2 5; He 6 16.17; Rev 10 5.6) would
tend to show that such solemn appeals to God are not
embraced in Christ's prohibition: “Swear not at all’;
but undoubtedly the ideal epoch is that of the simple
asseveration, the ‘‘ Yes’ or “No” of the man, who, con-
scious that he speaks in the presence of God, reckons his
word inviolable, needing no strengthening epithet, though
as hetween man and man an oath may be necessary for
confirmation and an end of strife. See Oars.

(e) Retaliation: He next touches upon the ‘‘law of
retaliation": ‘‘an eye for an eye’’ (ver 38), and con-
sistently with our understanding of the other sayings,
we t) that here Christ is dealing with the traditional
interpretation which admitted of personal revenge, of
men taking the law into their own hands and revenging
themseives. Such a pracuce Christ utterly condemns,
and inculcates instead gentleness and forbearance, the
outcome of love even toward enemies. This law, in-
deed, finds place ane the Mosaic provisions, hut it
appears there, not as allowing personal spite to gratify
itself in its own way, hut as a political enactment to he
carried out by the magistrates and so to discountenance

rivate revenge. Christ shows that the spirit of His

ospel received by His people would supersede the
necessity for these requirements of the civil code; al-
though His words are not to he interpreted quite lit-
erally, for He Himself when smitten on the one cheek
did not turn the other to the smiter (Jn_ 18 22.23), and
the Poerle of the law of retaliation still holds good in
the legislative procedure of all civilized nations, and
according to the NT teaching, will find place even in the
Divine procedure in the day of judgment. See also
PUNISHMENT. Ue i

(f) Love to neighbors; love of enemies: The last
saying mentioned in the Sermon clearly reveals its rah-
binical character: ‘‘'Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and
hate thine enemy” (Mt § 43). The first part is indeed
the injunction of the Law, the second part is an unwar-
rantable addition to it. It is only this part that Christ
virtually condemns when He says, ‘‘But I say unto you,
Love your enemies’’ (ver 44). That the interpretation
of these teachers was unwarrantahle may he seen from
many passages in the Pent, the Prophets and the Pss,
which set forth the more spiritual aspect of the Law’s
zeguieren and as to this particular precept, we need
only refer to Prov 25 21.22, ‘‘lf thine enemy be hungry,
give him bread to eat.’’ Christ while condemning the
addition unfolds the spiritual import of the command
itself, for the love of neighbor rightly interpreted involves
love of enemies; and so on another occasion (Lk 10 25-
37) He answers the lawyer’s question, ‘‘ Who is my neigh-
hor?" hy the parable of the Good Samaritan, showing
that everyone in need is our neighhor. See also For-
GIVENESS; WRATH.


The last reference in the Sermon on the Mount
to the Law fully bears out the idea that Christ
really upheld the authority while elucidating the
spirituality of the Law, for He declares that the
principle embodied in the “Golden Rule” is a de-
duction from, is, indeed, the essence of, ‘‘the law
and the rophets” (Mt 7 12).

(2) Other references to the Law in the teaching of
Christ.—We can only glance at the other references
to the Law in the teaching of Christ. In Mt 11 13,
“For all the prophets and the law prophesied until
John,” the Law in its teaching capacity is in view,
and perhaps the whole of the Pent is meant. In
Mt 12 1-8, in rebutting the charge brought against
His disciples of breaking the Sabbath, He cites the
ease of David and his men eating the showbread,
which it was not lawful for any but the priests to

artake of; and of the priests doing work on the
Rabbath day which in other men would be a breach
of the Law; from which He deduces the conclusion
that the ritual laws may be set aside under stress
of necessity and for a higher good. In that same
chapter (vs 10-13) He indicates the lawfulness of
healing—doing good—on the Sabbath day.


Lawinthe NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


(a) Traditions of the elders and the 5th com-
mandment: In Mt 15 1-6 we have the account
of the Pharisees complaining that the disciples
transgressed the traditions of the elders by eating
with unwashed hands. Jesus retorts upon them
with the question: ‘(Why do ye also transgress the
commandment of God hecause of your tradition?”
citing the specific case of the 5th commandment
which was evaded and virtually broken by their
ingenious distinction of korban. This is a very
instructive incident in its hearing upon the point
which we have sought to enforce—that it was the
traditional interpretation and not the Law itself
which Jesus condemned or corrected.

(b) Christ’s answer to the young ruler: To the
young ruler (Mt 19 16-42) He presents the com-
mandments as the rule of life, obedience to which
is the door to eternal life, especially emphasizing
the manward aspect of the Law’s claims. The
young man, professing to have kept them all, shows
that he has not grasped the spirituality of their
requirements, and it is further to test him that
Christ calls upon him to make the “great renun-
ciation” which, after all, is not in itself an additional
command so much as the unfolding of the spiritual
and far-reaching character of the command, ‘“‘Love
thy neighbor as thyself.”

(c) Christ’s answer to the lawyer: To the lawyer
who asks Him which is the great commandment in
the Law, He answers by giving him the sum of the
whole moral law. ‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. ‘This is the great and first com-
mandment. And a second like unto it is this,
Thou ee love thy neighbor as thyself’? (Mt 22
35-39).
“There is none other commandment greater than
these,” and in that of Matthew He says, ‘‘On these
two commandments the whole law hangeth, and the
prophets” (ver 40); both utterances showing the
high estimation in which He held the Law.

(d) References in the Fourth Gospel: In His dis-
cussion with the Jews, recorded in Jn 7, He charges
them with failure to keep the Law: ‘Did not Moses
give you the law, and yet none of you doeth the
law?” (ver 19). And referring to the healing of
the impotent man on the Sabbath day, a deed which
had roused their ire, He shows how one law may
conflict with another. Moses had enjoined cir-
cumcision, and sometimes the time for circumcising
would fall on the Sahbath day. Yet with all their
reverence for the Sabbath day, they would, in order
to keep the law of circumcision, perform the rite
on the Sabbath day, and so, He argues, it is un-
reasonable +o complain of Him hecause on the
Sabbath day He had fulfilled the higher law of doing
good, healing a poor sufferer. In none of all Christ’s
utterances is there any slight thrown upon the Law
itself; it is always held up as the standard of right
and its authority vindicated.

The passages we have considered show the place
of the Law in the teaching of Christ, but we also

find that He had to sustain a practical
2. The Law relation to that Law. Born under the
in Relation Law, becoming part of a nation which
to the Life honored and venerated the Law, every
of Jesus art of whose life was externally regu-
Christ ated by it, the life of Jesus Christ

could not fail to he affected hy that
Law. We note its operation:

(1) In His infancy —On the eighth day He was
circumcised (Lk 2 21), thus being recognized as
a member of the covenant nation, partaking of its
privileges, assuming its responsibilities. Then,
according to the ritual law of purification, He is
presented in the temple to the Lord (Lk 2 22-24),
while His mother offers the sacrifice enjoined in the


In Mark’s report (Mk 12 31), He adds,.


1846


“law of the Lord,” the sacrifice she brings patheti-
cally witnessing to her poverty, “‘a pair of turtle
doves, or two young pigeons” being the alternative
allowed to those who were not able to provide a
lamb (Lev 12). The Divine approval is set upon
thig consecrating act, for it is while it is being done
concerning Him after ‘the custom of the law” (ver
27), that the Spirit of God comes upon Simeon and
prompts the great pee which links all the
Messianic hopes with the Babe of Bethlehem.

Again, according to the Law His parents go up
to the Passover feast when the wondrous child has
reached His 12th year, the age when a youthful
Jew assumed legal responsibility, becoming ‘‘a son
of the Law,” and so Jesus participates in the festal
observances, and His deep interest in all that con-
cerns the temple-worship and the teaching of the
Law is shown by His absorption in the conversation
of the doctors, whose questions He answers so
intelligently, while questioning them in turn, and
filling them with astonishment at His understanding
(Lk 2 42-47).

(2) In His minisiry—In His ministry He ever
honors the Law. He reads it in the synagogue.
He heals the leper hy His sovereign touch and word,
hut He bids him go and show himself to the priest
and offer the gift that Moses commanded (Mt 8 4).
And again, when the lepers appeal to Him, His
response which implies the healing is, ‘(Go and show
yourselves unto the priests” (Lk 17 14). He drives
out of the temple those that defile it (Mt 21 12.13;
Jn 2 15-17), hecause of His zeal for the honor of
His Father’s house, and so, while showing His author-
ity, emphasizes the sanctity of the temple and its
services. So, while claiming to be the Son in the
Father’s house, and therefore above the injunctions
laid upon the servants and strangers, He neverthe-
less pays the temple-tax exacted from every son of
Israel (Mt 17 24-27). He attends the various
feasts during His ministry, and when the shadows
of death are gathering round Him, He takes special
pains to ohserve the Passover with His disciples.
Thus to the ceremonial law He renders continuous
ohedience, the motto of His life practically being
His great utterance to the Baptist: “Suffer it now:
for thus it hecometh us to fulfil all righteousness”
(Mt 3 15). If He obeyed the ceremonial law,
unquestionably He obeyed the moral law. His
keenest-eyed enemies could find no fault in Him in
regard to His moral conduct. His absolute sinless-
ness attests the translation of the moral law into
actual life.

We enter uot upon the theological question as to the
relation of the death of Christ to the penal inflictions of

the Law Divinely enforced on hehalf of
3. The Law Sitners—that touches the doctrine of the
in Relation Atonement—we only note the fact that


His death was brought about in professed
tothe Death accordance with the Law. The chief


of Jesus Tiests, in hatred, sent officers to take
Christ im, but overawed by His matchless
18 eloquence, these officers returned empty-

: handed, In their chagrin, the chict
fricats can only say that the people who follow Him
now not the Law and are cursed (Jn 7 49). Nicode-


mus, on this occasion, ventures to remonstrate: ‘Doth
our law judge a man, except it first hear from himself?”
(ver 51). This sound legal principle these men are bent
on disregarding; their one desire is to put an end to the
life of this man, who has aroused their jealousy and
hatred, and at last when they get Him into their ands,
they strain the forms of the Law to accompllsh their
purpose. There is no real charge that can he brought
against Him. They dare not bring up the plea that Te
broke the Sabbath, for again and again He has answered
their cavils on that score. He has broken no law; all
they can do is to bribe false witnesses to testify some-
thing to His discredit. _The trumpery charge, founded
upon a distorted reminiscence of His utterance about
destroying the temple, threatens to break down.

(1) Christ charged with blasphemy in relation to the
Jewish law.—Then the high eer et adjures Him to say
upon oath whether or not He claims to he the Christ,
the Son of the Living God. Such a claim would assured-


1847


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Law inthe NT


W. if unfounded, be blasphemy, and according to the
aw, be punishable by death. Ona previous occasion the
Jews threatened to stone Him for this—to them—blas-
poemone claim. Now when Jesus calmly avows that

e is the Son of God, the high priest, rending his clothes,
declares that no further proof is needed. e has con-
fessed to the blasphemy, and unanimously the council
votes Him worthy of death (Mt 26; Mk'14; Lk 99).
It Jesus Christ were not what He claimed to be, then the
priesus were right in holding Him guilty of blasphemy;
t never occurred to them to consider whether the claim
after all might not be true.

(2) Christ charged with treason under the Roman law.—
Not only is the Jewish law invoked to accomplish His
death, but also the Rom law. On one other occasion
Christ had come into touch with the law of Rome, viz.
when asked the ensnaring questlon by the Herodians
as to the lawfulness of giving tribute to Caesar (Mt 99
17; Mk 12 14; Lk 20 22). Now the Jews need the
Rom_ governor's authorization for the death penalty,
and Jesus must be tried before him. The charge cannot
now be blasphemy—the Rom law will have nothing to
Say to that—and so they trump up a charge of treason
against Caesar. _

_ In preferring it, they practically renounce their Mes-
sianic hopes, ‘The charge, however, breaks down before
the Rom tribunal, and only by playing on the weakness
of Pilate do they gain their end, and the Rom law decrees
His death, while leaving the Jews to sce to the carrying
out of the sentence. In this the evangelist sees the ful-
filment of Christ’s words concerning the manner of His
death, for stoning would have been the Jewish form of
the death penalty, not crucifixion. See Jesua Cunist,
III, £), ii, 3, 4


Looking at the whole testimony of the Gospels,
we can see how it was that Christ fulfilled the Law.
He fulfilled the moral law by obeying,


4. How by bringing out its fulness of meaning,
Christ Ful- by showing its intense spirituality,
filled the and He established it on a surer basis
Law in All than ever as the eternal law of right-
lis Parts eousness. He fulfilled the ceremonial


and typical law, not only by conform-
ing to its requirements, but by realizing its spiritual
significance. He filled up the shadowy outlines of
the types, and, thus fulfilled, they pass away, and
it is no longer necessary for us to observe the Pass-
over or slay the daily lamb: we have the substance
in Christ. He also cleared the Law from the tra-
ditional excrescences which had gathered round it
under the hands of the rabbis. He showed that
the ceremonial distinction between meats clean and
unclean was no longer necessary, but showed the
importance of true spiritual purity (Mt 16 11;
Mk 7 18-23). He taught His disciples those
great principles when, after His resurrection, “be-
ginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he
interpreted to them in all the scriptures the thmgs
concerning himself’ (Lk 24 27). And as_ He
opened their mind that they might understand the
Scriptures, He declared, “These are my words
which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you,
that all things must needs be fulfilled, which are
written in the law of Moses, and the prophets, and
the psalms, concerning me” (Lk 24 44). John
sums this up in his pregnant phrase, ‘The law was
given through Moses; grace and truth came through
Jesus Christ’? (Jn 1 17). The grace was in con-
trast to the condemnation of the moral law, the
truth was the antithesis to the shadowy outline of
the types and ceremonies. ¥
Il. Law in the Acts of the Apostles.—Without
considering questions of authenticity and historicity
in relation to this book which professes to be the
earliest church history, we briefly note the place of
the Law therein indicated. In the book we have
an account of the transition frem Judaism to fully
developed Christianity, and the Law comes into
view in various ways. The disciples, like other
Jews, observe the feast of Pentecost, and even after
the descent of the Spirit, they frequent the temple
and observe the hours of prayer,
The full-orbed gospel poses by Stephen
arouses the suspicion and enmity of the stricter
sects of the Jews, who accuse him before the


council of speaking blasphemous words against the
holy place and the Law. But this was the testi-
mony of suborned witnesses, having
1. Stephen’s doubtless its foundation in the fact
Witness that Stephen’s teaching emphasized
the grace of the gospel. Stephen’s own
defence honors the Law as given by Moses, ‘“‘who
received living oracles’? (Acts 7 38), shows how
disloyal the people had been, and closes by charging
them not only with rejecting and slaying the Right-
eous One, but of failing to keep the Law ‘‘as it was
ordained by angels’ (7 53).
Peter’s strict observance of the ceremonial law
is shown in connection with his vision which teaches
him that the grace of God may pass
2. Practice beyond the Jewish pale (Acts 10).
of Peter Paul’s preaching emphasizes the ful-
and Paul filling the Scriptures, Law and Proph-
ecy, by Jesus Christ. The gist of his
message, as given in his first reported sermon, is,
“By him everyone that believeth is justified from
all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the law of Moses” (13 38f). The coriversion of
the Gentiles brings up the question of their relation
to the ceremonial law, specifically to circumcision.
The decision of the council at Jerus treats circum-
cision as unnecessary for the Gentiles, and only
enjoins, in relation to the Mosaic ritual, abstinence
from things strangled and from blood (ch 15). The
after-course of events would show that this pro-
vision was for the time of transition. Paul, though
strongly opposed to the idea of imposing circum-
cision on the Gentiles, nevertheless without incon-
sistency and as a concession to Jewish feeling, cir-
cumcises Timothy (16 3), and himself fulfils the
ceremonial enactments in connection with the taking
of a vow (18 18). He also, following the advice of
James, who wished him to conciliate the myriads
of believing Jews who were zealous for the Law, and
to show them the falseness of the charge that he
taught the Jews among the Gentiles ‘‘to forsake
Moses”’ (apostasy from Moses), took upon him the
ceremonial duty of purifying the ‘four men that
have a vow on them” (21 20-26). This involved
the offering of sacrifices, and the fact that Paul could
do so shows that for the Jews the sacrificial system
still remained in force. The sequel to the trans-
action might raise the question whether, after all,
the procedure was a wise one; it certainly did not
fulfil the expectations of James. Later on, in his
defence before Felix, Paul claims to be loyal to the
Jewish faith, worshipping in the temple, and ‘‘be-
lieving all things which are according to the law, and
which are written in the prophets” (24 11-14);
and in his address to the Jewish leaders in Rome,
he declares that he has ‘done nothing against the
people, or the customs of our fathers’ (28 17), and
he seeks to persuade them concerning Jesus, “‘both
fro ae law of Moses and from the prophets’
: In the Acts we find several allusions to law other
than Jewish. In ch 16 Paul comes into collision
with the Rom law. Beaten and im-
3. Allusions prisoned by the magistrates of Philippi,
to the he is afterward offered the oppor-
Roman Law tunity of quietly slipping away, but
standing on his dignity as a Rom
citizen, he demands that the magistrates themselves,
who had violated the law by publicly beating un-
condemned Romans, should come and set them free.
This same right as a Rom citizen Paul again asserts
when about to be scourged by the command of the
centurion (22 25), and his protest is successful in
averting the indignity. His trial before Felix and
Festus well illustrates the procedure under the Rom
law, and his appeal, as a Rom citizen, to Caesar
had important results in his life.


Lawinthe NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


HI. Law in the Epistles.—The word is used both
with and without the article, but though in some
cases the substantive without the article refers to
law in general, yet in many other places it undoubt-
edly refers to the Law of Moses. Perhaps, as has
been suggested, it is that, where it does refer to the
Mosaic Law, the word without the article points
to that law, not so much as Mosaic, but in its quality
as law. But speaking generally, the word with
and without the article is used in reference to the
Law of Moses.

(1) Law as a standard.—In Rom Paul has much
to say about law, and in the main it is the moral

law that he has in view. In this great
1.In ep., written to people at the center of
Romans the famous legal system of Rome,
many of them Jews versed in the law
of Moses and others Gentiles familiar with the idea
of law, its nature, its scope and its sway, he first
speaks of the Law as a standard, want of conformity
to which brings condemnation. He shows that the
Gentiles who had not the standard of the revealed
Law nevertheless had a law, the law of Nature,
a law written upon their heart and conscience.
Rom jurisprudence was familiar with the concep-
tion of a law of Nature, which became a law of
nations (jus gentium), so that certain principles
could be assumed as obtaining among those who had
not the knowledge of the Rom code; and in accord-
ance with these principles, the dealings between
Romans and barbarians could be regulated. Pawul’s
conception is somewhat similar, but is applied to
the spiritual relations of man and God.

(2) Gentiles condemned by the law of Nature—
But the Gentiles, not having lived up to the light
of that law, are condemned. They have violated
the dictates of their own conscience. And the Jews,
with the fuller light of their revealed law, have
equally failed. In this connection Paul incidentally
lays down the great principle that “Not the hear-
ers of the Jaw are just before God, but the doers
of the law shall be justified’ (Rom 2 13). His
great aim, in the ep., is to show that justification
is by faith, but he here asserts that if anyone would
have justification through law, then he must keep
that law in all its details. The Law will pronounce


the doer of it justified, but the mere hearing of the.


Law without doing it will only increase the con-
demnation. ‘‘As many as have sinned without the
law shall also perish without the law: and as many
as have sinned under the law shall be judged by
the law’ (2 12). Paul does not pronounce upon
the question whether a Gentile may be saved by
following the light of Nature; he rather emphasizes
the negative side that those who have failed shall
perish; they have light enough to condemn, is his
oint.

P (8) Allmen under condemnation.—Having proved
that both Jews and Gentiles are under sin, he closes
his great indictment with the statement: ‘“Now we
know that what things soever the law saith, it
speaketh to them that are under the law; that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world
may be brought under the judgment of God” (3 19).
Thus the Law shuts up into condemnation. It is
impossible for any sinner to be justified “by the
works of the law’; the Law not only condemns
but ‘through the law cometh the knowledge of sin”
(3 20). It shows how far short men have come of
God’s requirements. It is a mirror in which the
sinner secs his defilement, but the mirror cannot
cleanse, though it shows the need of cleansing.

(4) The redeeming work of Christ providing
righteousness apart from the Law.—Then setting
forth the great redemption of Jesus Christ, the
apostle shows that it provides what the Law had
failed to provide, a righteousness which can satisfy


1848


the requirements of the Law; a righteousness that
is indeed “apart from the law,’’ apart from all
mnen’s attempts to keep the Law, but is neverthe-
less in deepest harmony with the principles of the
Law, and has been witnessed “by the law and the
prophets” (3 21). (In this passage the “law”
seems to mean the Pent, and in ver 19, in view of
the preceding citations from the Pss, it appears to
mean the whole OT Scriptures.) Since the right-
eousness secured by Christ comes upon the sinner
through faith, manifestly the works of the Law can
have nothing to do with our obtaining of it. But
so far is faith-righteousness from undermining the
Law, that Paul claims that through faith the Law
is established (3 31).

(5) Abraham’s blessings came not through the
Law.—Proceeding to show that his idea of justi-
fication by faith was no new thing, that the OT
saint had enjoyed it, he particularly shows that
Abraham, even in his uncircumcised state, received
the blessing through faith; and the great promise
to him and his seed did not come through the Law,
but on the principle of faith.

(6) Law worketh wrath and intensifieth the evil of
sin.—Indeed, so far from blessing coming to sinners
by way of the Law, the “law worketh wrath” (4
15); not wrath in men against the Law’s restric-
tions as some have argued, but the holy wrath of
God so frequently mentioned by the apostle in this
ep. The Law worketh wrath, inasmuch as when
disobeyed it brings on the sinner the Divine dis-
approval, condemnation; it enhances the guilt of
sin, and so intensifies the Divine wrath against it;
and it, in a sense, provokes to sin: the sinful nature
rebels against the restrictions imposed by the Law,
and the very fact of a thing being forbidden arouses
the desire for it. This seems what he means in a
subsequent passage (5 20), ‘‘And the law came in
besides, that the trespass might abound”; as if the
very multiplying of restrictions intensified the
tendency to sin, brought out the evil in human
nature, shgwed the utter vileness of the sinful
heart and the terrible nature of sin, and thus made
the need for salvation appear the greater, the very
desperateness of the disease showing the need for
the remedy and creating the desire for it; the
abounding of sin preparing the way for the super-
abounding of grace. That the presence of Law
enhances the evil of sin is further shown by the
statement, ‘‘But where there is no law, neither is
there transgression’ (4 15); transgression— pard-
basis—the crossing of the boundary, is, in the strict
sense, only possible under law. But there may be
sin apart from a revealed law, as he has already
proved in the 2d chapter.

(7) Law in the light of the parallel between Adam
and Christ.—In the 5th chapter, dealing with the
parallel between Adam and Christ he says: “For
until the Jaw sin was in the world; but sin is not
imputed when there is no law” (6 13). He cannot
mean that men were not held responsible for their
sin, or that sin was not in any sense reckoned to
their account, for he has in that 2d chapter proved
the opposite; but sin was not so imputed to them
as to bring upon them the punishment of death,
which they nevertheless did suffer, and that is
traced by him to the sin of Adam. These, he says,
had not sinned after the likeness of Adam’s trans-
gression (ver 14); they had not transgressed a
positive command as he did, although they had
undoubtedly violated the law of conscience, and
knew that they were sinners. In drawing out the
parallel between Adam and Christ, he plainly indi-
cates that as Adam’s transgression of law brought
condemnation on the race, so Christ’s obedience
to the Law brings justification. .

(8) Law and righteousness—So far he may be


1849


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  Lawin the NT


said to have spoken of the Law in regard to the
‘sinner, and it is mainly the Law in its judicial
aspect, the Law in relation to righteousness. The
Law reveals righteousness, the Law demands
righteousness, the Law condemns for unrighteous-
ness. Redemption is a working out of righteousness.
The Law witnesses to the perfeet righteousness of
Christ. The righteousness secured by Christ meets
all the requirements of the Law, while gloriously
transeending it. The righteous penalty of the Law
has been borne by Christ; the righteous require-
ments of the Law have been fulfilled by Christ.
That perfeet righteousness seeured apart from the
Law, but satisfying to the Law, eomes to men not
through their relation to the Law, but through faith.
Now he proceeds to consider the Law in relation to
the saint.

(9) The saint and the Law—The believer justi-
fied through Christ has died with Christ. The “old
man”—the sinful nature—has been crucified with
Christ; the eondemning power of the Law has
terminated in the death of Christ, and through the
death of the believer with Christ he has freedom
from the condemnation of the Law. “He that
hath died is justified from sin” (6 7). But though
in one aspect the believer is dead, in another he is
alive. He dies with Christ, but he rises spiritually
with Him, and thus spiritually alive he is “to yield,”
“to present” his ‘members as instruments of right-
eousness unto God” (ver 13), and for his comfort
he is assured that in this new sphere of life sin shall
not have power to bring him under the condemna-
tion of the Law—‘‘Sin shall not have dominion over
you: for ye are not under law, but under grace’
(6 14). His relationship to the Law has been
altered through his union with Christ, and this fact
the apostle proceeds to illustrate. He enounces
the principle that “the law hath dominion over a
man for so long a time as he liveth” (71). Death
dissolves all legal objections. The believer, spirit-
ually dead, is not under the dominion of the Law.

(10) Illustrated by the law of the husband.—The specific
case is then given of a married woman bound hy law to
her husband, but freed from that law through his death,
and in the application, he says, ‘‘ Wherefore, my brethren,
ye also were made dead to the law through the body of
Christ’ (7 4). If the Law in this metaphorical descrip-
tion is the husband while the soul is the wife, as has heen
Most generally understood by Commentators, then the
application is based on the general thought of death dis-
solving the legal obligation, the death of the husband
involves the death of the woman as a wife, and so he
can speak of the death of the believer rather than of the
death ofthe Law. Another explanation of the metaphor
is that the old sinful state is the hushand to which the
ego, the personality, was bound hy the Law, but that
the sinful state being brought to death through Christ,
the personality is free to enter into union with Christ.
Whatever view is adopted, the leading thought of the
apostle is clear, that through the death of Christ the
believer is free from the Law: ‘‘ But now we have heen
discharged from the law, having died to that wherein
we were held” (7 6).


(11) The purity and perfection of the Law in its
own sphere.—The question ig then raised, “Is the
law sin?” (ver 7). The thought is repudiated as
unthinkable, but he goes on to show how the law
was related to sin, giving from his own experience
the exemplification of what he had stated in the
3d chapter, that by the Law is the knowledge of sin.
The Law revealed his sin; the Law aroused the
opposition of his nature, and through the working of
sin under the prohibition of the Law, he found the
tendeney to be death. Nevertheless, there is no
doubt in his mind that the Law is not responsible
for the sin, the Law is not in any manner to be
blamed, ‘The law is boly, and the commandment
holy, and righteous, and good” (ver 12). Sin in the
light of the holy Law is shown to be exceeding sinful,
and the Law itself is known to be spiritual.

We need not deal with the difficult passage that


follows concerning the inner conflict. There has
always been much discussion as to whether this is a
conflict in the soul of the unregenerate man or of the
regenerate—we believe it is in the regenerate, setting
forth the experience of the believer—but whatever
view is taken, it is elear that the law eannot bring
deliverance; the higher part of man’s nature, or
the regenerate nature according to the interpreta-
tion one adopts, may ‘‘consent unto the law that it
is good” (ver 16), may even ‘‘delight in the law of
God”’ (ver 22); but there is another Jaw at work,
the law of sin in the members, and the working of
this law means captivity and wretehedness from
whieh deliveranee ean only come through Jesus
Christ (vs 23-25). The word “law” in these verses
is used in the sense of principle, “the law of my
mind,” “the law of sin,’”’ “the law in my members’;
but over against all is the law of God.

(12) Freedom from the penal claims of the Law.—~
The deseription of the Law as holy, righteous and

ood, as spiritual, as the object of delight to a true
hear is enough to show that the deliverance which
the Christian enjoys is freedom from the penal claims
and condemning power of the Law. ‘his is borne
out by the exulting conelusion: ‘‘There is therefore
now no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus’ (8 1). The Law’s claims, satisfied by
Christ, no longer press upon those who are in Him.
When the apostle adds, ‘For the law of the Spirit
of life in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of
sin and of death” (8 2), he is using “law” in the
general sense as a prineiple or power of producing
ordered action, and “the law of the Spirit of life’
may be taken to mean the method of the Spirit’s
working, and indeed may well be a way of describing
the gospel itself—the new law, through which the
Spirit operates. The other phrase, “law of sin and
death,’’ is not to be taken as meaning the Law of
Moses, but the law, the principle of sin producing
death mentioned in the previous chapter, unless
we think of it as the holy Law which gives the knowl-
edge of sin and brings the condemnation of death.
The failure of the Law to produce a satisfactory
result is definitely attributed to the weakness of the
flesh, which is in effect reflecting the statement of
the previous chapter, but all that the Law could
not accomplish is accomplished through the work
of Christ. In Christ sin is eondemned, and in those
who are brought into union with Him the righteous-
ness of the Law is fulfilled.

(18) The Law remains as @ rule of life for the
believer—Thus the Law is not abrogated. It
remains as the standard of righteousness, the “rule
of life’ for believers. The utmost holiness to which
they can attain under the influence of the Holy
Spirit, is still the ‘righteousness’ which the Law
requires. That the apostle’s teaching is far removed
from Antinomianism is shown, not only by all that
he says in these ehapters about the believer’s new
life of absolute spiritual service, but by the specific
statement in Rom 13 8-10, which at once preseribes
the commandments as rules of life in Eph 6 2 he
cites and enforces the 5th commandment) and shows
how true obedienee is possible. ‘(Owe no man
anything, save to love one another: for he that
loveth his neighbor hath fulfilled the law.’’ Then,
after specifying several of the commands, he de-
clares that these and all other commands are
“summed up in this word, namely, Thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself.” The man in Christ has
found the true principle of obedience. He has
entered into the true spirit of the holy law. That
is all summed up in love, and he having received
the love of Christ, living in His love, sees the Law
not ag a stern taskmaster condemning, but as a
bright vision alluring. He indeed sees the Law
embodied in Christ, and the imitation of Christ


Lawinthe NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1850


involves obedience to the Law, but he fulfils the
Law not simply as a standard outside, but as a
living principle within. Acting according to the
dictates of the love begotten at the cross, his life is
conformed to the image of Christ, and in so far
is conformed to the Law—‘‘Love therefore is the
fulfilment of the law.” In 13 1-7, though the word
“law” does not occur, Paul indicates the relation of
the Christian to the Rom law, to the sovereignty
of Rome in general, showing that “the powers that
be are ordained of God” and that in the ideal they
are reflections of Divine authority, and as such are

to be obeyed.
In the Ep. to the Gal, Paul has also a great deal
to say about the Law, but as we have dealt so fully
with the conception given in Rom, we


2. Inthe can only briefly note the teaching of
Epistle to the Galatian Ep.
the Galatians (1) Law in relation to grace and


spiritual liberty—In general, we may

say that as the Law in relation to righteousness was
the prominent feature in Rom, in Gal it is the Law
in relation to grace and spiritual liberty, and while
it was almost exclusively the moral law that Paul
had in view in Rom, in Gal it is rather the Law of
Moses in its entirety, with special emphasis upon
the ceremonial. He introduces the subject by
referring to the episode at Antioch, when he had
to rebuke Peter for his ‘‘dissimulation” (2 13). He
shows the inconsistency of those who knew that
they had been “justified by faith in Christ, and not
by the works of the law” (ver 16), compelling the
gentile Christians to live according to the Law, and
sums up with the striking statement, ‘For I through
the law died unto the law, that I might live unto
God” (ver 19). The Law in revealing his sin and
pronouncing condemnation, drove him to Christ
for justification. Crucified with Christ he has
entered into such vital union with Christ that his
whole self-life is dominated by the Christ-life: “It
is no longer I that live, but Christ liveth in me”
(ver 20). Here we have the same line of thought
as in Rom; then Paul goes on to show that all the
blessings of grace which these Christians enjoy have
come to them uot by way of the Law, but “by the
hearing of faith’? (8 2-5). Again, citing the case
of Abraham as an instance of justification by faith,
he shows how utterly opposed the Law is to the
grace that brings salvation, ‘For as many as are
of the works of the law are under a curse’’ (ver 10),
but in gracious contrast, ‘Christ redeemed us from
the curse of the law’ (ver 13), having Himself
borne the curse, and so the blessing of Abraham
can come upon the Gentiles through faith (ver 18).
(2) The function of the Law not to give life, but
to guide life —As in Rom, he shows that the promise
of the inheritance was apart from the Law, was
given 430 years before the Law was promulgated,
and answers the question as to the purpose of the
Law, by saying, “It was added because of trans-
gressions”’ (3 19), the thought already noted in
Rom. Yet the Law was not in its nature opposed
to the promise. If any law could have given life,
“could make alive,” then so perfect was the Law
of Moses that it would have served the purpose;
‘Verily, righteousness would have been of the law’
(ver 21). The Law was never meant to give life to
those who had it not. ‘‘He that doeth them shall
live in them” (ver 12), but the doing implies the
possession of life, and the Law only guarantees the
continuance of life while it is perfectly obeyed.
Law coutrols life, but cannot confer life. It regu-
lates life, but cannot restore life. It may impel to
righteousness, but it cannot impart righteousness.
(3) The Law our schoolmaster—The Law, he
shows, was our schoolmaster, our pedagogue, “‘to
bring us unto Christ” (ver 24), The Grecian youth


was under the charge of a pedagogue during his
minority, one part of the pedagogue’s duty being
to take the boy, unwilling enough sometimes, to
schoo]. In the sense already shown in Rom, the
moral law by showing us our sinfulness leads us to
Christ; but here we may take the Law as a whole,
including all the ceremonial and typical observances
which were designed to lead the people to Christ.

(4) The bondage of the Law.—But while there
was undoubtedly much of privilege for the people
under the Mosaic dispensation, there was also some-
thing of bondage. And so Paul says, ‘““We were
kept in ward under the law’ (ver 23), and in the
next chapter, he speaks of the child, though heir
to a great estate, being “under guardians and
stewards until the day appointed of the father’
(4 2), which seems to be the same thought as under
the pedagogue, and this he calls a state of “bond-
age’ (ver 3). The Law guarded and tutored and
restrained; the great typical observances, though
foreshadowing the grace of the gospel, were yet,
in their details, irksome and burdensome, and the
mass of rules as to every part of the Jew’s conduct
proved to be, speaking after the present-day man-
ner, a system of red tape. Little was left to the
free, spontaneous action of the spirit; the whole
course of the Jew from the cradle to the grave was
carefully marked out.

(5) Sonship and its freedom from the Law’s re-
strictions.—But in the fulness of time “God sent
forth his Son, born of a woman, born under the law,
that he might redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of sons’
(4 4f). The gospel of the grace of God embodied
in Christ shows its gracious character in that it not
only answers the requirements of the moral law
and removes its condemnation; fulfils, and by ful-
filling abrogates the typical observer of the cere-
monial law, but also abolishes all the directions
and restrictions given to the Jews as a separate
people, and brings its subjects into a condition of
liberty where the renewed spirit under the mighty
love of Christ can act spontaneously, the great
principles of the mora] law remaining as its guide,
while the minute rules needed for the infancy of the
race are no longer appropriate for the ‘‘sons of God,
through faith, in Christ Jesus’ (8 26). Andso Paul
warns these Christians against turning back to the
“weak and beggarly rudiments” and observing
“months, and seasons, and years” (4 9.10).

In the remaining Epp. of Paul, little is said of the
Law, and we need only indicate the connections in

which the word occurs. In 1 Cor 7


3. Inthe 39 there is a reference to the wife being
Other “bound by the law as long as ber hus-
Pauline band liveth” (AV). _ The word “law,”
Epistles however, is omitted from the critical


texts andfromRV. In thesameep. (9
8.9; 14 21.34) the word is used of the Pent or
the Scripturesasa whole. In 9 20 Paul refers to his
practice of seeking to win men to Christ by accom-
modating himself to their standpoint, ‘‘to them that
are under the law, as under the law’’; and in 15 56
occurs the pregnant statement, an echo of Rom
“The power of sin is the law.’’ In 2 Cor the wor
does not occur, though the Jegal system is referred
to as the ministration of death, in contrast to the
gospel ministration of the Spirit (ch 3). The word
“aw” is once used in Eph (2 15), in reference to the
work of Christ not only producing harmony between
God and man, but between Jew and Gentile:
“abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of
commandments contained in ordinances,’ also
spoken of as “the middle wall of partition,” and
referring esp. to the ceremonial enactments.
In Phil 3 5.6.9 we have the fine autobiographical
passage wherein we see the self-righteous Pharisee


1851


reckoning himself “‘blameless”’ in the eye of the Law,
until convinced of his sin, and led to find in Christ
the righteousness ‘which is through faith,” instead
of his own righteousness ‘‘which is of the law’’ (ver
9). The word does not occur in Col, but the thought
is found of the spiritual circumcision in contrast to
the physical, the blotting out through the work of
the cross, of the bond written in ordinances and the
consequent deliverance of the believer from the
bondage of ceremonial observances (2 11-17),
those being affirmed to be ‘‘a shadow of the things
to come,”’ Christ being the glorious substance. In
1 Tim 1 8.9, we have the two pregnant statements
that “the law is good, if a man use it lawfully,”
and that “law is not made for a righteous man, but
for the lawless.”

The word ‘law’ occurs 14t in this ep., and a
great deal of attention is given to the subject, but
it is generally the law in its ceremonial


4. Inthe and typical aspect that is in question.
Epistle It is not necessary to look at the matter
to the in detail, but simply to indicate the .
Hebrews


line of teaching.


(1) Harmony with the Pauline teaching.—The ancient
doubt as to the authorship of the ep. seems today to have
crystallized into certainty, albeit the grounds for a con-
clusion are no stronger than formerly, but in the desire
to prove the non-Pauline authorship, too much empha-
sis is perhaps laid upon the supposed un-Pauline char-
acter of the teaching. There is, after all, profound har-
mony between the teaching of the Pauline Epp. and the
teaching of He, and the harmony applies to this matter
of the Law. Whilo-Paul, as we have seen, gives promi-
nence in Rom to the moral law, in Gal and elsewhere he
deals with the ceremonial law, in much the same way,
though not so fully, as the writer to the Hebrews. Such
utterances as, ‘‘Our Passover also hath been sacrificed,
even Christ’ (1 Cor 5 7); ‘‘The rock was Christ’;
“Now these things were our examples” (types of us)
(1 Cor 10 4-6); ‘‘Which are a shadow of the things
to come; but the body is Christ’s'’ (Col 2 17) areexactly
in line with the teaching of Hebrews.

(2) The Law transcended by the gospel_—The
author shows how the Law, which was a word spoken
through angels, is transcended by the gospel, which
has been spoken by the Lord of the angels, and so
demands greater reverence (He 2 2-4), and all
through the ep. it is the transcendent glory of the
gospel dispensation introduced by Christ and
ascribed to Him, which is made to shine before us.

(3) Law of priesthood.—The author deals specifi-
cally in chs 7 and 8 with the law of priesthood,
showing that Christ’s Priesthood, “after the order
of Melchisedck,” surpasses in glory that of the
Aaronic priesthood under the law; not only sur-
passes but supersedes it; the imperfect gives place
to the perfect; the shadowy to the real; the earthly
to the heavenly; the temporal to the eternal. And
as Paul justifies his doctrine of justification apart
from the deeds of the Law by reference to the OT
teaching, so here the writer finds in the OT pre-
diction of the New Covenant, the basis for all his
reasoning, and in his reference to the description
of the New Covenant, he is at one with Paul in
regard to the moral law, seeing it as now written
on the heart, and becoming an internal power,
rather than an external precept. See New Covsz-


NANT. :

(4) The law of the sanctuary and the sacrifices.—
He next deais with the law of the sanctuary, and
in connection therewith considers the law of the
gacrifices (chs 9-10), and in the same way shows
that Christ makes good all that the tabernacle and
its services typified, that His one, all-perfect
eternal sacrifice takes the place of the many imper-
fect temporary sacrifices offered under the Law.
At the best the Law had ‘“a shadow of the good
things to come” (10 1). The shadow was useful
for the time being, the people were greatly privi-
leged in having it, it directed them to the great
Figure who cast the shadow. The whole ceremonial


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA | Law in the NT


system was really a system of grace at the heart
of it; in spite of its external rubrics which might
well be abused, it made provision for satisfying for
the time the breaches of the law; the sacrifices
themselves could not take away sin, but periodical
forgiveness was conveyed through them, by virtue
of their relation to the Coming One. Now the
great sacrifice having been offered, eternal redemp-
tion is secured, perfect forgiveness obtained, free
access into the heavenly Holy Place assured, and
the eternal inheritance provided. The Substance
of all the shadows has appeared, the shadows pass
away, and the great truth indicated by Christ Him-
self is now fully made known through His Spirit-
taught servants. Christ, who ‘is the end of the
law [the moral law] unto righteousness to every
one that believeth’? (Rom 10 4), is also the end of
the ceremonial law, the full realization of all its

types and shadows.
James mentions the “law” 10 t in his ep., and in
each case it is the moral law. The influence of the
Sermon on the Mount is seen through-


6. Inthe out the ep., and some distinct echoes
Epistle of of it are heard, as e.g. the injunction,
James “Swear not [at all] (6 12). James has


nothing hut good to say of the Law,
and that fact in the light of the influence of the
Sermon on the Mount is enough to show that Christ,
in that wonderful discourse, did not disparage the
Law, far less abrogate it, but rather exalted and
reinforced it. James taught by Christ exalts the
Law, glorifies it, in fact seems almost to identify
it with the gospel, for in ch 1, when speaking of
the Word and the importance of hearing and doing
it, he in the same breath speaks of looking into ‘‘the
perfect law, the law of liberty” (ver 25). And
indeed, it is just possible, as some think, that he
means the gospel by the epithet, although it seems
better to take it as the Law tr¢ in the gospel, the
Law looked at in its spirituality, as the guide of
ee Christian man who has entered into the spirit
of it.

Even in the OT, as Pss 19 and 119 specifically
show, it was possible for spiritually-minded men to
see the beauty of the Law and find delight in its
precepts. In 2 8 he speaks of the “royal law,’’ and
that here he does mean the Mosaic Law is beyond
doubt, since he cites the particular requirement,
“Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself,”’ in this
agreeing with his Master and with Paul, finding in
love of neighbor the sum of the Law and its true
fulfilment. Respect of persons, he affirms, is a
breach of this “royal law,” and leads to those in-
dulging in it being “‘convicted” by the law of trans-
gression (ver 9). He then affirms the solidarity of
the Law, so that a breach of it in one particular is
a breach of the whole, and makes a man “guilty of
all” (ver 10), a far-reaching principle which Paul
had also indicated when quoting in Gal the words,
“Cursed is every one who continueth not in all things
that are written in the book of the law, to do them”
(Gal 3 10), and when in Rom 7 he showed that
the conviction that he had broken the 10th com-
mandment made him realize that he had broken
the whole Law. James then exhorts his readers
to speak and act as those who are to be judged by
“a law of liberty” (2 12), so that he sets no limit
to the range of that law. Finally,in 4 11, he warns
them by implication against speaking against the
Law or judging the Law, that is, to assume the
place of judge instead of “doer of the law.’ James
could not have used such language unless he had a
profound conviction of the perfection of the Law.
And it is the perfection of the Law as arule of life
for spiritual men redeemed from its condemnation
that James considers it, and so we can call it the
perfect law, the law of hberty, the Royal Law.


Lawinthe OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1852


In the Epp. of Peter and John, the word “law”
does not occur, but Peter shows that the holiness
of God remains as in the Pent the


6. Inthe standard of life, and the example of
Epistles of Christ shows the way (1 Pet 2 21),
Peter and while in the church is found the spirit-
John ual realization of the sanctuary, priest-

hood and sacrifices of the old economy
(1 Pet 2 5-9). Peter has one reference to the


Rom law, enjoining upon his readers obedience to
it in the political sphere. John enjoins the keeping
of the commandments, these being apparently the
commandments of Christ (1 Jn 2 3.4; 6 2), and
the test of keeping the commandments is love of the
brethren, while hatred of a brother is, as in the
Sermon on the Mount, murder. All sin is “law-
lessness” (3 4), and the sum of all law-keeping is
love of God and love of the brethren, and so the
summary of the old Law is echoed and endorsed.
Literaturs.—Chiefly the works on NT theology
(Weiss, Beyschlag, Schmid, etc), and on Christian
ethics (Martensen, Dorner, Harless, etc), with comms.
on Pauline Epp. (Rom, etc); Ritschl, Enisiehung der


altk. Kirche (2d ed); Zahn, Das Gesetz Gottes nach der
Lehre und der Erfahrung des Apostels Paulus; J. Denney,
DB.


Arcatpato M’Caie
LAW IN THE OLD TESTAMENT:
I. Terms Usep
1. Torah ( Law’)
2. Synonyms of Téréh
(1) Migwah (‘'Command"’)
(2) ‘Edhah (‘' Witness," '' Testimony’’)
(3) Mishpatim ( Judgments’')
(4) Hukkim (‘'Statutes’’)
(5) Pikkidhim (‘'Precepts”’)
II, THe Written Recorp or tHe Law
1. The Critical Dating of the Laws
2. Groups of Laws in P
3. The Book of the Covenant
(1) Judgments. Compared with Code of Ham-


murabi
(2) Basis of Law of Covenant. Earlier Cus-


toms
. The Book of the Law of Dt 31
. The Law of Holiness
. The Final Compilation
III. Tur General CaaracTER AND DeEsIGN OF THE


1. The Civil Law
1) Servants and the Poor
Q) Punishments
3) Marriage
(4) Sabbaths and Feasts
2. The Ceremonial Law
(1) Origin of Sacrifice
(2) The Levitical Ritual
(3) The Law Truly a Torah
IV. Tue Passine Away or THE LAW
LITERATURE

Law, at least as custom, certainly existed among
the Hebrews in the times before Moses, as appears
from numerous allusions to it, both in matters civil
and ceremonial, in the earlier Scriptures. But we
have no distinct account of such law, either as to
its full contents or its enactment. Law in the OT
practically means the Law promulgated by Moses
(having its roots no doubt in this earlier law or
custom), with sundry later modifications or addi-
tions, rules as to which have been inserted in the
record of the Mosaic law.

The following are matters of pre-Mosaic law or
custom to which allusion is made in Gen and Ex:
the offering of sacrifice and the use of altars (Gen
passim); the religious use of pillars (Gen 28 18);
purification for sacrifice (35 2); tithes (14 20; 28
22); circumcision (17 10; Ex 4 25f); inquiry at
a sanctuary (Gen 26 22); sacred feasts (Ex 6 1,
etc); priests (Ex 19 22); sacred oaths (Gen 14
22); marriage customs (16; 24; 25 6; 29 16-30);
birthright (25 31-34); elders (24 2; 607; Ex 3
16); homicide (Gen 9 6), etc. We proceed at once
to the Law of Moses.

I, Terms Used.—The Heb word rendered “‘law’’


in our Bibles is M70, torah. Other synonymous


your


words either denote (as indeed does térah itself)
aspects under which the Law may be regarded, or
different classes of law.

Torah is from hérah, the Hiphil of yérah. The
root meaning is “to throw”; hence in Hiphil the
word means “to point out’ (as by
throwing out the hand), and so “to
direct”; and térah is “direction.”
Torah may be simply “human direction,” as the
‘Jaw of thy mother’ in Prov 1 8; but most often
in the OT it is the Divine law. In the sing. it often
means a law, the pl. being used in the same sense;
but more frequently ¢drah in the sing. is the general
body of Divinely given law. The word tells nothing
as to the way in which the Law, or any part of it,
was first given; it simply points out the general
purpose of the Law, viz. that it was for the guidance
of God's people in the various matters to which it
relates. This shows that the end of the Law lay
beyond the mere obedience to such and such rules,
that end being instruction in the knowledge of God
and of men’s relation to Him, and guidance in living
as the children of such a God as He revealed Him-
self to be. This is dwelt upon in the later Scrip-
tures, notably in Pss 19 and 119.

In the completed Canon of the OT, téraéh techni-
cally denotes the Pent (Lk 24 44) as being that
division of the OT Scriptures which contains the
text of the Law, and its history down to the death
of Moses, the great lawgiver.

(1) Migwa@h, “command” (or, in pl., “com-
mands’’), is a term applied to the Law as indi-

cating that it is a charge laid upon


1. Torah


2. Syno- men as the expression of God’s will,
nyms of and therefore that it must be obeyed.
Torah (2) ‘Hdhah, ‘witness’ or “testi-


mony” (in pl. “testimonies”), is a
designation of God’s law as testifying the principles
of His dealings with His people. So the ark of the
covenant is called the ‘ark of the testimony” (Ex
25 22), as containing ‘‘the testimony’? (ver 16),
i.e. the tables of the Law upon which the covenant
was based. The above terms are general, applying
to the tarah at large; the two next following are of
more restricted application.

(3) Mishpatim, ‘judgments’: Mishpatin the sing.
sometimes means Judgment in an abstract sense,
as in Gen 18 19; Dt 32 4; sometimes the act of
judging, as in Dt 16 18.19; 179; 2417. But
“judgments” (in the pl.) is a term constantly used
in connection with, and distinction from, statutes,
to indicate laws of a particular kind, viz. laws which,
though forming part of the tarah by virtue of Divine
sanction, originated in decisions of judges upon cases
bronght before them for judgment. See further:
below. :

(4) Hukkim, “statutes” (lit. “laws engraven”’), are
laws immediately enacted by a lawgiver. “Judg-
ments and statutes’ together comprise the whole
law (Lev 18 4; Dt 41.8 AV). So also we now
distinguish between consuetudinary and statute law.

(5) Pikkddhim, “precepts”: This term is found
only in the Pss. It seems to mean rules or coun-
sels provided to suit the various circumstances in
which men may be placed. The term may perhaps
be meant to apply both to the rules of the actual
térah, and to others found, e.g. in the writings of
prophets and “wise men.”

II, The Written Record of the Law.—The enact-
ment of the Law and its committal to writing must
be distinguished. With regard to the former, it
is distinctly stated (Jn 1 17) that “the law was given
through Moses”; and though this does not neces-
sarily imply that every regulation found in the Pent
is his, a large number of the laws are expressly as-
cribed to him. As regards the latter, we are dis-
tinctly told that Moses wrote certain laws or col-


1853


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Law in the OT


lections of laws (Ex 17 14; 24 4.7; Dt 31 9).
These, however, form only a portion of the whole
legislation; and therefore, whether the remaining
portions were written by Moses, or—if not by him
—when and by whom, is a legitimate matter of
inquiry.

_ It is not necessary here to discuss the large ques-
tion of the literary history of the Pent, but it must
briefly be touched upon. The Pent certainly
appears to have reached its present form by the
gradual piecing together of diverse materials. Dt
being a separate composition, a distinction would
seem to have been clearly established by critical
examination between a number of paragraphs in
the remaining books which apparently must once
have formed a narrative by themselves, and other
paragraphs, partly narrative but chiefly legislative
and statistical, which appear to have been subse-
quently added. Without endorsing any of the
critical theories as to the relation of these, one to
the other, or as to the dates of their composition,
we may, in a general way, accept the analysis, and
adopt the well-known symbol JE to distinguish the
former, and P the latter. Confining ourselves to
their legislative contents, we find in JE a short but
very important body of law, the Law of the Cove-
nant, stated in full in Ex 20-23, and repeated as
to a portion of it in Ex 34 10-28. All the rest of
the legislation is contained in P and Dt.

We are distinctly told in Ex that the law con-
tained in Ex 20-23 was given through Moses. Re-
jecting this statement, critics of the


1. The school of Wellhausen affirm that its
Critical true date must be placed considerably
Dating of later than the time of Joshua. They
the Laws maintain that previous to their con-


quest of Canaan the Israelites were
mere nomads, ignorant of agriculture, the practice of
which, as well as their culture in general, they first
learned from the conquered Canaanites. There-
fore (so they argue), as the law of Ex 20-28 pre-
supposes the practice of agriculture, it cannot have
been promulgated until some time in the period of
the Judges at the earliest; they place it indeed
in the early period of the monarchy. All this,
however, is mere assumption, support for which is
claimed in some passages in which a shepherd life
is spoken of, but with utter disregard of others
which show that both in the patriarchal period and
in Egypt the Israelites also cultivated land. See
B. D: Eerdmans, “Have the Hebrews Been No-
mads?” Expos, August and October, 1908. It can
indeed be shown that this law was throughout in
harmony with what must have been the customs and
conceptions of the Israelites at the age of the exodus
(Rule, OT Institutions). Professor Kerdmans in his
Alitestamentliche Studien, Part III (1910), vigorously
defends the Mosaic origin of the Book of the
Covenant. ;
The same critics bring down the date of the legis-
lation of Dt to the time of Josiah, or at most a few
years earlier. They affirm (wrongly) that the
chief object of Josiah’s reformation narrated in 2K
23 was the centralization of worship at the temple
in Jerus. They rightly attribute the zeal which
carried the reform through to the discovery of the
“Book of the Law” (22 8). Then arguing that the
frequent previous practice of worship at high places
implied the non-existence of any law_to the con-
trary, they conclude that the rule of Dt 12 was a
rule recently laid down by the temple priesthood,
and written in a book in Moses’ name, this new
book being what was “found in the house of Jeh.”
But this argument is altogether unsound: its grave
difficulties are well set ont in Miller’s Are the Critics
Right? And_here again careful study vindicates
the Mosaic character of the law of Dt as a whole


and of Dt 12in particular. M. Edouard Naville in
La découvcrie de ta loi sous le roi Josias propounds
a theory which he supports by a most interest-
ing argument: that the book found was a founda-
tion deposit, which must therefore have been built
over by masonry at the erection of the temple by
Solomon.

Equally unsound, however plausible, are the
arguments which would make the framing of the
Levitical ritual the work of the age of Ezra. The
difficulties created by this theory are far greater
than those which it is intended to remove. On
this also see Méller, Are the Critics Right?

Rejecting these theories, it will be assumed in the
present art. that the various laws are of the dates
ascribed to them in the Pent; that whatever may
be said as to the date of some “of the laws,” all
which are therein ascribed to Moses are truly so
ascribed. ‘

The laws in P are arranged for the most part in
groups, with which narrative is sometimes inter-

mingled. These e.g. are some of the


2. Groups groups: Ex 25-31; Lev 1-7; 11-15;
of Laws Nu 1-4, etc. The structure an
in P probable history of these groups are


very interesting. That many of them
must have undergone interpolation appears certain
from the following considerations. Each of the
groups, and often one or more paragraphs within
a group, is headed by a recurring formula, ‘“‘Jeh
spake unto Moses [or unto Aaron, or unto Moses
and Aaron], saying.” We might at first expect
that the contents of each group or paragraph so
headed would consist solely of what ooh had said
unto Moses or Aaron, but this is not always so.
Not infrequently some direction is found within
such a paragraph which cannot have been spoken
to Moses, but must have come into force at some
later date. Unless then we reject the statement of
the formula, unless we are prepared to say that
Jeh did not speak unto Moses, we can only conclude
that these later directions were at some time in-
serted by an editor into paragraphs which originally
contained Mosaic laws only. That this should
have been done would be perfectly natural, when
we consider that the purpose of such an editor
would be not only to preserve (as has been done)
the record of the original Law, but to present a
manual of law complete for the use of his age, a
manual (to use a modern phrase) made complete
to date.

That the passages in question were indeed inter-
polations appears not only from the fact that their
removal rids the text of what otherwise would be
grave discrepancies, but because the passages in
question sometimes disturb the sequence of the
context. Moreover, by thus distinguishing be-
tween laws promulgated (as stated) by Moses, and
laws to which the formula of statement was not
intended to apply, we arrive at the following im-

ortant result. It is that the former laws can all

e shown to be in harmony one with another and
with the historical data of the Mosaic age; while
the introduction of the later rules is also seen to be
what would naturally follow'by way of adaptation
to the circumstances of later times, and the gradual
unfolding of Divine purpose.

It would be much too long a task here to work this
out in detail: it has been attempted by the writer of
this article in OT Institutions, Their Origin and Devel-
opment. Two instances, however, may he mentioned.

Instances of interpolation.—In Ex 12 43 ff (ERV) we
read, ‘' This is the ordinance of the passover: there shall
no alien eat thereof; but every man’s servant that is
hought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then
shall he eat thereof. A sojourner and a hired servant
shall not eat thereof.”’ This was the original Mosaic
rule introduced hy the formula.in ver 43. But in vs
48.49 it is said that sojourners (when circumcised) may


Lawinthe OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1854


eat of the passover. This was plainly a relaxation of
later date, made in accordance with the principle which
is enlarged upon in Isa 56 3-8.

According to Lev 23 34.39a.40-42, the Feast of
Tabernacles was a feast of seven days only. This was
the Mosaic rule as: appears from the formula in ver 33,
and in certain other passages. But as a development in
the feast’s observance, an eighth day was subsequently
added, and therefore insertions to that effect were made
here at vs 36 and 39b. The introduction of this addi-
tional day would be in keeping with that elaboration in
the observance of the "set teasts’’ which we find in Nu
28 and 29, as compared with the simpler observance of
the same days ordered in Lev 28. Here again the
formula in Nu 28 1 plainly covered a few verses imme-
diately following, but not the whole content of the two
chapters. :


Premising then the existence in writing from an
early age of numerous groups of Mosaic laws and
their subsequent interpolation, the ultimate com-
pilation of these groups together with other matter
and their arrangement in the order in which we
now find them must have been the work, perhaps
indeed of the interpolator, but in any case of some
late editor. These numerous groups do not, how-
ever, make up the whole legislative contents of the
Pent; for a very large portion of these contents
consists of three distinct books of law, which we
must now examine. These were the ‘Book of the
Covenant,” the “Book of the Law” of Dt 31 26,
and the so-called ‘‘Law of Holiness.” ;

This book, expressly so named (Ex 24 7), is
stated to have been written by Moses (24 3.4). It

must have comprised the contents of
3. The Ex 20-23. The making of the cove-
Book of the nant at Sinai, led up to by the reveal-
Covenant ing words of Ex 3 12-17; 6 2-8; 19

3-6, was a transaction of the very first
importance in the religious history of Israel. God’s
revelation of Himself to Israel being very largely,
indeed chiefly, a revelation of His moral attributes
(Ex 84 6.7), could only be effectively apprehended
by a people who were morally fitted to receive it.
Hence it. was that Israel as a nation was now placed
by God in a stated relation to Himself by means of
a covenant, the condition upon which the covenant
was based being, on His people’s part, their obe-
dience to a given law. This was the law contained
in the “Book of the Covenant.” ;

Ti consisted of “words of Jeh” and “judgments”
(Ex 24 3 AV). The latter are contained in Ex 21
1—22 17; the former in ch 20, in the remaining
portion of ch 22, and ch 28. The “judgments”
(ARV “ordinances’’) relate entirely to matters of
right between man and man; the “words of Jeh”
relate partly to these and partly to duties dis-
tinctively religious.

(1) The judgments compared with Code of Hammurabi.
—The "‘judgments"' appear to be taken ‘trom older
consuetudinary law; not necessarily comprising the
whole of that law, but so much of it as it pleased God
now to stamp with His express sanction and to embody
in this Covenant Law. They may well be compared
with those contained in the so-called Code of Ham-
murabi, king of Babylon, who is thought to have been
the Amraphel of Gen 14. These are called ‘'the judg-
ments of righteousness which amare the mighty
king confirmed.’ The resemblances in form and in
subject between the two sets of judgments” are very
striking. All alike have the same structure, beginning
with a hypothetical clause, ‘‘if so and so,” and then
giving the rule applicable in the third person. All alike
relate entirely to civil, as distinguished from religious,
matters, to rights and duties between man and man.
All seem to have had a similar origin in judgments passed
in the first place on causes brought hefore judges for
sere both sets therefore represent consuetudinary
aw. :

(2) Basis of the law of the covenant on earlier custom
and conception.—It is remarkable that, alike in matters
ot right between man and man, and in matters relating
directly to the service of God, the Law of the Covenant
did little Gf anything) more than give a new and Di-
vinely attested sanction to requirements which, being
already familiar, appealed to the general conscience
of the community. If, indeed, in the ‘‘words of Jeh”
there was any tightening of accustomed moral or (more
particularly) rellgious requlremeuts, e.g. In the first


and second commandments of the Decalogue, it would
seem to have been by way of enforcing convictions
which must have been already gaining hold upon the
minds of at least the more thoughtful of the people, and
that in large measure through the lessons impressed
upon them by the events of their recent history. In no
other way could the Law of the Covenant have appealed
to their conscience, and so formed a foundation on which
the covenant could be securely based.

As in the "judgments" we have a ratification of old
consuetudinary law; as again in the second table of the
Decalogue we have moral rules in accordance with a
standard of moral right—no doubt already acknowledged
very similar indeed to that of the ‘‘ negative confession’
in the Egyp Book of the Dead; so in the more especially
religious rules of the Law of the Covenant we find, not
new rules or an establishment of new institutions, but
a new sanction of what was already old. These ‘‘ words
of Jeh’’ assume the rendering of service to Jeh: they do
not enjoin it as if it were a new thing, but they enjoin
that the Israelites shall not add to His service also the
service of other gods (Ex 20 3; 23 24). They assume
the observance of the three ‘‘feasts,’’ they enjoin that
these shall he kept to Jeh—"' unto me,” i.e. ‘unto me
only"’ (vs 14.17). They assume the making of certain
offerings to Jeh, they enjoin that these shall be made liber-
ally—" of the first,” i.e. of the best—and without delay
(22 29f). They assume the rendering of worship by
sacrifice, and the existence of an accustomed ritual, and
therefore they do not lay down any scheme of ritual,
but they give a few directions designed to guard against
idolatry, or any practices tending either to irreverence
or to low and false concep ilons of God (Ex 20 4-6.23-—
26; 22 31; 23 181). While insisting upon the observ-
ance of the three ‘‘feasts,"’ spoken of as already accus-
tomed, it is remarkable that they contain no command
to keep the Passover, which as an annual observance
was not yet an accustomed thing.

This absence of ritual directions is indeed _ very no-
ticeable. It was in the counsel of God that He would
in the near future establish a reconstituted ritual, based
upon what was already traditional, but containing cer-
tain new elements, and so framed as more and more to
foster spiritual conceptions of God and a higher ideal
of holiness. This however was as yet a thing of the
future. No mention therefore was made of it in the Law
of the Covenant; that law was so restricted as that It
should at once appeal to the general conscience of the
people, and so be a true test of their desire to do what
was right. This would be the firm basis on which to
build pee higher things. It is impossible to estimate the
true character of the subsequent legislation, i.e. of what
in bulk is by far the larger part of the aera rast by
first grasping the true character and motive of the
Covenant, and the Covenant Law. See also Covenant,
Boox or; PENTATEUCH.


Immediately after the making of the Covenant,
Moses was called up into the mount, and there re-
ceived instructions for the erection of

4. The the tabernacle, these being followed
Book of the in due course by the rules of the re-
Law of constituted ceremonial of which the
Dt 31 tabernacle was to be the home. All
these for the present we must pass over.

Having arrived on the E. of the Jordan, Moses,
now at the close of his career, addressed discourses
to the people, in which he earnestly exhorted them
to live up to the high calling with which God had
called them, in the land of which they were about
to take possession. To this end he embodied in his
discourse a statement of the Law by which they
were to live. And then, as almost his last public
act, he wrote “the words of this law in a book,” and
directed that the book should be placed “by the
side of the ark of the covenant” (Dt 31 24-26).
What now was this book? Was it Dt, in whole or
in part? The most reasonable answer to this
question is that the book actually written by Moses
comprised at least the contents of Dt 5-26 and 28.
Whether the whole or any parts of the remaining
contents of Dt also formed part of this book, or were
subsequently added to it, the whole being brought
by a process of editing to our present Dt, is again
a legitimate matter of inquiry.

Characteristics of Deuteronomy.—Regarding Dt
5-26 and 28 (with or without parts of other chap-
ters) as the “book” of Dt 31 24-26, we find that it is
a manual of instruction for the people at large—it
is not a priest’s manual. It deals with matters of
morals, and of religion in its general principles, but


eS SEO aT Aon RAR =
TR ORE ss z
Sato at i oie


ae z
ae rae ;
i ass


CODE OF HAMMURABI


1855


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Law in the OT


only subordinately with matters of ritual: it warns
against perils of idolatry and superstitious cor-
ruptions, common in the service of other gods, but
which might by no means be mixed up with Jeh’s
service: it insists upon righteous conduct between
man and man, and very strongly inculcates hu-
manity toward the poor and the dependent: it
enjoins upon those in authority the impartial main-
tenance of right, as also fairness, moderation and
mercy, in the administration of law and the inflic-
tion of punishment: it sets forth the fear of God as
the guide of His people’s actions, and the love of
God in response to His mercy toward them. It
does not lay down any scheme of ritual, though it
gives rules (14 3-21) as to things which might not
be eaten as unclean; it also gives directions as to
the disposal of tithes (14 22-29; 26 12); it enlarges
upon the direction in the Law of the Covenant for
the observance of the three “feasts,’’ adding to this
the observance of the Passover (ch 16); it lays down
a law (expressed conditionally) restricting to one
sanctuary the offering of at least the more solemn
sacrifices (ch 12); and it frequently inculcates liber-
ality toward the Levites, both on account of the
sacred services rendered by them, their dispersal
among the tribes, and the precarious character of
their livelihood. Like the Law of the Covenant it
assumes the existence of an accustomed ceremonial,
and it is remarkable that when there is occasion to
do so it makes use of phraseology (ch 12) similar
to that of the ritual laws of Moses in Lev and Nu.
It is quite possible that some interpolations may
have been made in the text of chs 5-26, but not on
any sufficient scale to affect the general character
of the original book. This ‘Book of the Law” then
was an expansion of the Law of the Covenant, en-
forcing its principles, giving directions in greater
detail for carrying them out, and setting them in a
framework of exhortation, warning and encourage-
ment. Thus its relation to the covenant is indi-
cated by Dt 26 16-19; 29 1. This is that “book
of the Law of Moses’ of which frequent mention is
made in the books of K, Ch, Ezr and Neh.
In marked contrast to the numerous rules, some-
times intermingled with narrative, which we find
in Ex 26-40; Lev 1-16, and through-
6. The Law out Nu, we have in Lev 17-26 a col-
of Holiness lection of laws which evidently was
once a book by itself. This, from its
constant insistence upon holiness as a motive of
conduct, has been called “the Law of Holiness.”
Though it contains many laws stated to have been
spoken by Jeh to Moses, we are not told by whom
it was written, and therefore its authorship and
date are a fair subject of inquiry. In its general
design it bears much resemblance to the Law of
the Covenant, and the Book of the Law contained
in Dt. Asin them, and esp. in the latter, the laws
are set up in a parenetic framework, the whole
closing with promise of reward for obedience and a
threat of punishment for disobedience (cf Ex 23
20-33; Lev 26; Dt 28). Like them it deals much
with moral duties: chs 19 and 20 are practically an
expansion of the Decalogue; but it deals also more
than they do with ceremonial. With regard to
both it sets forth as the motive of obedience the
tule, “Be ye holy, for I am holy.”

— its date is to be found in
jee eoncention of. Riosnnersst The idea found in the
Prophets and the NT that moral wrongdoing renders
unclean must be based upon some earlier conception,
viz. upon the OT conception of ritual uncleanness. Now
ritual uncleanness was originally physical uncleanness
only; the idea of moral right or wrong did not enter into
it at all: this is perfectly clear from the whole contents
Cee ee Or ne on eced l ! ene rae.
pail saa in eo pnete ineludine the earlier prophets,


a, and Isaiah. In H we find an interme-
Amos. dneoption, We find that whereas in Lev 11-15


sexual acts which were iawful rendered_unciean equally
with those which were unlawful, in H adultery and
incest are denounced as rendering specially unclean, the
idea heing that their technical uncleanness hecame more


| intensely unciean through their immorality (Lev 18


24-30). Similarly, converse with familiar spirits and
wizards, which probeply) involved physical defilement
(perhaps through the ingredients used in charms), is
mentioned as specially causing defilement, prohably as
such technical defilement wouid he intensified hy the
unlawfulness of dealing with familiar spirits and wizards
at ail (Lev 19 31). Sins, however, which did not in
themselves entaii physicai uncleanness, such e.g. as
injustice, are not mentioned in H as rendering unclean,
though they are so regarded in the Prophets. First,
then, we have ritual uncieanness, which is physical only
in the rules of Lev 11-15 (Mosaic rules undoubtedly
embodying a pre-Mosaic conception); lastly, we have
moral wrong in itself rendering unclean, in the Pss and
the Prophets; intermediately we have the transitional
conception in H. The date therefore of the Law of
Holiness may be Mosaic, hut must be considerably earlier
than the earliest of the writing prophets.


The remaining groups of Mosaic laws would
appear to have been extant in their original form
(i.e. without interpolation), no doubt

6. The in the custody of the priesthood for
Final Com- probably a very considerable time, it


pilation may have been for centuries, before
their final compilation in their present
form. The arrangement of these groups as they


now stand, before and after H and with narrative
intermingled, is by no means haphazard, as it might
at first appear.


(1) Exodus.—As the directions for the erection of the
tahernacle with the purpose of its several parts were
given to Moses immediately after the making of the
covenant, they foliow the account of it immediately.
Thus Ex contains the history of the covenant-making,
of what led up to it, and of what immediately followed
puede. the provision of the home for the covenant-wor-
ship.

(2) Leviticus.—This book follows with the rules of that
worship; not indeed with all its details, but with an
account of all that was essential to it. First (in Lev 1—
7) we have the law of sacrifice, including what was so
esp. peculiar to the covenant-worship, the law of the sin
offering. Then in chs 8-10 we have the consecration
of the tahernacle and its contents, the consecration of its
priests and the inanguration of the newly prescribed
system of worship. Then in chs 11-15 we have the rules
for purification from ritual uncleanness, without which it
would have been impossibie for this system of covenant-
worship to be carried on. Then there foliows in Lev 16
the account of the ceremonies of the Day of Atonement,
the crown and completion of the whole. Thus in these
16 chapters we have an account of the essentials of the
newly instituted covenant-worship. And then imme-
diately we have in the Law of Holiness the great. motive
that underlay both this ceremonial law and the preceding
moral and religious law_of the Book of the Covenant,
viz. the principle that God’s people must be holy, be-
cause He is holy. The emphasizing of this principle in
H thus closes this whole statement of law, as its first
enunciation had introduced it in Ex 19 6.

(3) Numbers.—The purpose of Nu is supplementary.
Nu 1-6, containing the numhering and ordering of the
tribes and rules as to the representative Levitical min-
istry, sets forth the corporate character of Israel’s serv-
ice of God. The Israelites were not to be a mere aggre-
gation of tribes, but a single nation, the bond of their
union heing the covenant with God. The camp itself,
ordered and carefully guarded against pollution, was to
he a symbol of this holy unity. Chs 7-10 narrate the
remaining occurrences at Sinai, including (9 1-14) the
important account of the first commemorative Passover.
The remaining chapters contain, alternately, a narrative
of events following the departure from Sinai and groups
of laws usually in some way connected with the events
narrated, but ail of them supplementary to the more
essential laws already recorded.

(4) Deuteronomy.—As @ separate work and _ hased
upon sayings and doings at the very close of the 40
years, Dt naturally follows last.


UI. The General Character and Design of the
Law.—Both in civil matters and in ceremonial the
Law had to deal with men who lived in a compara-
tively early age of human history. Its rules were
necessarily adapted in both departments to the
standards of the age. At the same time they in-
culeated principles, the working out of which would
by degrees bring about a great advance in men’s con-
ceptions both of what is true and of what is right.


lawinthe OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA.


1856


As J. B. Mozley says (Lectures on the OT), “The

morality of a progressive revelation is not the moral-

ity with which it starts but that with

1. The Civil which it concludes”; yet the excellence

Law of the OT Law is evident, not only in

its great underlying principles, but in

the suitability of its individual rules to promote
moral advance.

(1) Servants and the poor—We have already
noted the similarity between the “judgments” of
Ex 20 and 21 and the “judgments” of Hammurabi,
in respect to form and subject. Notwithstanding
the practical wisdom found in many of the latter,
there is in one matter a marked contrast in spirit
between them and the former, for while both the
Law of the Covenant and its enlargement in Dt
guarded the interest of and secured justice, and
mercy too, to slaves and the poor, the laws of Ham-
murabi were framed rather in the interests of the
well-to-do. Cf (e.g.) with the rule as to a runaway
slave in Dt 23 15f, the following (CH, § 16): ‘If
a man has harbored in his house a manservant
or a maidgservant fugitive from the palace, or a poor
man, and has not produced them at the demand
of the commandant, the owner of that house shall
be put to death.” The Law indeed permitted
slavery, an institution universal in the ancient
world, but it made provisions which must very
greatly have mitigated its hardship. It was en-
joined, both in Ex and in Dt, that after six years’
service a Heb manservant should “go out free for
nothing,’”’ unless he himself preferred to remain in
servitude (Ex 21 2-6; Dt 15 12-18). The rule
in Ex 21 7-11 as to women servants was not ex-
actly the same, but it nevertheless guarded their
interests, while Heb women servants were afterward
included in the rule of Dt 15 12. A still greater
amelioration was brought in by a later rule con-
nected with the law of the Jubilee as set ont in Lev
25 39-55. Again, though servitude was permitted
on account of debt, or as a rescue from poverty
(Ex 21 2.7; Dt 15 12), manstealing was a capital
offence (Ex 21 16).

(2) Punishments—The rule of Ex 21 22-25
(“eye for eye,” etc; cf Lev 24 19.20; Dt 19 16-
19) sounds harsh to us, but while the justice it
sanctioned was rough and ready according to the
age, it put a restraint on vindictiveness. The
punishment might be so much, but no more: and
the same spirit of restraint in punishment is seen
in the rule as to flogging (Dt 25 2f). Similarly
the rule that murder was to be avenged by ‘the
avenger of blood,” a rule under the circumstances
of the age both necessary and salutary, was pro-
tected from abuse by the appointment of places of
refuge, the rule with respect to which was designed
to prepare the way for a better system (see Ex 21
12-14; Nu 36 9-24; Dt 19 1-18).

(8) Marriage—The marriage customs of the
Mosaic age permitted polygamy and concubinage,
marriage by purchase or by capture in war, slave-
marriage, and divorce. The Law allowed the con-
tinuance of these customs, but did not originate
them; on the contrary, its provisions were designed
to restrict the old license, giving protection to the
weaker party, the woman, limiting as far as possible
the evils of the traditional system, a system which
‘could not suddenly be changed, and preparing the
way for a better. Consider the effect of the follow-
ing rules: as to slave-wives (Ex 21 7-11); captives
of war (Dt 21 10-14); plurality of wives (Dt 21
15-17); adultery (Ex 20 14.17; Dt 22 22); forni-
cation (Dt 22 23-29; 23 17.18; Lev 21 9); divorce
(Dt 24 1-4); Levirate marriage (Dt 25 5-10); in-
cest (Lev 18 6-18); marriage of priests (Lev 21
7.10-15); royal polygamy (Dt 17 17).

(4) Sabbaths and feasts——The law as to these,


though partly ceremonial, yet served social ends.
The Sabbath day gave to all, and particularly to
servants and the poor, and domestic cattle too,
a needful respite from daily toil; it also served
men’s spiritual welfare, and did honor to God (Ex
23 12; Dt 6 14.15; Ex 31 12-17). The seventh
year’s rest to the land —it also ‘‘a sabbath of solemn
rest, a sabbath unto Jeh’”—was for the land’s re-
cuperation, but it served also to safeguard common
rights at perhaps a time of transition as to customs
of land tenure: connected with it also there were
rules as to release of slaves and relief of debtors (Ex
23 9-11; Lev 25 2-7; Dt 15 1-18). The ob-
servance of the Sabbath year as a rest to the land
seems to have fallen into disuse, perhaps as early as
some 500 years before the Bab captivity (2 Ch 36
21), and it is probable that the Jubilee (the design
of which seems to have been to adjust conflicting
rights under new customs of land tenure and in the
relation of employer to employed) was instituted
to take its place (Lev 25). The law as to the an-
nual feasts insured both the social advantages of
festive gatherings of the Neato and their sancti-
fication by the worship of God, and the public recog-
nition of His hand in matters agricultural and politi-
cal, which were either the occasion of, or connected
with, these gatherings. Considerate liberality to the
poor and dependent was, on these occasions, esp.
enjoined (Ex 23 14-17; Dt 16 1-17; 12 12.18.19).

We have already noted that the conception of

sin as uncleanness, rendering the sinner therefore

unfit for the presence of God, must
2. The have been an outgrowth from the earlier
Ceremonial conception of purely ritual (physical)
Law uncleanness. This development, and

an accompanying sense of the hein-
ousness of sin and of its need of atonement hy
sacrifice, were undoubtedly brought about by the
gradual working of the law of the sin offering (Lev
4 i—6 18; 12-15; 16). Similarly the rules as
to guilt offerings (Lev 5 14—6 7) must by degrees
have led to a true conception of repentance, as in-
cluding both the secking of atonement throngh
sacrifice and restitution for wrong committed. The
sin offering was, however, a peculiarly Mosaic in-
stitution, marking a development in the sacrificial
system. The only sacrifices of which we have any
trace in pre-Mosaic times were meal and drink
offerings, whole burnt offerings and _ sacrifices (or,
to use the Levitical term, peace offerings).

(1) Origin of sacrifice—We read of the offering of
sacrifice all through the patriarchal history, and farther
back even than Noah in the story of Cain and Abel; and
there can be ne doubt that the Levitical scheme of sacri-
fice was based upen, and a development (under Divine
ordering) of, the sacrificial system already traditional
among the Hebrews. Sacrifice was undoubtedly of
Divine origin; yet we have no account, or even hint
of any formal institution of sacrifice. The sacrifices of
Cain and Abel are spoken of in a way that leaves the
impression that they were offered spontaneously, and
the most probable assumption would seem to be that
the very first offering of sacrifice was the outcome of a
spontaneous desire (Divinely implanted, we may be
Sure) in early men to render service to the higher Being
of whose relation to themselves they were, if cver so
dimly, conscious.

Prehistcric research has not yet been ahle te present
to us a distinct picture of primitive men; and even if
the results of anthropology were more certain than they
can yet claim te be, what in this connection we are con-
cerned in is the conceptions, net of early men every-
where, but of the early ancestors of the Heh race.
However infantile their ideas may have heen and
prebably were, there may well have been far more of
elementary truth in them—in simple ldeas Divinely
implanted—than students ef anthropelegy have any
knowledge of. Sconer or later early men did make
offerings to Ged; and as the Mosaic sacrificial system
was certainly based upen the patriarchal, so we may
fairly assume that the ideas underlying the latter were
an cutgrowth from these which underlay the sacrifice
of the patriarch's own still earlier ancestors.

It is well observed hy Dr. A. B. Davidson (OT The-
ology, p. 315) that the sacrifices of Cain and Abel are called


1857


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Law in the OT


a@ minhah or present; and this idea of sacrifice as a gift


to God most easily accounts for the facts with which we
have to deal in the history of OT sacrifice. When early
men first made offerings to God, they probably did so in
the spirit of young children who give gifts to older persons
without knowing whether, or in what way, the gifts will
be of any use to them. They simpiy give in affection
what is of value in their own eyes. The one only thing
of prime value to the earliest men must have been food:
hence offerings to God were everywhere in the first place
Offerings of food. But here a difficulty must soon have
arisen, for men must have become convinced very soon
that the Divine Being did not feed upon the food offered,
at least in men's way of feeding. Ultimately, among
the Israelites, the idea of His actual feeding’ became
eliminated altogcther (Ps §0 13.14), but in the mean-
tlme the difficulty seems to have been met by the assump-
tion that the Divine Being consumed an inner essence of
food; and this being supposed to be set free by fire, food
offered in sacrifice came to be burnt in order to fit it to
become the food of God. This certainly appears from
Lev 8 11.16 (cf Lev 21 6.8.17.21).

Coming, however, to animal as distinguished from
vegetable sacrifice, we do not find that its origin can be
accounted for as at the first belng an offering of food.
We learn from Lev 17 10-14 that the essential part of
animal] sacrifice was the offering of the blocd, and that
blood was offered because blood was life. The idea that
lite can be given by giving blood lay at the root of a cus-
tom which must have been well-nigh universal in primi-
tive times, that of blood covenanting (see H. Clay Trum-
bull, Blood Covenant). In this, two persons would give
each to the other of his own blood, drawn from the living
vein. Persons united in blood covenant were supposed,
by the commingling of their blood, to become actual sharers
of one life. To give to another of one’s own blood was
to give one’s own life, i.e. one’s own self, with all the
dedication of love and service which that would imply.
Now a similar idea would seem to have lain at the root
of the primitive offering of blood to God: it was the
offering of the life of the offerer.

In the very first blood offerings itis probable that the
bicod offered was the blood of the offerer, and that there
was no infliction of death—only in this way the dedi-
cation of life. The dedicatory rite of circumcision may
have been a survival of sacrifice in this its earliest form;
so also what is narrated in 1 K 18 28. When, however,
the blood offered had come to be the blood of a substi-
tute, and that a substitute animal, the sacrifice would
come (no doubt soon) to include the slaughter of the
anima] and further the consumption, in whole or in part,
of its carcase by fire as an offering of food.


(2) The Levitical ritual—Whether the above
theory be accepted or not, in so far as animal sacri-
fice became an offcring of food, it would stand in
line with vegetable sacrifice; but in both the excel-
lence of the Levitical ritual stood in this, that while
it was framed for a people whose conceptions were
in a stage of transition, it was yet adaptable to
higher conceptions, and fitted to become at length
symbolical of purely spiritual truth. It was
through the teaching, not only of prophets but of
the Levitical ritual itself, and while it was still in
full force, that the words of Ps 50 13.14 were
uttered: “Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink
the blood of goats? Offer unto God the sacrifice
of thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the Most
High.” The Levitical ritual, as respects animal
sacrifice in particular, was so framed as, on the one
hand, to keep alive the idea of sacrifice as the offer-
ing of life, not of death, of life’s dedication, not its
destruction, and therefore to make it a true type
of Christ’s living sacrifice. On the other hand, the
rules of sacrifice guarded against abuses which, as
a matter of fact, sprang up widely among the
heathen. The rule, e.g. in Lev 1 2 and elsewhere,
that ‘ye shall offer your oblation of the cattle, even
of the herd and of the flock,” excluded human sac-
rifice. The rule that the first act in every sacrifice
must be to slay the creature offered excluded the
infliction of unnecessary suffering. The detailed
rules as to the offering and disposal of the blood,
and the varying modes of disposal of the carcase,
kept alive the essential idea of all such sacrifice, and
saved it from degenerating into a mere heaping up,
as in Egypt, of altars with mere loads of food. The
rules of the peace offering, clothing it always with
2 spiritual motive (see Lev 7 12.16), raised it to a
level far above the sacrifice of that class among the


surrounding heathen, guarding it against their
licentious festivity (ef Hos 2 11-18; 4 13.14; Am
2 8; 5 21-23) and gross ideas as to the part of God
in the feasting.

(3) The Law truly a térah.—In every one of its
departments the Law proved itself to be indeed a
torah directing God’s people in the upward way;
leading them on from the state of advancement,
such as it was, to which they had already attained
by Moses’ time, to higher and higher standards,
both of faith and of duty, till they were prepared
for the gospel of Christ, who Himself said of the old
Law, “Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all be
fulfilled” (Mt 5 18 AV). Meanwhile we have, in
the teaching of the prophets, not a counter influence,
not asystem rivaling the Law, but its unfolding, both
inspired of God, both instruments in His progressive
revelation. ‘To obey is better than sacrifice, and
to hearken than the fat of rams’ were the words of
Samuel, a faithful servant of the Law, and himself
a frequent offerer of sacrifice. What the Law was
to the heart of devout Israelites in the prophetic
age is seen in the fervent words of Ps 119.

IV. The Passing Away of the Law.—The great
general principles of the Law were not transitory
but abiding, and reappear under the gospel dispen-
sation. Otherwise, however, i.e. in those particu-
lars, whether ceremonial or civil, in which it was
adapted to merely passing needs, the Law passed
away when Christ came. It is not always realized
that already before Christ came it had begun to
pass away. The following are illustrations:

(1) The whole rationale of the Levitical worship
consisted in its being based upon the covenant made
at Sinai, and the symbol of the Covenant was the
ark containing the tables of the Law and surmounted
by the mercy-seat. Therefore one of its most sig-
nificant acts was the sprinkling of the blood of sin
offering within the veil upon the mercy-seat, or
without the veil, but yet before the mercy-seat.
But this most significant act could no longer be per-
formed when, after the Bab captivity, there was no
longer either ark or mercy-seat.

(2) The law that tithe should be paid to the
Levites, a tithe only of it being paid by them to
“Aaron the priest’. (Nu 18), was practicable so
long as the priests were a small portion only of the
whole Levitical body, as they appear in the history
down to the middle period of the monarchy. But
by the time of the exile they disappeared from his-
tory except as actual temple ministrants, and, after
the return from the exile, even these were in number
a mere handful compared with the priests (Ear 2
36-42; 8 15-20.24-30; Neh 11 10-19). The at-
tempt to revive the old law (Neh 10 38.39) was
well-intentioned but impracticable: it was evi-
dently soon abandoned (Neh 18 10-13; Mal 3 8-
10). We learn from Jos that tithes were regarded
later as due to the priests, not to the Levites (Jos,
Ant, XX, vili, 8; ix, 2).

(8) That the Mosaic law as to divorce was to
give place to one more stringent appears not only
from Our Lord’s words in Mt 19 7-9, but from Mal
2 16.

(4) It is probable that some of the supplementary
rules in Nu may have been designed for temporary
use only, and may have passed away before the
close of the OT. It may have been so, e.g., with the
law of Nu 5 11-31, a law probably most useful in
the circumstances of the Mosaic age, and perhaps
itself an endorsement of a pre-Mosaic custom.

Lireraturs.—Driver, LOT, with which should be
read Moller, Are the Critics Right? and Orr, POT; A.B.
Davidson, Theology of the OT; J. B. Mozley, Ruling
Ideas in Barly Ages; Rule, OT Institutions, Their Origin
and Development; Kurtz, Sacrificial Worship of the OT;
Hoonacker, Le sacerdoce lévitique; douard Navilie,


Law, Judicial
Lay, Laying


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1858


La découverte de la lot sous le roi Josias; H. Clay Trum-
bull, The Blood Covenant; Milligan, Resurrection of Our
Lord (274 ff, on ‘‘blood-offering’’).

Utric Z. Rute


LAW, JUDICIAL, j66-dish’al: This was the form
of Divine law which, under the dominion of God,
as the Supreme Magistrate, directed the policy of
the Jewish nation, and hence was binding only on
them, not on other peoples. The position of Jeh,
as the Supreme Ruler, was made legally binding
by a formal election on the part of the national
assembly (Ex 19 3-8); and that there might be no
question about the matter, after the death of Moses,
Joshua, in accordance with instructions received
by his great predecessor in the office of federal
judge, in the public assembly caused the contract to

renewed in connection with most solemn exer-
cises (Josh 8 30-35). No legal contract was ever
entered into with more formality and with a clearer
understanding of the terms by the several parties
than was the contract which made it binding on the
Hebrews permanently to recognize Jeh as the Su-
preme Ruler (Ex 24 3-8). He was to be acknowl-
edged as the Founder of the nation (Ex 20 2);
Sovereign, Ruler, and Judge (Ex 20 2-6); and in
these capacities was to be the object of love, rever-
ential fear and worship, service, and absolute ohe-
dience. Flagrant disregard of their obligations to
Him manifested in idolatry or blasphemy was re-
garded as high treason, and like high treason in all
nations and history was punishable by death (Ex
20 3-5.7; 22 20; Lev 24 16; Dt 17 2-5). The
will of Jeh in critical cases was to be ascertained
through special means (Nu 9 8; Jgs 1 1.2; 20 18.
23.28; 1 8 10 22).

The ruling official recognized by the Hebrews as
a nation was the chief magistrate, but he stood as
Jeh’s vicegerent, and therefore combined various
authorities in his person. We must distinguish
the functions of the chief magistrate (1) under the
republic, (2) under the constitutional monarchy,
and (3) under the senatorial oligarchy after the
Bab captivity. Moses was the first chief magis-
trate under the republic; after him, Joshua, and the
other judges. Under the constitutional monarchy,
it was the king whose government was limited, for
he was to be elected by the people; must be a native
Hebrew; must not keep a large cavalry; must not
support a harem; must not multiply riches; must
be a defender of the national religion; must be
guided by law, not whim; must he gracious and
condescending to the people (Dt 17 15-20). After
the Bab captivity, the senatorial oligarchy com-
bined ecclesiastical and state authority, later sharing
it with the Rom government. See also SANHEDRIN.

Frank E. Hirsce

LAW, ROMAN. See Roman Law.


LAWFUL, 16’fo6l (usually UBW'A, mishpat, “re-
lating to judgment,”’ or “a pronounced judgment”;
p7IX , caddtk, ‘relating to that which is righteous’
or ‘just’; eon, éxesti, etvopos, etinomos, ‘that
which is authorized according to law,” or “a privi-
lege according to legitimate custom” [cf Ezk 18 5.19.
21.27; Isa 49 24; Mt_12 10; Acts 16 21; 19 39}):
Used of persons: of God, as being righteous both
in the punishment of the wicked and the reward-
ing of the righteous (Ps 145 17 Heb); of man, as
being just and equitable in all his dealings with
his fellow-man (Ezk 33 19). It is used of things
when the same are in accord with a pronounced
judgment or a declared will of God, and thus pleas-
ing in His sight (Mk 3 4). When the course of
individual conduct is according to God’s law of
righteousness, it is declared to be “lawful” (Ezk 33
19). The word is used in a forensic sense as de-
claring the legal status of a person conforming to


law. The idea of straightness, rigid adherence to
God’s law, whether religious, civil or ceremonial,
cannot be excluded from the definition of the word
“lawful.”

Neither AV nor ARV is consistent in its tr
of the Heb and Gr words tr? “lawful.”’ Ofttimes
the words “just?? and “Tighteous” are used. To
arrive at the full and proper meaning of “lawful,”
therefore, it is necessary that we study the passages
containing these synonymous terms. The written
Law of God is the recognized standard by which
things, actions and persons are to be judged as
being lawful or unlawful. Wiii1aM Evans


LAWGIVER, lé’giv-ér (PPA, mhokek; vopobé-
rns, nomothétés): There are two words, one Heb
and one Gr, which are tr4 “lawgiver.’”’? The former
occurs 7 t in the OT, and in AV in every case except
Jgs 6 14 is thns tr’. In RV it bears the tr “law-
giver” but twice (Dt 33 21; Isa 83 22), though
in the other passages (Gen 49 10; Nu 21 18; Jgs
5 14; Ps 60 7; 108 8) this meaning is retained
in the margin. The Gr word occurs in the NT but
once (Jas 4 12), where it has a meaning that is
almost the exact equivalent of the Heb word in
Isa 33 22. In both passages God is declared to
be the “lawgiver,’’ and in the NT passage is so
called because He has the power to rule and judge,
to save and destroy. Man is denied the authority
to judge hecause he is not the lawgiver. God is
the lawgiver, and therefore possesses the right to
pronounce judgment (cf Isa, supra). The word,
however, implies more than mere legislative func-
tion; it also connotes the idea of ruling. Isaiah
makes this very plain, since he adds to the statement
that God is our judge and lawgiver the further
declaration that He is also king. This meaning
adheres in the very history of the word. Itis based
upon the monarchical conception in which the legis-
lative, judicial and administrative functions are all
vested in one person. In Jas the two terms “‘law-
giver and judge” express the idea of God’s absolute
sovereignty. The vb. nomothetein occurs in He 7
11; 8 6, but it does not extend beyond the meaning
“to enact laws.”

The Heb word is restricted to poetic passages,
and except in Isa 33 22 is applied to a tribal or
kingly ruler. Moses is preéminently the lawgiver
in Jewish and Christian circles, but it should be
noted that in the Scriptures of neither is he given
this title. The primary meaning of the vb. from
which m*hokék is derived is “to cut,” “to carve,”
and a derived meaning is “to ordain.’”” The mean-
ing of the part. m*hdkek is based upon this last. It
means (1) the symbol which expresses the law-
maker’s authority, that is, the commander’s staff;
and (2) the person who possesses the authority (Dt
33 21). It has the first of these meanings in Nu 21
18; Ps 60 7; 108 8, and probably in Gen 49 10,
though here it may have the second meaning. The
parallelism, however, seems to require an imper-
sonal object to correspond to scepter, and so the
reading of the text (RV) is to be preferred to that
of the margin (Skinner, ad loc.). In Dt 33 21;
Jgs 6 14; Isa 33 22, it means the person who
wielded the symbol of authority, that is the pre-
scriber of laws. In a primitive community this
would be a military commander. In Gen 49 10
the “ruler’s staff” is the symbol of kingly authority
(Driver), and this verse consequently implies the
supremacy of Judah which came in with the Davidic
kingdom. This word contains no reference to the
Messiah. In Nu 21 18 there is an allusion to the
custom of formally and symbolically opening
fountains under the superintendence and at the
instruction of the leader of the tribe. Such a
custom seems to have been in vogue till compara-


1859


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Law, Judicial
Lay, Laying


tively modern times. Gray cites Budde in the New
World for March, 1895, and Muir’s Mohamet and
Islam, 348f. In Jgs 5 14 the word means ‘“‘mili-
tary commander,” as the context shows. This is
the meaning also in Dt 33 21, where it is affirmed
that Gad obtained a position worthy of its warlike
character. Tg, Vulg, Pesh, and some moderns
have seen here a reference to the grave of Moses,
but Nebo was in Reuben and not in Gad.
W. C. Morro
_ LAWLESS, lé’les (Gvopos, dnomos): While occur-
ring but once in AV (1 Tim 1 9), is tr4 in various
ways, e.g. “without law’ (1 Cor 9 21); “unlawful”
(2 Pet 28 AV); “awless” (1 Tim 1 9); ‘‘trans-
gressor’”’ (Mk 16 28; Lk 22 87); ‘wicked’ (Acts
2 23 AV; 2 Thess 2 8 AV). When Paul claims to
be “without law,” he has reference to those things
in the ceremonial law which might well be passed
over, and not to the moral law. Paul was by no
means an antinomian. Those are ‘lawless’? who
break the law of the Decalogue; hence those who
disobey the commandment, ‘Honor thy father and
thy mother,” are lawless ( Tim 19). The civil
law is also the law of God. Those breaking it are
lawless, hence called ‘‘transgressors.’? Those who
are unjust in their dealings are also “lawless’’; for
this reason the hands of Pilate and those who with
him unjustly condemned Jesus are called “wicked
[unlawful] hands’ (Acts 2 23 AV). The most not-
able example of lawlessness is the Antichrist, that
‘twicked [lawless] one’’ (2 Thess 2 8).
Wituiam Evans

LAWYER, lé’yér (vopixés, nomikés, “according
or pertaining to law,”’ i.e. legal; as noun, “an expert
in law,” “about the law,” “lawyer” [Mt 22 35;
Lk 7 30; 10 25; 11 45.46.52; 14 3; Tit 3 13)):
The work of the ‘lawyers,’ frequently spoken of
as “‘scribes,”’ also known as ‘‘doctors’” of the law
(Lk 2 46 m), was first of all that of jurists. Their
business was threefold: (1) to study and interpret
the law; (2) to instruct the Heb youth in the law;
(3) to decide questions of the law. The first two
they did as scholars and teachers, the last as ad-
visers in some court. By virtue of the first-named
function, they gradually developed a large amount
of common law, for no code can go into such detail
as to eliminate the necessity of subsequent legis-
lation, and this usually, to a great extent, takes
the form of judicial decisions founded on the code
rather than of separate enactment. And so it was
among the Hebrews. The provisions of their code
were for the most part quite general, thus affording
much scope for casuistic interpretation. As a
result of the industry with which this line of legal
development had been pursued during the centuries
immediately preceding our era, the Heb law had
become a very complicated science; and since it
was forbidden to record these judicial decisions, a
protracted study was necessary in order to commit
them to memory.

But since the law must have universal application,
the views of the individual scribe could not be taken
as a standard; hence the several disciples of the law
must frequently meet for discussion, and the opin-
ion of the majority then prevailed. To these meet-
ings the youth interested in the study would be
invited, that. they might memorize the formulas
agreed upon and might clear up the points upon
which they were uncertain by asking questions of
the recognized doctors (Lk 2 46).

Such centers of legal lore, of course, would seldom be
found in rural communities; the authorities would natu-
rally gather in large centers of populullons esp.—until
70 AD—in Jerus. While the deliverances of these law
schools were purely theoretical, yet they stood in close
relation to the practical. Whenever doubt arose regard-


ing the application of the-law to a particular case, the
question se referred to the Neateat awa or! by him to


the nearest company of lawyers, perhaps to the Sanhe-
driu; and the resultant decision was henceforth author-
ity. Thus the lawyers became law makers, and after the
destruction of Jerus, which brought au end to the exist-
ence of the Sanhedrin, the rabbinical doctors were recog-
nized as the absolute authority in such matters. Fre-
uently a single lawyer of great rank, as for instance
illel or Gamaliel I, might pronounce dicta of unques-
tioned recognition with as much authority as a supreme
court in our day, though sometimes his opinions were
received and corrected by the legal tribunal, especially
the Sanhedrin. Of course, frequently, these tribunals
were under the sway of such a man's influence, so that
what he said upon his own authority would be ratified
in the assembly of the doctors. 7
The second function of the lawyers was that of
teachers. The renowned rabbis always sought to
gather a company of pupils about them whose
business it was to repeat the teachers’ law formulas
until they had ‘passed into their flesh and blood.”
For the purposes of such instruction as well as for
the discussion of the teachers and the students,
there were special schoolhouses, which are often
mentioned in connection with the synagogues as
places of special merit and privilege. In Jerus,
these law schools were conducted in the temple—
probably in the hall dedicated to this special pur-
pose (Mt 21 23; 26 55; Mk 14 49; Lk 2 46;
20 1; 2137; Jn 18 20). The students during
the lectures sat on the floor, the teacher on a raised
platform, hence the expression “‘sitting at the feet
of” (Acts 22 3; Lk 2 46). Finally, the lawyers
were called upon to decide cases in court or to act
as advisers of the court. Before the destruction of
Jerus, technical knowledge of the law was not a con-
dition of eligibility to the office of judge. Anyone
who could command the confidence of his fellow-
citizens might be elected to the position, and many
of the rural courts undoubtedly were conducted,
as among us, by men of sterling quality but of
limited knowledge. Naturally such men would
avail themselves of the legal advice of any ‘“‘doctor”
who might be within reach, esp. inasmuch as the
latter was obliged to give his services gratuitously.
And in the more dignified courts of large munici-
palities, it was a standing custom to have a com-
pany of scholars present to discuss and decide any
new law points that might arise. Of course, fre-
quently, these men were elected to the office of
judge, so that practically the entire system of
jurisprudence was in their hands. =
s Frank E. Hirsca
LAY, 14, LAYING, 14’ing: (1) B'W, sim, “to put,”
and the Gr equivalent, rlOnp., ttthémi, are very
frequently tr by ‘to lay.””. RV very often changes
the AV rendering of stm, but never that of t&thémi:
1S 16 2, “how he set himself against him in the
way’ (AV “he laid wait for him’); 2 K 11 16,
“So they made way for her’ (AV “And they laid
hands on her’); cf 2 Ch 23 15; Job 24 12, “God
regardeth not the folly” (AV “God layeth not folly”);
Job 34 23, ‘For he needeth not further to consider
a man’ (AV “For he will not lay upon man more”);
Isa 28 17, “And I will make justice the line”
(AV “Judgment also will I lay to the line’); Job
17 3, “Give now a pledge” (AV “Lay down now”).
(2) 7D3, nathan, lit. “to give,” is very commonly
tr by ‘‘to lay.” RV changes the tr of AV in Ezk 4
5, “I have appointed”; Ezk 33 28f, “I will make
the land a desolation” (AV “I will lay the land most
desolate”). (3) “To lay” of AV is frequently
rendered differently in RV; Isa 64 11, “I will set
thy stones” (AV “lay thy stones’); Dt 29 22, “‘the
sicknesses wherewith Jeh hath made it sick” (AV
“sicknesses which the Lord hath laid upon’’). For
other differences of RV and AV cf Dt 218; 2K 9
25m; 2K 12 11; Ezr 8 31; Ps 1045m; Isa
53 6; Jer 6 26; Mk 78; Lk 19 44; Jas 1 21;
1 Pet 2 1. In most of these passages the change of
RV is due to the peculiar use of the word ‘to lay”


Lazarus
Leah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1860


in AV. The following expressions are found very
frequently: “to lay hands on,’’ “‘to lay wait,’’ “‘to
lay up,” “to lay aside,” “to lay upon,” “‘to lay
down,’’ etc. : .
“Laying of wait,’ AV, is rendered “lying in wait”
in Nu 85 20ff; Acts 9 24 reads: ‘But their plot
became known” (AV “But their laying await was
known’’), The “laying on of hands” is.a very
general expression. See Hanps, LayIne on oF.
A. L. Brestica
LAZARUS, f{az’a-rus (Adtapos, Ldzaros, an ab-
ridged form of the Heb name Eleazar, with a Gr
termination): Means ‘‘God has helped.” In LXX
and Jos are found the forms ’Hdeatdap, Hleazdr,
and ’Eadedtapos, Eledzaros. The name was common
among the Jews, and is given to two men in the
NT who have nothing to do with each other.
The home of the Lazarus mentioned in Jn 11 1
was Bethany. He was the brother of Martha and
Mary (Jn 11 1.2; see also Lk 10 38—
1. Lazarus 41). All three were esp. beloved by
of Bethany Jesus (Jn 11 5), and at their home He
more than once, and probably often,
was entertained (Lk 10 38-41; Jn 11). Asin-
timated by the number of condoling friends from


Traditional Tomb of Lazarus.


the city, and perhaps from the costly ointment
used by Mary, the family was probably well-to-
do. In the absence of Jesus, L. was taken sick,
died, and was buried, but, after having lain in the

ave four days, was brought back to life by the
Saviour (Jn 11 3.14.17.43.44). As a result many
Jews believed on Jesus, but others went and told
the Pharisees, and a council was therefore called
to hasten the decree of the Master’s death (Jn 11
45-53). Later, six days before the Passover, at a
feast in some home in Bethany where Martha served,
L. sat at table as one of the guests, when his sister
Mary anointed the feet of Jesus (Jn 12 1-3).
Many of the common people came thither, not only
to see Jesus, but also the risen L., belicved in Jesus,
and were enthusiastic in witnessing for Him during
the triumphal entry, and attracted others from
the city to meet Him (Jn 12 9.11.17.18). For that
reason the priests plotted to murder L. (Jn 12 10).
This is all that we really know about the man, for
whether the Jews accomplished his death we are
not informed, but it seems probable that, satiated


with the death of Jesus, they left L. unmolested.
Nothing is told of his experiences between death
and resurrection (ef Tennyson, ‘In Memoriam,”’
xxxi), of his emotions upon coming out of the tomb,
of his subsequent life (cf Browning, “A Letter to
Karshish”’), and not a word of revelation does he
give as to the other world. His resurrection has
been a favorite subject for various forms of Chris-
tian art, and according to an old tradition of Epi-
phanius he was 30 years old when he was raised
from the dead, and lived 30 years thereafter.


As might be expected this miracle has been vigorously
assailed hy all schools of hostile critics. Ingenuity has
been exhausted in inventing ohjcctions to it. But all
told, they really amount only to three.

(1) The silence of the other Gospels.—There is here, no
douht, some difficulty. But the desire of the early
Christians, as many scholars think, to screen the family
from danger may have kept the story from hecoming
current in the oral tradition whence the Synoptics drew
their materials, though Matthew was probably an eye-
witness. But, in aay case, the Synoptics do not pretend
to give all the deeds of Jesus, and in the repo.t by
them we have few save those which were wrought in
Galilee. Each of them has omitted elements of highest
interest which others have preserved. Thus Lk alone
gives us the raising of the widow's son at Nain. John,
knowing that the others had omitted this, tells us what
he had himself witnessed, since all danger to the family
had long ago passed away, as it was of espccial intcrost
to his story, and he had recorded no other case of resur-
rection. At any rate, the Gospel writers do not seem to
regard @ resurrection from the dead by the power of
Jesus aS sO much more stupendous than other miracles,
as they seem to modern scholars and to the Jews, and,
moreover, the Synoptics do unconsciously attest this
miracle by descrihing a sudden outburst of popular
excitement in favor of Jesus which can be accounted for
only by some extraordinary event.

(2) The stupendous character of the miracle.—But to @
philosophical heliever in miracles this is no ohstacle at
all, for to omnipotence there are no such things as hig
miracles or little ones. Of course, Martha's statement
as to the decomposition of the body was only her opinion
of the peopenl ty. in the case, and He, who sees the end
from the beginning and who had intended to raise L.,
might well in His providence haye watched over the
body that it should not see corruption. When all is said,
“He who has created the organic cell within inorganic
matter is not incapable of reéstablishing life within the
inanimate substance.”

(3) Its non-use as an accusation against Jesus.—The
objection that Jn_11 47-53 is inconsistent with the fact
that in accusing Jesus before Pilate no mention is made
of this miracle by the enemies of Jesus has little weight.
Who would expect them to make such a self-convicting
acknowledgment? The dismay of the priests at the
miracle and their silence about it are perfectly compatible
and natural.

No one of the attempted explanations which deny the
reality of the miracle can offer even a show of probability.
That L. was just recovering from a trance when Jesus
arrived; that it was an imposture arranged by the
family and sanctioned by Jesus in order to overwhelm
His enemies; that it was a fiction or parable tr4 into a
fact and made up largely of synoptic materials, an alle-
gorical illustration of the words, ‘I am the resurrection,
and the life,’ a myth—such explanations require more
faith than to believe the fables of the Talm. ‘They well
illustrate the credulity of unbelief. The narrative holds
together with perfect consistency, is distinguished by
vivacity and dramatic movement, the people who take
part in it are intensely real and natural, and the picture
of the sisters perfectly agrees with the sketch of them in

No morhid curiosity of the reader is satisfied.
Invented stories are not like this. Even a Renan de-
clares that it is a necessary link in the story of the final
Catastrophe.


The purpose of the miracle seems to have been:
(1) to show Himself as Lord of life and death just
before He should be Himself condemned to die;
(2) to strengthen the faith of His disciples; (3) to
convert many Jews; (4) to cause the priests to
hasten their movements so as to be ready when His
hour had come (Plummer, HDB, III, 87).

In the parable in Lk 16 19-31, L. is pictured as
in abject poverty in this world, but highly rewarded

and honored in the next. It is the
2. The only instance of a proper name used
Beggar in a parable by Jesus. Some think
that he was a well-known mendicant
in Jerus, and have even attempted to define his


1861


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lazarus
Leah


disease. But this is no doubt simple invention,
and, since “in Christ’s kingdom of truth names
indicate realities,” this was probably given because
of its significance, suggesting the beggar’s faith in
God and patient dependence upon Him. It was
this faith and not his poverty which at last brought
him into Abraham’s bosom. Not one word does
L. speak in the parable, and this may also be sug-
gestive of patient submission. He does not murmur
at his hard lot, nor rail at the rich man, nor after
death triumph over him. The parable is related
to that of the Rich Fool (Lk 12 16-21). This
latter draws the veil over the worldling at death;
the other lifts it. It is also a counterpart of that
of the Unjust Steward (Lk 16 1-13), which shows
how wealth may wisely be used to our advantage,
while this parable shows what calamities result
from failing to make such wise use of riches. The
great lesson is that our condition in Hades depends
upon our conduct here, and that this may produce
a complete reversal of fortune and of popular judg-
ments. Thus L. represents the pious indigent who
stood at the opposite extreme from the proud, cove-
tous, and luxury-loving Pharisee. The parable made
a deep impression on the mind of the church, so that
the term “lazar,” no longer a proper name, has passed
into many languages, as in lazar house, lazaretto,
also lazzarone, applied to the mendicants of Italian
towns. There was even an order, half-military,
half-monastic, called the Knights of St. Lazarus,
whose special duty it was to minister to lepers.

The rich man is often styled Dives, which is not
strictly a proper name, but a Lat adj. meaning
“vich,’? which occurs in this passage in the Vulg.
But in Eng. lit., as early as Chaucer, as seen in the
‘“Sompnoure’s Tale” and in “Piers Plowman,” it
appears in popular use as the name of the Rich
Man in this parable. In later theological lit. it
has become almost universally current. The name
Nineuis given him by Euthymius never came into
general use, though the Sahidic version has the
addition, ‘‘whose name was Ninue.” His sin was
not in being rich, for Abraham was among the
wealthiest of his day, but in bis worldly unbelief in
the spiritual and eternal, revealing itself in ostenta-
tious luxury and hard-hearted contempt of the poor.
Says Augustine, ‘‘Seems he [Jesus] not to have been
reading from that, book where he found the name of
the poor man written, but found not the name of the
rich, for that book is the book of life?”

G. H. TREVER

LEACH, léch. See Horseieacn.


LEAD, led (FID, ‘dphereth): Lead was one
of the first metals to be used in the free state, prob-
ably because it was so easily obtained from its ores.
Lead was found anciently in Egypt and the Sina-
itic peninsula. There is no lead found in Pal proper,
but in Northern Syria and Asia Minor it occurs in
considerable quantities, usually associated with
silver. These sources no doubt furnished an im~-

ortant supply in Bible times. It was also brought
y the Phoenicians from Spain (Tarshish) (Ezk 27
12) and the British Isles. :

Lead waa used, as it still is, all along the Mediter-
ranean shores for sinkers. Pieces of Egyp fish~
nets probably dating from 1200 BC are now pre-
served in the British Museum, with their lead sink-
ers still attached. Since lead was the heaviest
metal known to the ancients, gold excepted, it was
generally used for fish-lines and sounding lines (cf
Acts 27 28), esp. in the dense waters of the Medi-
terranean. Moses mentioned the sinking qualities
of lead in the sea in his simile of the sinking of
Pharach’s hosts “as lead in the mighty waters”
(Ex 15 10). : oe

Lead was used by the ancients for binding stones


together. In most of the ancient ruins of Syria
the Arabs have dug holes at the scams between
stones in walls and columns in order to remove the
iron, bronze, or lead thus used. In the museum
of the Syrian Protestant College, Beirit, there are
several specimens of cast-lead sarcophagi dating
from the time of Christ.

In Job 19 23.24, lead is mentioned as used in the
engraving of permanent records. Two inferences
might be drawn from this passage: either that the
letters were cut with a chisel (pen) and then the
cutting was filled with lead, or that sheets of lead
were used as tablets on which to grave the record
with an iron tool. Lead is frequently referred to
along with iron, brass, silver and tin (Nu 31 22;
Ezk 22 18.20; 27 12). The use of lead for
plumblines is implied in Am 7 7.8; Zec 4 10; as
a weight in Zec 5 7.8. That OT writers under-
stood the use of lead for purifying gold is shown by
Jer 6 29 and Ezk 22 18-22 (cf Mal 3 2.3). See
Metats; REFINER. James A. Patou


LEAF, lef, LEAVES, lévz: Used in three different
senses, with reference: (1) To trees (m>7 , ‘Gleh, “a
coming up”), Gen 3 7; 8 11; Lev 26 36 (O79,
tereph); Ezk 17 9; @éddov, phillon. Figuratively
(a) of spiritual blessings (Ezk 47 12; cf Rev 22 2)
and prosperity (Ps 1 3); (6) of moral decay (Isa
64 6), and (c) of a formal, empty profession (Mt
21:19). (2) Toa book (not , deleth), Jer 36 23 (m
“eolumns”; see ver 2); asthe parchment was gradu-
ally unfolded the successive columns could be read.
(8) To doors (92%, cala‘, “side,” yp, hela’, “a
screen,” “hanging’’), 1 K 6 34. The door of the
Holy Place consisted of two halves, but each half
had two leaves (cf Ezk 41 24). M. O. Evans


LEAGUE, lég. See Conreppracy.


LEAH, lé’a (MN, leah; Acta, Leia, “weary,”
“dull” [?], ‘wild cow’’): Rachel’s sister, and the
elder daughter of Laban (Gen 29 16). We are
told that her eyes were “tender” (M121, rakkdth).
Gesenius renders it ‘weak,’ LXX do@evets, asthe-
nets; accordingly, she was weak-eyed, but by no
means “‘blear-eyed” (cf Vulg). Her eyes were
lacking that luster which always and everywhere is
looked upon as a conspicuous part of female beauty.
Jos (Ant, I, xix, 7) says of her, Ti» dpc» od« ederpery,
tén épsin ouk euprepé, which may safely be ren-
dered, ‘‘she was of no comely countenance.”

L. became the wife of Jacob by a ruse on the part
of her father, taking advantage of the oriental cus-
tom of heavily veiling the prospective bride. When
taken to task by his irate son-in-law, Laban excused
himself by stating it was against the rule of the
place ‘‘to give the younger before the first-born”
(Gen 29 21-26). Although Rachel was plainly
preferred by Jacob to L., still the latter bore him
six sons: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah (Gen 29
31 ff), Issachar, Zebulun, and a daughter, Dinah
(Gen 80 17-21}. Up to this time Rachel had not
been blessed with children of her own. Thus the
lesson is brought home to us that Jeh has a special
and kindly regard for the lowly and despised, pro-
vided they learn, through their troubles and afflic-
tions, to look to Him for help and success. It seems
that homely L. was a person of deep-rooted piety
and therefore better suited to become instrumental
in carrying out the plans of Jeh than her handsome,
but worldly-minded, sister Rachel.

When Jacob decided to return to the “land of his
fathers,’ both of his wives were ready to accom-
pany him (Gen 31 4.14). Before they reached
the end of their journey their courage was sorely


Leannoth
Lebanon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1862


tried at the time of the meeting between Jacob and
his brother Esau. Although L. was placed between
the handmaids in the front, and Rachel with her
son Joseph in the rear, she still cannot have derived
much comfort from her position. We may _well
imagine her feeling of relief when she saw Esau
and his 400 men returning to Seir (Gen 33 2.16).

According to Gen 49 31, L. was buried at Mach-
pelah. We cannot know for a certainty that she
died before Jacob’s going down to Egypt, though
it is very likely. If she went down with her hus-
band and died in Egypt, he had her body sent
to the family burying-place. Ruth 4 11 discloses
the fact that her memory was not forgotten by
future generatious. When Boaz took Ruth for a
wife the witnesses exclaimed, ‘“‘Jeh make the woman
that is come iuto thy house like Rachel and like
Leah, which two did build the house of Israel.”

Witi1am Baur

LEANNOTH, lé-an’oth (Ps 88, title). See

Psabns.


LEAPING, lép'ing. See Games.


LEASING, 1é2’ing (AT , kazabh, ‘‘to devise,’ “to
fabricate,” hence “to lie’; occurs but twice in AV
[Ps 4 2, RV “falsehood”; 5 6, RV ‘‘lies’’]; the
Heb word is tr¢ “‘liars” [Ps 116 11]; “lie” or deceive
[Job 6 28]): The idea of treachery, lying, and de-
ceit, lies at the root of this word. Joab’s conduct
is a good illustration of the meaning (2 8 3 27;
20. 8-10). In Ps 6 6 David is referring to the
cunning, treachery, and falsehood of his adver-
saries; ef 2S 13 28; 15 7-9. Doubtless David
had a special person in mind as being guilty of
‘Jeasing,”” probably Ahithophel.


Wiitutiam Evans
LEATHER, leth’ér. See Sxry; Grrpip; Tan-
NER.


LEAVEN, lev’n (ANW, sar, PAM, hamec; ton,
zimé; Lat fermentum): The nomadic ancestors of
the Hebrews, like the Bedouin of today, probably
made their bread without leaven; but leaven came
to play a great part in their bread-making, their
law and ritual, and their religious teaching (see Ex
12 15.19; 13 7; Lev 2 11; Dt 16 4; Mét 13 33;
16 6-12; Mk 8 15f; Lk 12 1; 13 21).

(1) In bread-making.—The form of leaven used
in bread-making and the method of using it were
simple and definite. The ‘‘leaven” consisted always,
so far as the evidence goes, of a piece of fermented
dough kept over from a former baking. There is
no trace of the use of other sorts of leaven, such as
the lees of wine or those mentioned by Pliny (NH,
xviii.26). Thelump of dough thus preserved was
either dissolved in water in the kueadiug-trough
before the flour was added, or was “hid” in the flour
(AV “meal’’) and kneaded along with it, as was the
case mentioned in the parable (Mit 13 33). The
bread thus made was known as “leavened,” as dis-
tinguished from ‘‘unleavened” bread (Ex 12 15, ete).
See Brean.

(2) In law and ritual.—The ritual prohibition of
loaven during ‘‘the feast of unleavened bread” iu-
cluding the Passover (Ex 23 15, etc) is a matter
juviting restudy. For the historical explanation
given in the Scriptures, see esp. Ex 12 34-39;
13 3ff; Dt 16 8. The antiquity of the prohibi-
tion is witnessed by its occurrence in the earliest
legislation (Ex 23 18; 34 25). A natural reason
for the prohibition, like that of the similar exclusion
of honey, is sought on the ground that fermentation
implied a process of corruption. Plutarch voices
this ancient view of the matter when he speaks of it
as “itself the offspring of corruption, and corrupt-
ing the mass of dough with which it is mixed.”


Fermentatum is used in Persius (Sat., i.24) for
“corruption.” For this reason doubtless it was
excluded also from the offerings placed upon the
altar of Jeh, cakes made from flour without leaven,
and these only, being allowed. The regulation name
for these “‘unleavened cakes’? was magcath (Lev
10 12). Two exceptions to this rule should be
noted (Lev 7 13; cf Am 4 5): “leavened bread”
was an accompaniment of the thank offering as
leavened loaves were used also in the wave offering
of Lev 23 17. Rabbinical writers regularly use
leaven as a symbol of evil (Lightfoot). ;

(3) In teaching—The figurative uses of leaven in
the NT, no less than with the rabbins, reflect the
ancient view of it as “corrupt and corrupting,” in
parts at least, e.g. Mt 16 6 ||, and esp. the prover-
bial saying twice quoted by Paul, “A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump” (1 Cor 6 6f; Gal 5
9). But as Jesus used it in Mt 13 33, “The king-
dom of heaven is like unto leaven,’’ it is clearly the
hidden, silent, mysterious, but all-pervading and
transforming action of the leaven in the measures of
flour that is the point of the comparison.

Lirzerarure.—Nowack, Heb Arch., II, 145f; Talm,
Berakhoth, 1%a; Lightfoot, Hor. Heb.on Mt 16 6.

Gro. B. Eacer

LEBANA, lé-ba’na, Ieb’a-na (N229, [*bhana’), or
LEBANAH (7329, lebhanah, “white”’): Head of a
family of returning exiles (Ezr 2 45; Neh 7 48;
ef 1 Esd 5 29).


LEBANON, leb’a-non (j1223, lbhanon; LXX
AlBavos, Libanos; Vulg Libanus): Derived from
the root 72>, labhen, “to be white,”
probably from the snow which covers
its summits the greater part of the
year. ‘White mountains” are found in almost every
couutry. The light color of the upper limestone


1. Name


Anti-Lebanon: Souk-W 4dy-Barrada. :


may, however, form a sufficient reason for the name.
In prose the article is usually connected with the
name. In poetry it is more often without. the
article. In the LXX, however, the article is gen-
erally present both in prose and poetry.
The Lebanon range proper borders the east
coast of the Mediterranean, for a distance of 100
miles, running N.N.E and 8.8.W.
2. General from the mouth of the Litany river,
Description the classic Leontes (which enters the
sea a little N. of Tyre), to the mouth
of the Eleuthurus (Nahr el-Kebir), a few miles N.
of Tripolis. This river comes through a depression
between Lebanon and the Nuseiriyeh mountains,
known as ‘‘the entrance to Hamath,” and connects
with a caravan route to the Euphrates through
Palmyra. For a considerable distance N. of the
Litény, the mountain summits average from 4,000
to 6,000 ft. in height, and the range is more or less


1863


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Leannoth
Lebanon


dissected by short streams which enter the Medi-
terranean. Most prominent of these is the Nahr
ez-Zaherany, which, after running 25 or 30 miles
in a southerly direction through the center of the
range, like the Litdny, turns abruptly W. opposite
Mt. Hermon, reaching the sea between Tyre and
Sidon. In roughly parallel courses Nahr el-'Awleh
and Nahr Damur descend to the sea between Sidon
and Beyrout, and Nahr Beyrout just N. of the city.
Throughout this district the mountain recesses are
more or less wooded. Opposite Beyrout the range
rises in Jebel Sannin to an elevation of 8,560 ft.
Thirty miles farther N.E. the summit is reached
in Jebel Mukhmai, at an elevation of 10,225 ft., with
several others of nearly the same height. An
amphitheater here opens to the W., in which is
sheltered the most frequented cedar grove, and from
which emerges the Nahr Kadtsha (‘sacred stream’)
which enters the Mediterranean at Tripolis. Snow
is found upon these summits throughout the year
(Jer 18 14), while formerly the level area between
them furnished the snow fields from which a glacier
descended several miles into the headwaters of the
Kadisha, reaching a level of about 5,000 ft. The
glacier deposited in this amphitheater a terminal
moraine covering several sq. miles, which at its front,
near Bsherreh, is 1,000 ft. in thickness. It is on
this that the grove of cedars referred to is growing.

The view from this summit reveals the geographi-
cal features of the region in a most satisfactory
manner. Toward the EH. lies Coele-Syria (the
modern Buka), 7,000 ft. below the summit, bordered
on the eastern side by the mountain wall of Anti-
Lebanon, corresponding to the cliffs of Moab E. of
the Jordan valley, opposite Judaea. This depression
in fact is but a continuation of the great geological
fault so conspicuous in the Jordan valley (see
AraBaH). As one looks down into this valley,
Ba*‘albek appears at the base of Anti-Lebanon, only
20 miles away. The valley is here about 10 miles
wide, and forms the watershed between the Orontes
and the Litany. To the N.E. the valley of the
Orontes is soon obscured by intervening peaks, but
to the S.W. the valley of the Litény closes up only
where the glistering peak of Mt. Hermon pierces
the sky, as the river turns abruptly toward the sea
40 miles distant. Toward the W., the blue waters
of the Mediterranean, only 25 miles distant as the
crow flies, show themselves at intervals through the
gorges eut by the rapid streams which have fur-
rowed the western flanks of the mountain (Cant
4 15); 3,500 ft. beneath is the amphitheater many
sq. miles in area, filled with the terminal moraine
from which the Kadisha river emerges, and on which
the grove of cedars (cf 1 K 4 33; Ps 92 12; Hos
14 5) appears as a green spot in the center. On-
ward to the W. the river gorge winds its way amid
numerous picturesque village sites and terraced
fields, every foot of which is cultivated by a frugal
and industrious people. To the traveler who has
made the diagonal journey from Beyrout to_the
cedars, memory fills in innumerable details which
are concealed from vision at any one time. He
has crossed Nahr el-Kelb (‘Dog River’’), near its
mouth, where he has seen Egyp and Assyr inscrip-
tions dating from the time of Sennacherib’s inva-
sion. Ascending this river, after passing numerous
villages surrounded by mulberry and olive groves,
vineyards, and fields of wheat, and pausing to study
the ruins of a temple dating from Rom times and
having crossed a natural bridge at Jisr el- Hagar
with a span of 120 ft., rising 75 ft. above the stream,
he arrives, at the end of the second day, at the ruins
of the famous temple of Venus destroyed by the
order of Constantine on account of the impurity
of the rites celebrated in it. Here, too, is a famous
gpring, typical of many others which gush forth


on either side of the Lebanon range from beneath
the thick deposits of limestone which everywhere
crown its summit. The flow of water is enormous,
and at certain seasons of the year is colored red
with a mineral matter which the ancients regarded
with mysterious reverence (see LB, III, 244).
The lower part of the amphitheater is covered with
verdure and a scanty growth of pine and walnut
trees, but the upper part merges in the barren cliffs
which lie above the snow line. Onward, alternately
through upturned limestone strata, left by erosion
in fantastic forms, and through barren areas of red
sandstone, where the cedars of Lebanon would
flourish if protected from the depredations of man
and his domestic animals, he crosses by turns at
higher and higher levels the headwaters of the
Ibrahim, Fedar, Jozeh, Byblus and the Botrys rivers,
and at length reaches, on the fourth day, the Ka-
disha, 5 miles below the cedars of Lebanon. Viewed
from the Mediterranean the Lebanon range pre-
sents a continuous undulating outline of light-
colored limestone peaks, the whole rising so abruptly
from the sea that through most of the distance there
is barely room for a road along the shore, while in
places even that is prevented by rocky promon-
tories projecting boldly into the sea. The only
harbors of importance are at Beyrout and Tripolis,
and these are only partially protected, being open
to the N.W. The eastern face of the range falling
down into Coele-Syria is very abrupt, with no foot-
hills and but one or two important valleys.
Geologically considered, the Lebanon consists of
three conformable strata of rock thrown up in an
anticline with its steepest face to the
3. Geology E. The lowest of these are several
thousand ft. thick, consisting of hard
limestone containing few fossils, the most character-
istic of which is Cidaris glandaria, from which the
formation has been named Glandarian limestone.
In its foldings this has been elevated in places to a
height of 5,000 ft. Through erosion it is exposed
in numerous places, where it presents picturesque
castellated columns, whose bluish-gray sides are
beautifully fluted by atmospheric agencies. The
second formation consists of several hundred feet
of red-colored sandstone alternating with soft
limestone and clay deposits, occasionally contain-
ing a poor quality of bituminous coal, with pyrites
and efflorescent salts. It is this that occasionally
colors the water of the spring at Adonis. The char-
acteristic fossil is Trigonia syriaca. Altogether
this formation attains a thickness of 1,000 ft., and
it is on its exposed surfaces that the most of the
Lebanon pines are found. It contains also many
signs of volcanic action. The third formation con-
sists of hippurite limestone, a eretaceous formation,
in some places almost wholly composed of fragments
of the fossils from which it derives its name. This
formation appears on all the highest summits, where
in most cases it is nearly horizontal, and in places
attains a thickness of 5,000 ft. Between the sum-
mits of the range and the foothills this formation
has been almost wholly carried away by erosion,
thus exposing the underlying formations. Cre-
taceous strata of still later age are found at low
levels near the sea, which in places are covered by
small deposits of Tertiary limestone, and by a
porous sandstone of the Pleistocene age.
The scenery of the western slopes of Lebanon is
most varied, magnificent, and beautiful, and well
calculated, as indeed it did, to impress
4. Scenery the imagination of the Heb pocts.
Originally it was heavily covered with
forests of pine, oak and cedar; but these have for
the most part long since disappeared, except in the
valley of Nahr Ibrahim, which is still thickly
wooded with pine, oak and plane trees. Of the


Lebaoth
Lend, Loan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1864


cedars there remain, besides the grove at the head
of the Kadisha, only two or three, and they are of
less importance. Every available spot on the
western flanks of the Lebanon is cultivated, being
sown with wheat or planted with the vine, the olive,
the mulberry and the walnut. Irrigation is ex-
tensively practised. When we let the eye range
from the snowy summits of the mountain over all
that lies between them and the orange groves of
Sidon on the seashore, we understand why the
Arabs say that “Lebanon bears winter on ita head,
spring on its shoulders, autumn in its lap, while
summer lies at its feet.’

In the more desolate places jackals, hyenas,
wolves, and panthers are still found (ef 2 K 14 9).

The original inhabitants of Lebanon were Hivites
and Gebalites (Jgs 3 3; Josh 13 5.6). The whole

mountain range was assigned to the
5. History Israelites, but was never conquered

by them. It seemed generally to have
been subject to the Phoenicians. At present it is
occupied by various sects of Christians and Mo-
hammedans, of whom the Maronites, Druzes and
Orthodox Greeks are most active and prominent.
Since 1860 the region has been under the protection
of European powers with a Christian governor.
No exact figures are available, but the population
at present numbers probably about 275,000.

Ruins of ancient temples are numerous through-
out Lebanon. Bacon estimates that within a
radius of 20 miles of Ba‘albek there are 15 ruined
sun-temples, the grandeur and beauty of which
would have made them famous but for the surpass-
ing splendor of Ba‘albek.

Anti-Libanus (Jth 17; Josh 18 5; Cant 7 4)
is an extension northward of the great mountain

system facing on the E, the great
6, Anti- geological fault most conspicuous in
Lebanon __ the valley of the Jordan (sce Jorpan,
VALLEY OF), extending from the Gulf
of Akabah to Antioch on the Orontes River. The
system begins at the Barada River just N. of Mt.
Hermon, and, running parallel to Mt. Lebanon for
65 miles, terminates at Hums, the ‘entering in of
Hamath.” The highest points of the range reach
an elevation of over 8,000 ft. Eastward the range
merges into the plateau of the great Syrian desert.
South of Ba‘albek the Yahfufah, a stream of con-
siderable importance, empties into the Litany,
while the Barada (the “Abana” of Scripture), rising
in the same plateau, flows eastward to Damascus,
its volume being greatly increased by fountains
coming in from the base of the dissected plateau.


Lirerature.—The geographical and geological de-
scriptions are largely obtained by the writer from an
extended excursion through the region in the company
of Professor Day of the Protestant College at Beyrout,
whose knowledge of the region is most intimate and
comprehensive. For more detailed information see
Robinson, BRP?, II, 435 ff, 493; G. A. Smith, HGHL,
45 ff; Burton and Drake, Unexplored Syria; Benjamin
W. Bacon, and G. F. Wright in Records of the Past, 1906,
V, 67-83, 195-204; Baedeker-Socin, Pal.

: Grorce Freprrick Wricut

LEBAOTH, 1éba’oth, -oth (MAND>, lebha’ath):
An unidentified city in the S. of the territory of
Judah (Josh 15 32). It is the same as Beth-
lebaoth of Josh 19 6, which, by a clerical error
appears in 1 Ch 4 31 as “‘Beth-biri.”


LEBBAEUS, le-bé’us (AcBBatos, Lebbaios): Men-
tioned in Mt 10 3 AV as ‘“Lebbacus, whose sur-
name was Thaddaeus” (RV omits); one of the
twelve apostles. See THaDDAEUS.


LEBONAH, 1é-bd’na (M3539, i’bhonah): A place
on the great north road between Shiloh and
Shechem (Jgs 21.19). It is represented by the
modern Khén el-Lubbaén, about 3 miles W.N.W. of


Seilan (“Shiloh”), on the way to Nablas. It is a
wretched village lying on the slope of a hill, with
many rock tombs in the vicinity.


LECAH, lé’ka (Ip2, lékhah): A descendant of
Judah (1 Ch 4 21).


LEDGE, lej (25%), shalabh): The word in the
sense of side-projection is used in 1 K 7 28.29
in connection with the bases of Solomon’s MoLTEN
Sra (q.v.); in vs 35.36, where AV uses the same
word, RV has “stay” (yadh, lit. “hand’”’). RV
likewise has “ledge”? (round) for AV “compass’’
(karkobh) in the description of the altar in Ex 27
5; 38 4 (see AvTaR), and ARV substitutes “ledge”’
for “settle” (‘dzarah) in Ezk 43 14.17.20; 46 19.
See TEMPLE. ‘


LEEKS, léks (WEN, hacir; Ta wpdca, id prdsa):
This word, elsewhere tr? ‘grass,’ is in Nu 11 5
rendered “leeks” in all the ancient VSS, on account


at


Leek (Allium porrum).


of its association with garlic and onions; such a use

of the word occurs in the Talm. The leek (Allium
jorrum) is much grown today in Pal, while in ancient
gypt this vegetable was renowned,


LEES, léz. See Wine.
LEFT, left (28'2W , sama’l, “to go to the left,” “to


au,
turn to the left,” whip, Srila”, smo’l, “the left
hand,” “bay, sema’lt, “belonging to the left,”
“situated on the left’; dpirrepds, aristerdés, and
euphemistically evévupos, eudnumos, lit. “having
a good name,“ “of good omen”): The words are
chiefly used in orientation with or without the addi-
tion of the word “hand.’ So Abraham says to
Lot: “If thou wilt take the left hand [semé’l], then
I will go to the right; or if thou take the right hand,
then I will go to the left. [sdma’l]’ (Gen 13 9).
Frequently in Heb idiom the right hand and the
left are mentioned together in order to express the
idea “everywhere,” ‘“‘anywhere,”’ “altogether” (Gen
24 49; Ex 14 22.29; Nu 22 26; Dt 2 27; 6 32;


1865


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lebaoth
Lend, Loan


2 Cor 6 7). In the geographical sense the left
1s synonymous with north (Gen 14 15; Josh 19
27; Ezk 16 46; Acts 213). While the left
hand is considered as weaker than the right (sce

EFTHANDED), it is the hand which holds the bow
(Ezk 39 3). The left hand is the side from which
bad omens come, and therefore less lucky and less
honored than the right hand (see Hann, note).

: H. L. E. Lusrine

LEFTHANDED, left’hand-ed (72.772 7X,
"ter yadh-yamin; LXX dpdorepodéfios, ampho-
terodéxios, i.e. “ambidextrous” ): The Heb presents
a combination of words signifying lit. a man whose
right hand is impeded or lame, who therefore uses
the left hand instcad, or one who by habit prefors
the use of the left hand, where others use the right.
It is interesting to note that in both instances,
where the expression occurs in the Scripture, it
refers to individuals belonging to the tribe of Ben-
Jamiu (which name itself signifies “a son of the
right hand”!), The first is Ehud, son of Gera, who
killed Eglon, king of Moab, and thereby delivered
Israel from paying tribute to the Moabites (Jgs 3
15). The other instance is that of the 700 selected
Benjamites, who, though lefthanded, “could sling
stones at a hair-breadth, and not miss” (Jgs 20 16;
ef 1 Ch 12 2), H. L. E. Luzrine


LEG ({1] PW, shak, Aram. PW, shok; [2] 373,
kara‘, dual D193, kera‘ayim; [3] 41, reghel; ex&os,
skélos; AV tr® also 52W, shobhel, and TITY,
g“adhah, with “leg,” but mistakenly): (1) The
first Heb word (shdk) denotes the upper leg, and is
therefore synonymous with TuiaH (q.v.). It ex-
presses metaphorically the muscular strength, and
the pride of the runner. ‘He taketh no pleasure
in the legs of a man” (Ps 147 10). ‘His legs are
as pillars of marble, set. upon sockets of fine gold”
(Cant 6 15). If the legs have lost their strength
asin the lame or the Beri-beri patient, they become
a@ metaphor for anything useless, inefficient or dis-
appointing: ‘The legs of the lame hang loose; a0 is
a parable in the mouth of fools’”’ (Prov 26 7). The
Aram, form is found in the description of the image
of Nebuchadnezzar, ‘‘its legs of iron” (Dnl 2 33).
(2) Kara‘, dual k*rd‘ayim, the “leg,” “respecting
the legs,” mentioned as a portion of the paschal
lamb (Ex 12 9), or, usually, in connection with the
head and the inwards, as a sacrificial portion (Ex
29.17; Lev 19.13; Am 312). The word des-
ignates also the legs of leaping insects of the orthop-
terous family, locusts, etc, which were permitted
as food to the Israelites (Lev 11 21). &) Reghel,
lit. “foot”? (q.v.), found in this sense only once:
“He [Goliath] had greaves of brass upon his legs”’
(1 8 17 6).

Two passages of wrong tr in AV have been cor-
rected by RV. The virgin daughter of Babylon is
addressed: ‘‘Make bare the leg, uncover the thigh”
(Isa 47 2), RV renders: ‘Strip off the train [shé-
bhel], uncover the leg,” the idea being that the
gentle maid, who has been brought up in affluence
and luxury, will have to don the attire of a slave
girl and do menial work, for which her former
garments are unsuited. The other passage is in
Isa 3 20, where AV reads: “the bonnets, and the
ornaments of the legs,’ RV corrects: ‘the head-
tires [c**adhah], and the ankle chains.” ;

In the NT the word “‘leg’” is found only in con-
nection with the breaking of the legs of the persons
crucified with the Saviour (Jn 19 31.32.33). We
know from Rom and Gr authors that this was done
as a coup de grace to shorten the miseries of criminals
condemned to die on the cross. The practice bore
the technical name of cxedoxorla, skelokopia, Lat
crurifragium. The vb. ckedoxoe’v, skelokopein


(“to break the legs”), is found in the apocryphal
Gospel of St. Peter (4 14), where it ia distinctly
stated that the legs of Jesus were not broken, that
His sufferings on the cross might be extended, while
the two malefactors crucified with Him were merci-
fully dispatched in this way. The Res Gad
consisted of some strokes with a heavy club or
mallet, which always materially hastened the death
of the sufferer, and often caused it almost imme-
diately.

Edersheim, in LTJM, II, 613, suggests that the break-
ing of legs was an additional punishment, and that it
was always followed hy a coup de gréce, the perforatic or
percussio sub alas, a stroke with sword or lance into the
side. This, however, is not horne out by any classical
information which is known to me, and is contradicted
hy the statement of the evangelist that Jesus received
the percussio, while the malefactors endured the cruri-
fragium. f on this subject, esp. for parallels from


classical authors, Sepp, Das Leben Jesu, VII, 441, and
Keim, Jesus von Nazara (ET), VIL, gos, note 3.


. L. E, Luerine
LEGION, lé@’jun. See Army; Army, RoMAN.


LEGISLATION, 1lej-is-la’shun, OF SANCTITY.
See Astronomy, I, 5


LEHABIM, 1é-ha’bim (pram , thabhim): -Named
in Gen 10 13; 1 Ch 1 11 as descendants of Miz-
raim. They are probably to be identified with the
Lusim (q.v.), and the one word may be a corruption
of the other.


LEHI, lé’hi. See RamMatu-LeHl.


LEMUEL, lem’i-el ON, Iema’al, or S10,
lem@’él): A king whose words, an “oracle [taught
him by his mother],” are given in Prov 31 1-9; and
possibly the succeeding acrostic poem (vs 10-31)
is from the same source. Instead of translating
the word after this name as “oracle,’? some propose
to leave it as a proper name, translating “‘king of
Massa,” and referring for his kingdom to Massa
(Gen 25 14), oneof the sons of Ishmael, supposedly
head of a tribe or sheikh of a country. It is to be
noted, however, that the words of Agur in the pre-
vious chapter are similarly called massa’, “‘oracle,’’
with not so clear a reason for referrmg it to a
country. See for a suggested reason for retaining the
meaning “oracle” in both places, Proverss, Boox
or, II, 6. JoHN FRANKLIN GENUNG


anes LOAN, lén: The tr of 7 Heb and 2 Gr
vbs.:

In the OT: mb, lawaéh, ‘‘to join,” ‘cause to join,”’
“lend” (Ex 22 25; Dt 28 12.44; Ps 37 26; Prov 19
’ 17); TW}, naehah, “to bite,” “lend” (Dt
1. Lexical 24 11; Jer 15 10); TVW}, ndshah (same


Usages root as last, though different vb. stem,
Hiphil), ‘to cause to bite,"’ “lend on


usury” (Dt 15 2; 24 10): yw. nashakh, ‘‘to bite,”
“lend” “[cause to lend] on usury” (Dt 23 19.20); yn2>
nathan, “to give’ (Lev 25 37, RV ‘to give”); DAY,
‘abhat (Hiphil), ‘to cause to borrow,” "to lend” (Dt 15
6.8); Sew, sha’ al (Hiphil), ‘to cause to ask,” ‘‘to lend”
(Ex 12 36, RV “ask”; 181 27), In LXX 8aveite,
danetzé, Savigw, dantzé, “to lend,” trs ayy, DAY, and
wy) in above passages and in Neh § 4; Proy 22 7,
and Isa 24 2; xxpdw, kichrdo, also tre MID and yy


(Ps 1125; Prov 13 11); Sdvecov(-cov), ddneion(-ion),
“loan,” occurs in Dt 15 8.10; 24 11; 4 Mace 2 8,
In the NT ‘‘lend” tre two Gr vbs., daneizo, ‘‘to lend
money” (LK 6 34.35, usually in commercial sense);
nixpnut, kichrémi, ‘to lend [as @ friendly act]”’ (Lk 11
5). The subst. “loan,” TDN, she’elah, occurs only


once in the OT (1 8 2 20 AV and ERV), not at all in
the NT.


(1) Lending on interest to the poor is prohibited


Lentils
Leper, Leprosy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1866


——


in the code in Ex 22 25, (2) In the code in Dt
15 1-6; 28 19.20; 24 10.11; 28 12.44, borrow-
ing and lending are taken for granted
2. History as existing in Israel, but the creditor
of Lending is required to release his Heb brother
in the Bible as debtor in the 7th year (either the
and Apoc- cancellation of the loan [so in Jewish
rypha lit. and early Christian scholars] or sus-
pension of payment that year [so most
modern scholars]), though he may exact payment
from a foreigner. Israel may lend, and will be able
to lend, hecause of Jeh’s blessing, to other nations, but
must not borrow from them. A pledge, or security,
must not be taken in person by the creditor from
the house of the debtor, nor kept over night, if the
debtor be poor. (3) The code in Lev 25 35-38
requires that the Israelite receive no interest from
his poor brother, because of the goodness of Jeh to
Israel. (4) Notwithstanding the prohibition of the
early laws against lending on interest or usury, the
same seems to have become common in Isracl
before the exile (Isa 24 2; Jer 15 10), was prac-
tised on the return, and was an evi! to be corrected
by Nehemiah (Neh 5 7.10). (5) According to
Ps 37 26; 1125; Prov 19 17, lending to the
needy was regarded as a mark of the pious Hebrew,
but no interest is to be charged. (6) According
to Apoc (Wisd 15 16; Sir 8 12; 18 33; 20 15.
29; 4 Macc 2 8), borrowing is discouraged, and
lending is exalted as a mark of the merciful man.
(7) Jesus teaches that His followers should lend,
even to enemies, to men from whom they have no
reasonable hope of expecting anything in return,
because thus to do is to be like the Most High (Lk
6 34.35). He did not discuss lending for commer-
cial purposes, and so does not necessarily forbid it.
Lirrreraturnr.—See Driver on Dt 15 1-6; Benzinger,
Heb Archéol. (1894), 3501; Oehler, OT Theol., 150, 10;
Plummer on Lk 6 34.35.
Cuaries B. WILtiaMs
LENTILS, len’tila (DWTD, ‘ddhadshim; axéds,
phakés; Gen 25 34; 2 8 17 28; 23 11; Ezk 4 9;
AV Lentiles): These are undoubtedly identical
with the Arab. ‘adas, a small, reddish bean, the


Lentil (Zroum lens).


product of Ervum lens, a dwarf leguminous plant,
half a foot high, which is extensively cultivated in
Pal as a summer crop. The flour is highly nutri-
tious, and the well-known food, Revalenia arabica,
is simply one form, specially prepared; ‘adas are
highly esteemed in Pal, and are used in soup and
as a “pottage’’ known as mujedderah. This last is
of a reddish-brown color and is without doubt the


 “pottage” of Gen 25 34. Lentils were part of the


provisions brought to David when fleeing from
Absalom (2 S 17 28) and were used in the making
of the hread for the prophet Ezekiel (4 9). Ina
“plot of ground full of lentils,’? Shammah, one of
David’s “mighty men,’’ stood and defended it and
slew the marauding Philis (2 § 23 11.12).
E. W. G. MasTerMan

LEOPARD, lep’érd ([1] WAl, némeér [Cant 4 8;
Isa 11 6; Jer 5 6; 13 23; Hos 18 7; Hab 1 8);
cf Arab. (43, nimr, “leopard.” [2] Chald "23,
nemar [Dnl 7 6]. [8] wapSadus, pdrdalis [Rev 13
2; Ecclus 28 23); cf O03, nimrim, Nimrim [Isa
15 6; Jer 48 34), M192, nimrah, Nimrah [Nu 382
3], and MWA) 73, beth-nimrah, Beth-nimrah [Nu
32 36; Josh 13 27}): The leopard is found through-


Leopard (Felts leopardis).


out Africa and ranges through Southern Asia from
Asia Minor to Japan, being absent from Siberia
and Central Asia. Its range is much the same as
that of the lion, which latter, however, does not
extend so far to the E. Like other animals of wide
range, it has local varieties, but these shade into
each other imperceptibly, and the one specific name,
Felis pardus, includes all. Leopards live in some
of the valleys E. and 8. of the Dead Sea, and in the
mountains of Sinai and Northwestern Arabia.
They have but rarely been seen of recent years in
Lebanon or the more settled portions of Pal. So
far as can be judged from skins which are available
for comparison, the leopard of Pal is rather light in
color, and is not as large as some found in Africa
or India. It is not certain that the place-names,
Nmrm, Nimran, and Bera-nimray (q.v.), have
to do with na@mér, “leopard,” but their location is
in Moab, where leopards are well known, even at
the present day. One of the valleys entering the
Dead Sea from the E., 8. of the Arnon, is called
Wadi-en-Numeir (“valley of the little leopard”;
numetr, dim. of nimr).

In the Bible “leopard”? occurs mainly in fig-
urative expressions, as a large and fierce beast.
The leopard is mentioned with the lion and bear
in Dn] 7 6; Hos 13 7; Rev 13 2; with the lion,
wolf and bear in Isa 11 6; with the lion and wolf
in Jer 5 6; with the lion alone in Ecclus 28 23;
with the wolf alone in Hab 1 8. The leopard is
smaller than the lion and the tiger, but is more
active than either. Its swiftness is referred to in
Hab 1 8: “Their horses also [of the Chaldaeans]
are swifter than leopards.” The spots of the
leopard are referred to in Jer 13 23: “Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots?”

The Gr wdpdadkis, pdrdalis, and mwdévOnp, pdn-
thér, were both applied to the leopard. Panther”
is sometimes used of large leopards, while in Amer-
ica, with its corrupt form “painter,” it is one of the
names applied to the cougar or puma, Felis concolor,


1867


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lentils
Leper, Leprosy


which, as the specific name implies, is not spotted
like the leopard, or striped like the tiger.
ALFRED Exy Day

LEPER, lep’ér, LEPROSY, lep’ro-si (nyiy,
cara‘ath; dpa, lépra): A slowly progressing and
intractable disease characterized by subcutaneous
nodules (Heb s°éth; LXX oulé; AV “rising’’), scabs
or cuticular crusts (Heb sappahath; LXX sémasia)
and white shining spots appearing to be deeper than
the skin (Heb bahereth; LXX télaigéma). Other
signs are (1) that the hairs of the affected part turn
white and (2) that later there is a growth of “quick
raw flesh.” This disease in an especial manner
rendered its victims unclean; even contact with
a leper defiled whoever touched him, so while the
cure of other diseases is called healing, that of lep-
rosy is called cleansing (except in the case of
Miriam [Nu 12 13] and that of the Samaritan
(Lk 17 15] where the word ‘‘heal’’ is used in refer-
ence to leprosy). The disease is described in the
Papyrus Ebers as ukhedu (the Coptic name for
leprosy is ¢eht). It is also mentioned in ancient
Indian and Japanese history. Hippocrates calls
it “the Phoen disease,” and Galen names it ‘‘ele-
phantiasis.”’?’ In Europe it was little known until
imported by the returning soldiers of Pompey’s army
after his Syrian campaign in 61 BC; but after that
date it is described by Soranus, Aretaeus and other
classic authors.

The first OT mention of this disease is as a sign
given by God to Moses (Ex 4 6 [J]), which may

be the basis of the story in CAp, 1,
1. OT 31, that Moses was expelled from
Instances Heliopolis on account of his being a
leper (see also 1, 26 and Ant, III, xi, 4).

The second case is that of Miriam (Nu 12 10),
where the disease is graphically described (EP2).
In Dt 24 8 there is a reference to the oral tradition
concerning the treatment of lepers, without any
details, but in Lev 13, 14 (PC) the rules for the
recognition of the disease, the preliminary quar-
antine periods and the ceremonial methods of
cleansing are given at length. It is worthy of note
that neither here nor elsewhere is there any mention
of treatment or remedy; and Jehoram’s ejaculation
implies the belief that its cure could be accomplished
only by miracle (2 K 6 7).


Group of Lepers Begging.


The case of Naaman (2 K 6 1) shows that
lepers were not isolated and excluded from society
among the Syrians. The leprosy of Gehazi (2 K
5 27) is said to have been the transference of that
of Naaman, but, as the wcubanon Pood ia long,
it must have been miraculously cted on him.
The four lepers of Samaria of 2 K 7 3 had been
excluded from the city and were outside the gate.


The leprous stroke inflicted on Uzziah (2 K 16 5;
2 Ch 26 23) for his unwarrantable assumption
of the priestly office began in his forehead, a form
of the disease peculiarly unclean (Lev 13 43-46)
and requiring the banishment and isolation of the
leper. It is remarkable that there is no reference
to this disease in the prophetical writings, or in the
Hagiographa.
In the NT, cleansing of the lepers is mentioned
as a specific portion of Our Lord’s work of healing,
and was included in the commission
2. Leprosy given to the apostles. There are few
inthe NT individual cases specially described,
only the ten of Lk 17 12, and the
leper whom Our Lord touched (Mt 8 2; Mk 1 40;


_Lk 6 12), but it is probable that these are only a


few out of many such incidents. Simon the leper
(Mt 26 6; Mk 14 3) may have been one of those
cured by the Lord.

The disease is a zymotic affection produced by a
microbe discovered by Hansen in 1871. It is con-

tagious, although not very readily
3. Nature communicated by casual contact; in
and Locality one form it is attended with anaes-
of the thesia of the parts affected, and this,
Disease which is the commonest variety now

met with in the East, is slower in its
course than those forms in which nodular growths
are the most prominent featurcs, in which parts of
the limbs often drop off. At present there are many
lepers to be seen at the gates of the cities in Pal.
It is likewise prevalent in other eastern lands, India,
China, and Japan. Cases are also to be seen in
most of the Mediterranean lands and in Norway,
as well as in parts of Africa and the West Indies
and in South America. In former times it was
occasionally met with in Britain, and in most of
the older English cities there were leper houses,
often called “lazarets’” from the mistaken notion
that the eczematous or varicose ulcers of Lazarus
were leprous (Lk 16 20). Between 1096 and 1472,
112 such leper houses were founded in England.
Of this disease King Robert Bruce of Scotland died.
There was special mediaeval legislation excluding
lepers from churches and forbidding them to wander
from district to district. Leprosy has been some-
times confounded with other diseases; indeed the
Gr physicians used the name lepra for the scaly skin
disease now called psoriasis. In the priestly legis-
lation there was one form of disease (Lev 13 13)
in which the whiteness covers all the body, and in
this condition the patient was pronounced to be
clean. This was probably psoriasis, for leprosy
does not, until a very late stage, cover all the body,
and when it does so, it is not white. It has been
surmised that Naaman’s disease was of this kind.
Freckled spots (Heb badhak), which were to be dis-
tinguished from true leprosy (Lev 13 39), were
either spots of herpes or of some other non-con-
tagious skin disease. The modern Arab. word of
the same sound is the name of a form of eczema.
RV reads for freckled spot ‘‘tetter,”’ an old Eng.
war on a root implying itchiness (see Hamlet,
I, v,

The komiletic use of leprosy as a type of sin is
not Bib. The only Scriptural reference which might
approach this is Ps 61 7, but this refers to Nu 19
18 rather than to the cleansing of the leper. The
Fathers regarded leprosy as typical of heresy rather
than of moral offences. (See Rabanus Maurus,
Allegoria, s.v. ‘‘Lepra.’’)

(1) Leprosy in garments——The occurrence of
certain greenish or reddish stains in the substance
of woollen or linen fabrics or in articles made of
leather is described in Lev 18 47 ff, and when these
stains spread, or, after washing, do not change their
color, they are pronounced to be due to a fretting


Leshem
Levitical Cities


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1868


leprosy (¢dra‘ath mam’ereth), and such garments
are to be burnt. As among the fellahin articles of
clothing are worn for years and are often hereditary,
it is little wonder that they become affected by
vegetable as well as animal parasites, and that
which is here referred to is probably some form of
mildew, such as Penicillium or mold-fungus. The
destruction of such garments is a useful sanitary
precaution. Possibly this sort of decaying gar-
ment was in Job’s mind when be compares him-
self to a “rotten thing that consumeth, like a
garment that is moth-eaten’? (18 28); see also
Jude ver 23, “the garment spotted [espiléménon]
by the flesh.”

(2) Leprosy in the house (Lev 14 34 ff) —The
occurrence of ‘hollow streaks, greenish or reddish,”
in the plaster of a house is regarded as evidence that


the wall is affected with leprosy, and when such is |


observed the occupant first clears his house of furni-
ture, for if the discoloration be pronounced leprous,
all in the home would become unclean and must be
destroyed. Then he asks the priest to inspect it.
The test is first, that the etain is in the substance
of the wall, and, second, that it is spreading. In
case these conditions are fulfilled, it is pronounced
to be leprosy and the affected part of the wall is
taken down, its stones cast outside the city, its
plaster scraped off and also cast outside the city;
new stones are then built in and the house is newly
plastered. Should the stain recur in the new wall,
then the whole house is condemned ‘and must be
destroyed ‘and its materials cast outside the city.
The description is that of infection by some fungus
attacking whatever organic material is in the mud
plaster by which the wall is covered. If in wood-
work, it might be the dry rot (Merulius lacrimans),
but this is not likely to spread except where there
is wood or other organic matter. It might be the
efflorescence of mural salt (calcium nitrate), which
forms floccnlent masses when decomposing nitro-
genous material is in contact with lime; but that
is generally white, not green or reddish. Consider-
ing the uncleanly condition of the houses of the
ordinary fellah, it is little wonder that such fungus
growths may develop in their walls, and in such cases
destruction of the house and its materials is a sani-

tary necessity.
It should be observed here that the attitude of
the Law toward the person, garment or house sus-
pected of leprosy is that if the disease


4, The be really present they are to be de-
Legal clared unclean and there is no means
Attitude provided for cure, and in the case of


the garment or house, they are to be
destroyed. If, on the other hand, the disease be
proved to be absent, this freedom from the disease
has to be declared by a ceremonial purification.
This is in reality not the ritual for cleansing the
leper, for the Torah provides none such, but the
ritual for declaring him ceremonially free from the
suspicion of having the disease. This gives a
peculiar and added Jorce to the words, ‘‘The lepers
are cleansed,” as a testimony to Our Lord’s Divine
mission. ALEX. MACALISTER


LESHEM, lé’shem. See Latsu.


LESSAU, les’é (Acooaot, Lessaoi; AV Dessau):
A place mentioned only in 2 Macc 14 16 as the
scene of a battle hetween Nicanor and the Jews.
“Dessau”’ of AV arises from confusion of A with A
in the Gr. The place may be identical with
Apasa (q.v.).


LET (karéxw, katéchd): Usually in the sense of
“permit” (AS leian), but also in Old Eng. with
meaning of ‘‘hinder’” (AS lettan). This latter sense


is found in 2 Thess 2 7 AV, “Only he who now let-
teth will let,” where RV has, ‘“‘Only there is one that
restraineth now.”


LETHECH, lé’thek (qn>, lethekh): A liquid
measure equivalent to half a homer (Hos 3 2m)
and containing about 53 bushels. See WEIGHTS
AND MEASURES.


LETTER, let’ér. See Epistun.


LETTERS, let’érz. See ALPHABET; WRITING.

LETUSHIM, 1étoo’shim, 1éti’shim coia,
letushtm): A Dedanite tribe in North Arahia (Gen
25 3). With it are connected the AssHURIM and
Leumi (q.v.).


LEUMMIM, lé-um’im (BAND, l’ummim): A
Dedanite tribe of North Arahia, connected with the
LetusHiIM (q.v.).


LEVI, levi ("12, Iéwi; Aevt, Leut; WH Act,


Leuet):

(1) The 3d son of Jacob hy Leah. See separate
article,

(2) (3) Two ancestors of Jesus in Lk’s genealogy
(Lk 3 24.29).

(4) The apostle Matthew. See Martuew.


LEVI (“IE, léwt; Aevel, Leuet): The third of
Leah’s sons born to Jacob im Paddan-aram (Gen
29 34). In this passage the name is connected
with the vb. lawah, ‘to adhere,’ or ‘‘be joined to,”
Leah expressing assurance that with the birth of
this third son, her husband might be drawn closer
to her in the bonds of conjugal affection. There
is a play upon the name in Nu 18 2.4, where
direction is given that the tribe of Levi be “joined
unto” Aaron in the ministries of the sanctuary.
The etymology here suggested is simple and reason-
able. The grounds on which some modern scholars
reject it are purely conjectural. It is asserted, e.g.,
that the name is adjectival, not nominal, describing
one who attaches himself; and this is used to sup-
port the theory that the Levites were those who
joined the Sem people when they left Egypt to
return to Pal, who therefore were probably Egyp-
tians. Others think it may be a gentilic form lé’ah,
“wild cow’ (Wellhausen, Proleg., 146; Stade,
GVI, 152); and thisis held to be the more probable,
as pointing to early totem worship!

Levi shared with Simeon the infamy incurred
at Shechem by the treacherons slaughter of the
Shechemites (Gen 34). Jacob’s displeasure was
expressed at the time (ver 3), and the memory was
still bitter to him in his last days (49 5f). The
fate predicted for the descendants of Simeon and
Levi (ver 7), in the case of the latter on account of
the tribe’s stedfast loyalty in a period of stern test-
ing, was changed to a blessing (Ex $2 26 ff). _In
later lit. the action condemned by Jacob is men-
tioned with approval (Jth 9 2 ff). Levi was in-
volved in his brothers’ guilt with regard to Joseph
(Gen 37), and shared their experiences in Egypt
before Joseph made himself known (chs 42-45).
Three sons, Gershon, Kohath, and Merari, were
born to him in Canaan, and went down with the
caravan to Egypt (46 11). Nothing further is
known of the personal history of this patriarch. He
died and found sepulture in Egypt. For the tribal
history and possessions, see Prirsts anp LEVITES.

W. Ewina


LEVIATHAN, 1évi'a-than ([9%>, lwyathan
[Job 41 1-34], from 7/ mp , awah, “to fold’’; cf Arab.


1869


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Leshem
Levitical Cities


79 9


name of the wry neck, Iynx torquilla, Ge pl


abi-luwé, from kindred 7/, ys) lawé, ‘‘to bend”):


(1) The word “leviathan” also occurs in Isa 27 1,
where it is characterized as ‘the swift serpent
.... the crooked serpent”; in Ps 104 26, where
@ marine monster is indicated; also in Ps 74 14
and Job 3 8. The description in Job 41 has been
thought by some to refer to the whale, but while the
whale suits better the expressions denoting great
strength, the words apply best on the whole to the
crocodile. Moreover, the whale is very seldom
found in the Mediterranean, while the crocodile
is abundant in the Nile, and has been known to
occur in at least one river of Pal, the Zarka, N. of
Jaffa. For a discussion of the behemoth and levia-
than as mythical creatures, see HB, s.v. ‘“Behe-
moth” and “Leviathan.” The points in the de-
scription which may well apply to the crocodile
are the great invulnerability, the strong and close
scales, the limbs and the teeth. It must be ad-
mitted that there are many expressions which a
modern scientist would not use with reference to
the crocodile, but the Book of Job is neither modern
nor scientific, but poetical and ancient.

(2) See Astronomy, II, 2, 5.

ALFRED Evy Day

LEVIRATE, lev’i-rat, LAW. See Marriace.


LEVIS, lé’vis (Acvls, Lewis): 1 Esd 9 14,
properly the Levite of Ezr 10 15; ‘“Shabbethai
the Levite” for ‘“‘Levis and Sabbateus.”


LEVITES, 1é’vits.
LEVITICAL, lé-vit'i-kal, CITIES:


I. Leesa Provisions
1. Numhers


See Prizsts anp LEVITES.


2. Deuteronomy
II. Wes .iaausen'’s VIEW

ITI. A.rernative View anp EvipENcE
1. Traces of the Cities
2. Wellhausen’s Arguments Answered
3. Van Hoonacker'’s Reply
4. Ezekiel’s Vision
5. Priestly Cities and Cities in Which Priests

Dwell
LITERATURE


I. Legal Provisions.—Nu 35 1-8 provides that -


48 cities should be given to the Levites, each sur-
rounded by a pasturage. The exact
1. Numbers details are not quite clear, for in the
Heb, ver 4 would naturally be read
as ineaning that the pasturage was a radius of 1,000
cubits from the city walls, while ver 5 makes each
city the center of a square, each side of which was
2,000 cubits long. Extant variants in the V8S
suggest, however, that the text has suffered slightly
in transmission. Originally there seems to have
been no discrepancy between the two verses, and
it may be doubted whether the intent was that the
city was always to be in the mathematical center
of the patch. The Levites were to have the right
of redeeming the houses at any time, and in default
of redemption they were to go out in the Jubilee.
The field was not to be sold (Lev 25 32f). . :
Dt 18 8 undoubtedly recognizes patrimonial
possessions of the Levites outside the religious
capital, and sees no inconsistency with
its earlier statement that Levi had no
portion or inheritance with Asrael
(ver 1). The explanation lies, in the
fact that these cities were not a tribal portion like
the territories of the secular tribes. The area
occupied by the whole 48 jointly would only have
amounted to Jess than 16 miles.
IL Wellhausen’s View.—Josh 21 relates that
this command was fulfilled by the allocation of 48
cities, but it is clear that some of those cities were


2. Deuter-
onomy


not in fact reduced into possession; see e.g. Josh
16 10; Jgs 1 29 as to Gezer, and Jgs 1 27 as to
Taanach. Wellhausen treats the whole arrangement
as fictitious. His main reasons are: (1) that the
arrangement is physically impracticable in a moun-
tainous country, and (2) that “there is not a his-
torical trace of the existence of the Levitical cities.”
Many remained in the hands of the Canaanites till
a late period, while others were “important but by
no means ecclesiastical towns’ (Prolegomena, 160).
Two pages later he says that “four of them were
demonstrably famous old seats of worship,” and
conjectures that most, if not all, were ancient
sanctuaries. He also regards Ezckiel’s scheme of a
heave offering of land (ch 45) as the origin of the
idea. Yet ‘‘Jerus and the temple, which, properly
speaking, occasioned the whole arrangement, are
buried in silence with a diligence which is in the

highest degree surprising” (p. 164).
If. Alternative View and Evidence.—In point
of fact, there are traces of some of the Levitical
cities in the later history. Such are


1. Traces Anathoth (1 K 2 26; Jer 11; 32),
of the Jattir (2 8 20 26, where, as shown
Cities in the art. Primsts anp Levirses


[q.v.], Jattirite should be read for
the Massoretic Jairite), Beth-shemesh (1 5 6 13-
15; see Prizsts anp Levires as to the text).
(From Am 7 17 it appears that Amaziah of Bethel
had land, but we do nat know that he was of Leviti-
cal descent or where the land was.) Further, the

fact that many other Levitical cities


2. Well- appear to have been centers of worship
hausen’s points to the presence of priests. Was
Arguments the great high place of Gibeon (1 K
Answered 3 4) unserved by priests? It is surely


natural to suppose that during the
period between the capture of the Ark and its trans-
port to Jerus there was a tendency for high places .
to spring up in cities where there were priests rather
than elsewhere; indeed there would probably be
a disposition on the part of unemployed priests to
go astray in a direction that would prove lucrative.
With regard to the other objection, Van Hoon-
acker’s answer is convincing: ‘As to the way in
which the measurements were to be
3. Van carried out in the mountainous country
Hoonacker’s of Pal, the legislator doubtless knew
Reply what method was usually employed.
: Besides, we are free to believe that he
only gives these figures as approximate indications”
(Sacerdoce lévitique, 433).
The same writer’s reply to the theory that the
idea originated with Ezekiel is wholly admirable.
“Strictly we could ask . . . . whether
4. Ezekiel’s Ezekiel did not found himself on the
Vision description of the camp of the Israel-
ites in the desert. It is only too mani-
fest that the division and appointment of the terri-


_tory as presented in ch 48 of the prophet are scarcely


inspired by practical necessities, that they have a
very pronounced character of ideal vision; and
‘ag no fancy is pure fancy,’ we ought also to find
the elements which are at the basis of Ezekiel’s
vision. The tents of the tribe of Levi ranged
around the tabernacle explain themselves in the
PC; we may doubt whether the Levites, deprived
of territory (Ezk 44 28) and nevertheless grouped
on a common territory, in the conditions described
in Ezk 48, explain themselves with equal facility.
A camp is readily conceived on the pattern of a
chessboard, but not the country of Canaan. We
need not stop there. It is in fact certain that Eze-
kiel here has in view the protection of the holiness
of the temple from all profanation; and in the realm
of the ideal, the means are appropriate to the end”
(op. cit., 425 f).


Leviticus


Lastly there runs through Wellhausen’s discussion
the confusion between a city where priests may be
dwelling and a priestly city. There


5. Priestly were priests in Jerus, as there are today
Cities and in London or Chicago; but none of
Cities in these three places can be regarded as
Which a priestly city in the same sense as the
Priests Levitical cities. Not one of them has
Dwell ever been a patrimonial city of priests,


or could be the origin of such an
arrangement.

While therefore the whole of the cities mentioned
in Josh 21 were certainly not reduced into pos-
session at the time of the conquest, the Wellhausen
theory on this matter cannot be sustained.

Lireraturs.—J. Wellhausen, Prolegomena, 159-63;
A. Van Hoonacker, Sacerdoce lévitigue, 423-35 (very
brilliant and important). Haroutp M, WiENER


LEVITICUS, Jé-vit’i-kus:


I. Generau Data
1. Name
2. Character of Book
3. Unity of Book: Law of Holiness
Examination of Critical Theory
II. Structure :
1. Modern Analyses
(1) Theories of Disintegration
(2) Reasons for Dismemberment
(3) Insufficiency of These Reasons
2. Structure of the Biblical Text
(1) Structure in General
(2) Structure of the Individual Pericopes
III. Origin ;
1. Against the Wellhausen Hypothesis
(1) The Argument from Silence
(2) eeuude of Prophets toward Sacrificial
stem
(3) The People’s Disobedience
ts} Indiscriminate Sacrificing
(5) Dt and PC
2. Connection with Mosaic Period
(1) PC and Desert Conditions
(2) Unity and Construction Point to Mosaic
‘Origin
IV. Tue SIGNIFICANCE
1. Positive
(1) The Law Contains God’s Will
(2) The Law Prepares for the UnderstandIng
of Christianity
(3) The Law as a Tutor unto Christ
2. Negative
LITERATURE
I. General Data.—The third book of. the Pent
is generally named by the Jews according to the
first word, 8771, wayyikra’ (Origen
Otrxpd, Ouikrd, by the LXX called
according to its contents Aevituxdy,
Leuitikén, or Acvevtuxdv, Leueitikén, by the Vulg,
accordingly, “Leviticus” [i.e. Lzber], sometimes
“Leviticum’’). The Jews have also another name
taken from its contents, viz. DIS NW, torath
kohdénim, ‘Law of the Priests.” ree
As a matter of fact ordinances pertaining to the
priesthood, to the Levitical system, and to the
cultus constitute a most important
2. Charac- part of this book; but specifically
ter of Book religious and ethical commands, as
we find them, e.g. in chs 18-20, are
not wanting; and there are also some historical
sections, which, however, are again connected with
the matter referring to the cultus, namely the con-
secration of the priests in chs 8 and 9, the sin and
the punishment of two sons of Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu (10 1 ff), and the account of the stoning of
a blasphemer (24 10ff). Of the Levites, on the
other hand, the book does not treat at all. They
ate mentioned only once and that incidentally in
25 32 ff. The laws are stated to have been given
bhar sinay (7 38; 261; 26 46; 27 34), which
expression, on account of ch 11, in which Jeh is
described as speaking to Moses out of the tent of
meeting, is not to be tr? “upon” but “at” Mt.
Sinai. The connection of this book with the pre-
ceeding and following books, i.e. Ex and Nu, which


1. Name


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


.


1870


is commonly acknowledged as being the case, at
least in some sense, leaves for the contents of Lev
exactly the period of a single month, since the last
chronological statement of Ex 40 17 as the time
of the erection of the tabernacle mentions the Ist
day of the 1st month of the 2d year of the Exodus,
and Nu 1 1 takes us to the Ist day of the 2d month
of the same year. Within this time of one month
the consecration of the priests fills out 8 days (Lev
8 33; 91). A sequence in time is indicated only
by 16 1, which directly connects with what is re-
ported in ch 10 concerning Nadab and Abihu. In
the same way the ordinances given in 10 6ff are
connected with the events described in 8 1—10 5.
The laws are described as being revelations of Jeh,
generally given to Moses (cf 1 1; 4 1; 6 14; 6 19.24
[Heb 12.17]; 7 22.28, etc); sometimes to Moses and
Aaron (cf 11 1; 13 1; 14 33; 15 1, etc), and, rarely,
to Aaron alone (10 8). In 10 12 ff, Moses gives
some directions to the priests, which are based on
a former revelation (cf 6 16 [Heb 9] ff; 7 387 ff). In
10 16 ff, we have a difference of opinion between
Moses and Aaron, or rather his sons, which was
decided on the basis of an independent application of
principles given in Lev. Most of these commands
are to be announced to Israel (1 2; 4 2; 7 23.29;
9 3ff; 11 2; 12 2; 16 2; 18 2, etc); others to
the priests (6 9.25 [Heb 2.18]; 21 2; 22 2, etc); or
to the priests and the Israelites (17 2; 22 18), while
the directions in reference to the Day of Atonement,
with which Aaron was primarily concerned (16 2),
beginning with ver 29, without a special super-
scription, are undeniably changed into injunctions
addressed to all Israel; cf also 21 24 and 21 2.
As the Book of Ex treats of the communion which
God offers on His part to Israel and which cul-
minates at last in His dwelling in the tent of meeting
(40 34 ff; cf under Exonus, I, 2), the Book of Lev
contains the ordinances which were to be carried
out by the Israelites in religious, ethical and cul-
tural matters, in order to restore and maintain this
communion with God, notwithstanding the im-
perfections and the guilt of the Israelites. And as
this book thus with good reason occupies its well-
established place in the story of the founding and
in the earliest history of the theocracy, so too even


- a casual survey and intelligent glance at the con-


tents of the book will show that we have here a well-
arranged and organic unity, a conviction which is
only confirmed and strengthened by the presentation
of the structure of the book in detail (see under II,
below).
As a rule, crities are accustomed first of all to
regard chs 17-26 or 26 as an independent section,
y and find in these chapters a legal code
3. Unity of that is considered to have existed at
Book: Law one time as a group by itself, before it
of Holiness was-united with the other parts.


It is indeed trve that a series of peculiarities have
been found in these chapters. To these peculiarities
belongs the frequent repetition of the formula: ‘I am
Jeh your God” (18 2.4; 19 2.4, etc); or “I am Jeh”
(18 5.6.21; 19 14.16, etc), or “I am Jeh.... who
hath separated you" (20 24), or ‘‘who sanctifieth you”
(20 8; 21 8.15.23, etc). To these ‘peculiarities belong
the references in words, or, in fact, to the land of Canaan,
Into which Israel is to be led (18 3.24 ff; 19 23 #f.29:
20 22 ff; 23; 25). and also to Beye, out of which He
has led the people (18 3; 19 34; 223 33; 26 13.45, etc);
as, further, the demand for sanctification (19 2), or the
warning against desecration (19 12; 21 23, etc), both
based on the holiness of Jeh. In addition, a number of
peculiar expressions are repeatedly found in these chap-
ters. Because of their contents these chapters have,
slnce Klostermann, generally been designated hy the
letter H (i.e. Law of Holiness); or, according to the sug-

estion of Dillmann, by the letter S (i.e. Sinaitic Law),

ecause, according to 25 1; 26 46, they are said to have
been given at Mt. SInal, and hecause In certaln critical
circles it was at one time claimed that these chapters
contain old laws from the Mosaic period, although these
had been changed in form. These earlier views have
apparently now been discarded by the critics entirely.


1871


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Leviticus


Examination of critical theory.—We, however, do
not believe that it is at all justifiable to separate
these laws as a special legal code from the other
chapters. In the first place, these peculiarities,
even if such are found here more frequently than
elsewhere, are not restricted to these chapters ex-
clusively. The Decalogue (Ex 20 2) begins with
the words, ‘I am Jeh thy God, who brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bond-
age.’ Ex 22 31 contains the demand, “Ye shall
be holy men unto me.” Ex 29 44.45 contains a

romise that, God will dwell in the midst of the
sraelites, so that they shall learn that He is Jeh,
their God, who has brought them out of Egypt in
order to dwell in their midst as Jeh, their God (cf,
further, Ex 6 6-8; 31 13f; Lev 10 10.11; 11 44;
Nu 16 37-41; 33 521.55f; Dt 14 2.21). Itisa
more than risky undertaking to find in these and
in other sections scattered remnants of H, esp. if
these are seen to be indispensable in the connec-
tion in which they are found, and when no reason
can be given why they should be separated from
this collection of laws. Then, too, the differences
of opinion on the part of the critics in assigning
these different parts to H, do not make us favorably
inclined to the whole hypothesis. Hoffmann, esp.
(Die wichtigsien Instanzen gegen die Graf-Well-
hausensche Hypothese, 16 ff), has shown how impos-
sible it is to separate H from the other ordinances
of the PC in so radical a manner. In saying this
we do not at all wish to deny the peculiar character
of these chapters, only we do not believe that ch 17
can be added or ch 26 can be taken away from this
section; for in ch 17 all the characteristic peculiari-
ties of the Holiness Law are lacking ; and, on the
other hand, in ch 26 the expression ‘fam Jeh your
God,” or a similar one in vs 12.13.44 f, is found.
The subscription in ver 46 connects ch 26 with the
preceding; and, further, the reference to the Sab-
batical year as described in ch 26, found in 26 34f.
43,is not to be overlooked. Finally, also, other
legal codes, such as that in the first Book of the
Covenant (Ex 23 20-33) and that of Dt (27 11-
28 68) close with the offer of a blessing or a curse.

The chapters under consideration (Lev 18-26)
are most closely connected with each other solely
through their contents, which have found expression
in a particular form, without these facts being suffi-
cient to justify the claim of their being a separate
legal code. For since in chs 1-17 all those things
which separate the Israelites from their God_have
been considered and bridged over (cf chs 1-7, the
laws concerning sacrifices; chs 8-10, the mediator-
ship of the priests; chs 11-16, the unclean things;
ch 16, the Day of Atonement; ch 17, the use made
of blood), we find in chs 18-26 an account of the
God-pleasing conduct, which admits of nothing
that desecrates; namely, chs 18-20 contain laws
dealing with marriage and chastity and other matters
of a religious, ethical or cultural kind, together with
the punishments that follow their transgression;
chs 21 f determine the true character of the priests
and of the sacred oblations; chs 23f, the conse-
cration of the seasons, of life and death, etc; ch 26,
the Sabbath and the Jubilee year; ch 26 contains
the offer of a blessing or a curse. Chs 1-17 have,
as it were, a negative character; chs 18-26 a posi-
tive character. In chs 1-17 the consciousness of
what is unclean, imperfect and guilty is awakened
and the possibility of their removal demonstrated;
while in chs 18-26 the norm of a holy life is set
forth. Even if these two parts at certain places
show so great a likeness that the occurrence of an
interchange of ordinances could be regarded as
possible, nevertheless the peculiar character of each
part is plainly recognized; and this is also a very
essential argument for the view that both parts


have one and the same author, who intentionally
brought the two parts into closer connection and
yet separated the one from the other. On this
supposition the peculiarities of chs 18-26 are suffi-
ciently explained, and also the positive contents of
these chapters and the fact that just these chapters
are referred to in preéxilic lit. oftener than is the
case with chs 1-17, and particularly the close con-
nection between Ezk and H is to be regarded as a
consequence of the common tendency of both
authors and not as the result of their having used
a common source (see Ezexiet, II, 2). In 26 46
we have what-is clearly a conclusion, which corre-
sponds to 25 1; 7 37f; 11, and according].
regards chs 1-26 as a unity; while ch 27, whic
treats of vows and of tithes, with its separate sub-
scription in ver 34, shows that it is an appendix or
a supplement, which is, however, in many ways
connected with the rest of the book, so that this
addition cannot, without further grounds, be re-
garded as pointing to another author.
Il, Stractare.—Modern criticism ascribes the
entire Book of Lev, being a special legal code, to
the PC. The questions which arise
1. Modern in connection with this claim will
Analyses be discussed under III, below. At
this point we must first try to awaken
a consciousness of the fact, that in this special par-
ticular, too, the documentary theory has entered
upon the stage of total disintegration; that the
reasons assigned for the separation of the sources
are constantly becoming more arbitrary and sub-
jective; and that the absurd consequences to which
they consistently lead from the very outset arouse
distrust as to the correctness of the process. Just
as in the historical parts the critics have for long
been no longer content with J (Jahwist) and 1
(Elohist), but have added a J‘ and J’, an Et and E?,
and as Sievers and Gunkel have gone farther, and
in detail have completely shattered both J and E
into entirely separate fragments (see GENESIS), 80
P, too, is beginning to experience the same fate.
It is high time that, for both the historical and the
legal sections, the opposite course be taken, and
that we turn from the dismemberment to the com-
bination of these documents; that we seek out and
emphasize those features which, in form and con-
tent, unite the text into a clear unity. For this
reason we lay the greatest stress on these in this
section, which deals with the structure of the book,
and which treats of the matter (1) negatively and


. (2) positively (see also Exopvs, II


(1) Theories of disintegration—We have already
seen in the art. Day or Atonement (I, 2, [2]) in
connection with Lev 16 an example of these at-
tempts at dissection, and here still add several ex-
amples in order to strengthen the impression on this
subject.


(a) General considerations: If we for the present dis-
regard the details, then, according to Bertholet (Kurzer
Hand-Kommentar zum Alten Testament), not only chs 17—-
96 (see, above, under I) at one time existed as a separate
legal corpus, but also the sacrificial legislation in chs
1-7, and also the laws concerning the clean and the un-
clean in chs 11-15. Concerning ch 16 see above. Then,
too, ch 27 is regarded as a supplement and is ascribed to
a different author. Finally, the so-called ‘fundamental
document”’ of P (marked Pg) contained only parts from
chs 9f (also a few matters from ch 8), as also one of the
three threads of ch 16, for Lev 8-10, it is said, described
the consecration of the priests demanded in Ex 26 ff,
which also are regarded as a pat of Pg, and ch 16 1 is
claimed to connect again with Lev 10 (cf on this point
Day or ATONEMENT, I, 2). All these separate parts of
Lev (i.e. chs 1-7, 8-10, 11-15, 16, 17-26, 27) are further
divided into a number of more or less independent sub-
parts; thus, e.g., chs 1-7, containing the sacrificial laws,
are made to consist of two parts, viz. chs 1-5 and chs
6-7; or the laws concerning the clean and the unclean
in chs 11-15 are divided into the separate pieces, chs 11
12; 13 1-46; and these are regarded as having existed
at one time and in @ certain manner Independently and


Leviticus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1872


separated from each other. But how complicated in
detail the composition is considered to be, we can see
from chs 17-26.

(b) Chs 17-26 considered in detail: While Baentsch


30; ¢ 10. E
20 2(3).6(27); (vii) 20 9.10-21; 19 20; (viii) 21 10-5.7.
9-15.17b-24; 22 3.8.10~14.18-25.27-30; (ix) 23 10-20.
39-43; (x) 24 15-22, except vs 1608b; (xi) 25 2-7 (4).
18—22.35-38.39.400.42 £.47.53.55; (xii) 25 80.9b.100.13.
14-16.17.24f. In uniting these pieces Rh (the Redac-
tor of theLaw of Holiness) seems to have added de suo the
following: 17 5 (beginning); 18 20-5.21.24.26a,8.29; 19
33f.37; 20 4f.7f.22-26; 21 6.8; 22 2.9.15f.31-33; 23 22;
25 111; 26 1f. At the same time he united with these
an older parenetic section, 26 3-45, which, by insert-
ing vs 10.34 f.39-48, he changed into a concluding ad-
dress of this small legal code. Atl the rest that is found
in chs 17-26 seems to be the result of a revision in the
spirit of P, not, however, as though originally it all came
from the hand of Rp (Redactor P). That he rather
added and worked together older pieces from P (which did
not belong to Pg) is seen from an analysis of ch23.....
As far as the time when these a were worked to-
ether is concerned, we have a reliable terminus ad quem
n a comparison of Neh 8 14-18 with Lev 23 36 (P).
39 ff (H). Only we must from the outset remember,
that still, after the uniting of these different parts, the
marks of the editorial pen are to be noticed in the follow-
ing chs, 17-26, i.e. that after this union a number of addi-
tions were yet made to the text. This is sure as far as
23 26-32 is concerned, and is probable as to 24 1-9.
10—-14.23; 25 32-34; and that this editorial work even
went so far as to put sections from P in the place of parts
of H can possibly be concluded from 24 1-9.”


(c) Extravagance of critical treatment: This is
also true of all the other sections, as can be seen by
a reference to the books of Bertholet and Baentsch.
What should surprise us most, the complicated and
external manner in which our Bib. text, which has
such a wonderful history back of it, is declared by
the critics to have originated, or the keenness of the
critics, who, with the ease of child’s play, are able
to detect and trace out this growth and develop-
ment of the text, and can do more than hear the

ass grow? But this amazement is thrust into the
Gecueroand when we contemplate what becomes of
the Bible text under the manipulations of the
critics. The compass of this article makes it im-
possible to give even as much as a general survey
of the often totally divergent and contradictory
schemes of Baentsch and Bertholet and others on
the distribution of this book among different
sources; and still less possible is it to give a criti-
cism of these in detail. But this critical method
really condemns itself more thoroughly than any
examination of its claims would. All who are not
yet entirely hypnotized by the spell of the docu-
mentary hypothesis will feel that by this method
all genuine scientific research is brought to an end.
If the way in which this book originated had been
so complicated, it certainly could never have been
again reconstructed.

(2) Reasons for dismemberment—We must at
this place confine ourselves to mentioning and dis-
cussing several typical reasons which are urged in
favor of a distribution among different authors.

(a) Alleged repetitions: We find in the parts be-
longing to P a number of so-called repetitions. In
chs 1-7 we find a twofold discussion of the five
kinds of sacrifices (1-5; 6 1 ff); in ch 20 punitive
measures are enacted for deeds which had been
described already in ch 18; in 19 3.30; 23 3; 26
2 the Sabbath command is intensified; in 19 5 ff;
22 29f, we find commands which had been touched
upon already in 7 15 ff; 19 9f we find almost ver-
bally repeated in 23 22; 24 2 ff repeats ordinances
concerning the golden candlestick from Ex 27 20


ff, etc. The existence of these repetitions cannot
be denied; but is the conclusion drawn from this
fact correct? It certainly is possible that one and
the same author could have handled the same ma-
terials at different places and from different view-
points, as is the case in chs 1-7 in regard to the sac-
rifices. Chs 18 and 20 (misdeeds and punishments)
are even necessarily and mutually supplementary.
Specially important laws can have been repeated,
in order to emphasize and impress them all the more};
or they are placed in peculiar relations or in a unique
light (cf, eg., 24 1ff, the command in reference
to the golden candlestick in the pericope chs 23-24;
see below). Accordingly, as soon as we can furnish
a reason for the repetition, it becomes unobjection-
able; and often, when this is not the case, the ob-
jections are unremoved if we ascribe the repeti-
tions to a new author, who made the repetition by
way of an explanation (see Exopvs, IT, 2, [5]).

(6) Separation of materials: Other reasons will
probably be found in uniting or separating materials
that are related. That ch 16 is connected with
chs 8-10, and these connect with Ex 25 ff, is said
to prove that this had been the original order in
these sections. But why should materials that
are clearly connected be without any reason torn
asunder by the insertion of foreign data? Or has
the interpolator perhaps had reasons of his own for
doing this? Why are not these breaks ascribed
to the original author? The sacrificial laws in chs
1-7 are properly placed before Lev 8-10, because
in these latter chapters the sacrifices are described
as already being made (9 7.15, the sin offering; 9
7.12.16, the burnt offering; 9 17; 10 12, the meal
offering; 9 18, the peace offering; 9 3f, all kinds).
In the same way chs 11-15, through 15 31, are in-
wardly connected with Lev 16, since these chap-
ters speak of the defiling of the dwelling-place of
Jeh, from which the Day of Atonement delivers
(16 16f.33). As a matter of course, the original
writer as well as a later redactor could ‘have at
times also connected parts in a looser or more ex-
ternal manner. In this way, in 7 22 ff, the com-
mand not to eat of the fats or of the bload has been
joined to the ordinances with reference to the use
of the peace offerings in 7 19 ff. This again is the
case when, in ch 2, vs 11-13 have been inserted in the
list of the different kinds of meal offering; when after
the general scheme of sin offerings, according to
the hierarchical order and rank in ch 4, a number of
special cases are mentioned in 5 1 ff; and when in 5
7 ff commands are given to prevent too great poverty;
or when in 6 19 ff the priestly meal offerings are
found connected with other ordinances with refer-
ences to the meat offerings in general (6 14 ff); or
when the share that belongs to the priest (7 8 ff)
is found connected with his claim to the guilt offer-
ing (7 1ff); or the touching of the meat offerin
by something unclean (7 19 ff) is found connecte
with the ordinances concerning the peace offerings;
or when in ch 11 the ordinances dealing with the
unclean animals gradually pass over into ordinances
concerning the touching of these animals, as is
already indicated by the subscription 11 4.6f (cf
with ver 2). Still more would it be natural to unite
different parts in other ways also. In this way the
ordinances dealing with the character of the sacri-
fices in 22 17-30 could, regarded by themselves, be
placed also in chs 1-7. But in ch 22 they are also
well placed. On the other hand, the character of
chs 1-7 would have become too complicated if they
were inserted here. In such matters the author
must have freedom of action.

(c) Change of singular and plural: Further, the fre-
quent change between the sing. and the pl. in the ad-
dresses found in the laws which are glven to a body of


persons is without further thought used by the critics as
a proof of a diversity of authors in the section undercon-


1873


sideration (cf 10 12; 19 9.11ff,15ff, etc). But how
easily this change in numhers can be explained! In case
the pl.is used, the hody of the people are regarded as hav-
ing been distributed into individuals; and in the case of a
more stringent application the pl. can at once be con-
verted into the sing., since the author ‘ts thinking now
only of separate individuals. Naturally, too, the sing.
is used as soon as the author thinks again rather of the
people as a whole. Sometimes the change is made
suddenly within one and the same verse or run of thought;
and this in itself ought to have banished the thought of a
difference of authors !n such cases. In the case of an
interpolator or redactor, it is from the outset all the more
probable that he would have paid more attention to the

erson used in the addresses than that this would have

een done by the original writer, who was completely
absorbed hy the subject-matter. Besides, such a change
in numher is frequently found in other connections also;
ef in the Book of the Covenant (Ex 22 20-25.29f; 23
off; cf Dt 12 2ff.13ff). In regard to these passages,
also, the modern critics are accustomed to draw the same
conclusion; and in these cases, too, this is hasty. In the
same way the change in the laws from the 3d to the
2d person can hest he explained as the work of the
lawgiver himself, before whose mind the persons addressed
are more vividly present and who, when speaking in
the 2d person, becomes personal (cf Lev 2 4 with 2
1-3, and also 1 2; 3 17; 6 18.21.25 7).


(d) Proofs of religious development: A greater
importance seemingly must be attributed to the
reasons based on a difference in the terminology
or on contradictions in the laws, as these appear
to lead to areligio-historical development. But the
following examples are intended to show how all-
important it is to be slow in the acceptance of the
materials which the critics offer in this connection.


(3) Insufficiency of these reagons.— (a) In § 1-7, in the
section treating of the sin offering (4 1—5 13), we find
the word 'asham, which also signifies ‘‘guilt offering”
(cf vs 14%; 7 1 if). Accordingly, it is claimed, the author
of 5 1-7 was not yet acquainted with the difference be-
tween the two kinds of offerings, and that this part is
older than thatin 4 117; 5 14ff. However, in § 1 ff the
word ‘dsham is evidently used in the sense of ‘'repent-
ance,’ and does not signify ‘‘sin offering” at all; at
any rate, already in vs 6f we find the characteristic
term hatta'th to designate the latter, and thus this section
appears as entirely in harmony with the connection.

(b) Critics find a contradiction in 6 26; 7 33.7, and
in 6 29; 7.31.6, since in the first case the officiating
priest and in the other case the entire college of priests
is described as participating in the sacrifice. In reply
it is to be said that the first set of passages treat of the
individual concrete cases, while the second set speak of
the general principle. In 7% 8f, however, where the
individual officiating priest is actually putin express con-
trast with all the sons of Aaron, the matter under con-
sideration is a difference in the meal offerings, which,
beginning with ch 2, could be regarded as known. Why
this difference is made in the use of this sacrifice is no
longer intelligible to us, as we no longer retain these
sacrifices, nor are we in possession of the oral instruction
which possibly accompanied the written formulation
of these laws; but this is a matter entirely independent
of the question as to the author.

(c) According to Ex 29 7;, Lev 4 3.5.16; 6 20.22;
8 12; 16 32; 21 10.12, the high priest is the only one
who is anointed; while, on the other hand, in Ex 28 41;
29 21: 30 30; 40 15; Lev 7 36; 10 7, all the priests are
anointed. But the text as it reads does not make \t
impossible that there was a double anointing. Accord-
ing to the first set of passages, Aaron is anointed in snch
a@ manner that the anointing oil is poured out upon his
head (cf esp. Ex 29 7 and Lev 8 12). Then, too, he
and all his sons are anointed in such a way that a mixture
of the oil and of the blood is sprinkled upon them and
on their garments (cf esp. Ex 29 21 and Lev 8 30).
Were we here dealing with a difference in reference to the
theory and the ranks of the priesthood, as these dis-
cussions were current at the time of the exile (see I11,
below), then surely the victorious party would have seen
to it that their views alone would have been reproduced
in these laws, and the opposing views would have heen
suppressed. But now both anointings are found side
hy side, and even in one and the same chapter!

(d) The different punishments prescribed for carnal
intercourse with a woman during her periods in 15 24
and 20 18 are easily explained by the fact that, in the
first passage, the periods are spoken of which only set
in during the act, and in the second passage, those which
had already set in before. rs x

(e) As far as the difference in terminology is con-
cerned, it must be remembered that in their claims the
critics either overlook that intentional differences may
decide the preference for certain words or expressions;
or else they ignore the fact that it is possible in almost
every section of a writer's work to find some expressions
which are always, or at least often, peculiar to him; or


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Leviticus


finally, they in an inexcusable way ignore the freedom
of selection which a writer has between different syno-
nyms or hls choice in using these.

Allin all, it must be said that however much we
acknowledge the keenness and the industry of the
modern critics in clearing up many difficulties, and
the fact that they bring up many questions that
demand answers, it nevertheless is the fact that
they take the matter of solving these problems
entirely too easily, by arbitrarily claiming different
authors, without taking note of the fact that by
doing this the real difficulty is not removed, but
ig Baty transferred to another place. What could
possibly be accepted as satisfactory in one single
instance, namely that through the thoughtlessness
of an editor discrepancies in form or matter had
found their way into the text, is at once claimed
to be the regular mode of solving these difficulties—
a procedure that is itself thoughtlessness. On the
other hand, the critics overlook the fact that it
makes little difference for the religious and the ethi-
cal value of these commands, whether logical, sys-
tematic, linguistic or aesthetic correctness in all
their parts has been attained or not; to which must
yet. be added, that a failure in the one particular
may at the same time be an advantage in the other.
In this respect we need recall only the anacoluths
of the apostle Paul. ;

(1) Structure in general—The most effective
antidote against the craze to split up the text in

the manner described above will be
2. Structure found in the exposition of all those


of the features which unite this text into
Biblical one inseparable whole. What we have
Text tried to demonstrate in the arts.


. Genesis; Exopus, II; Day or
Atonement, I, 2 (cf also Ezexrot, I, 2, [2]) can be
repeated at this point. The Book of Lev shows
all the marks of being a well-constructed and or-
ganic literary product, which in its fundamental
characteristics has already been outlined under I
above. And as this was done in the several articles
just cited, we can here add further, as a confirma-
tory factor in favor of the acceptance of an inner
literary unity of the book, that the division of the
book into its logical parts, even down to minute
details, is here, as is so often the case elsewhere,
not only virtually self-evident in many particulars,
but that the use made of typical numbers in many
passages in this adjustment of the parts almost
forces itself upon our recognition. In other places
the same is at least suggested, and can be traced
throughout the book without the least violence to
the text. The system need not be forced upon the
materials. We often find sections but loosely con-
nected with the preceding parts (cf under 1 above)
and not united in a strictly logical manner, but
which are nevertheless related in thonght and asso-
ciation of ideas. In harmony with the division of
the Book of Gen we find at once that the general |
contents, as mentioned under I above, easily fall
into 10 pericopes, and it is seen that these consist
of 2 sets each of 5 pericopes together with an
appendix.

(a) Ten pericopes in two parts: Part I, the
separation from God and the removal of this sep-
aration: (i) chs 1-7; (ii) chs 8-10; (iii) chs 11-15;
(iv) ch 16; (v) ch 17.

Part II, the normal conduct of the people of
God: (i) chs 18-20; (ii) chs 21-22; (iii) chs 23-24;
(iv) ch 25; (v) ch 26.

Appendix, ch 27; cf for the number 10 the division
of Ex 1 8—7 7; 7 8—13 16; 13 17—18 27; also
the Decalogue, 20 1 ff; 21 1—23 19; 32 1—35 1;
and see Exopus, JI, 2; and in Lev probably 18 6-18;
19 9-18, and with considerable certainty 19 1-37
(see below).


Leviticus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1874


(b) Correspondence and connections: I leave out of
consideration in this case the question whether an
intentional correspondence among the different parts
be traced or not, even in their details. Thus, e.g., when
the 2d pericope (chs 8-10 and 21f) treats particularly
of the order of the priests, or when the 4th pericope of
the 2d set (ch 25) states that the beginning of the Year
of Jubilee fell on the 10th day of the 7th month, i.e. on
the Day of Atonement as described in Lev 16, in the
4th pericope of the 1st set (cf 25 9 with 16 29); or when
both sets close with two shorter pericopes, which evi-
dently express high stages of development (chs 16 and
17, respectively, chs 25 and 26 treating of the Day of
Atonement, of the use made of blood and the purposes
of blood for the altar or the Juhilee Year, of the blessing
and the curse).


And, as far as the order in other respects is con-
cerned, it is throughout to be regarded as founded
in the snbject-matter itself that chs 1-17 must pre-
cede chs 18-26. First that which separates the
people from God must be removed, and then only
is a God-pleasing conduct possible. Just as easily,
and in agreement with the context, it is possible
that the consecration of the priests in chs 8-10 pre-
supposes the sacrificial térah (chs 1-7; ef under 1
above) and follows the latter, and is immediately
introduced by the mention made of the installation
sacrifices for which otherwise there are no reasons
assigned in the concluding formula in 7 37 (cf 8
22-32). The Day of Atonement (ch 16), which in
vs 16f and 33 is spoken of in connection with the
punts of the sanctuary, is in turn introduced

y chs 11-15, or more particularly by the remark
in 15 31, where mention is made of the pollution of
the dwelling-place of Jeh. And on the other hand,
the ordinances dealing with the priests (chs 8-10) in
10 10, where the command is given to discriminate
between what is holy and what is unholy and to
teach Israel accordingly, already point to the con-
tents of chs 11-15. The sacrifices, with which the
first part in chs 1~7 begins, are taken up again by
the conclusion in ch 17, in the commandment con-
cerning the blood for the altar. The second part,
too, already at the beginning (chs 18-20) in its
religiously cultural and ethical ordinances, shows
in the clearest possible manner what matters it
proposes to discuss. In this way the systematic
structure of the book is apparent in all particulars.

Close connections: comparison with Ex: And,
further, the different pericopes are also so closely
connected among themselves and with the corre-
sponding pericopes in the books of Ex and Nu, that
many have thought it necessary to regard them
as a special body of laws. But the connection is
so close and involves all the details so thoroughly,
that all efforts to divide and distribute them after
the examples described under 1 above must fail
absolutely. We shall now give the proofs for the
different pericopes in Lev, but in such a manner as
to take into consideration also Ex 26-31; 35 ff,
treating of the tabernacle and its utensils and the
Aaronitic priesthood, which are most intimately
connected with Lev. All details in this matter
will be left out of consideration.

(a) Tabernacle and priesthood: That Lev 8-10 (the
consecration of the ee etc), together with Ex 26
ff, constitutes a single whole is accepted on all hands.
But the tent of meeting and its utensils, and also the
priesthood, both with and without any emphasis on the
Aaronitle origin, are presupposed also in almost each
one of the other pericopes of Lev; cf for chs 1-17, e.g.,
1 3.5; 3 2.8.13; 4.5.7.14.16.18; 6 26 (tent of meet-
ing); 1 5.12; 8 5; 4 7.25.30; 6 12 (altar of burut
sacrifices); 4 7.18 (altar of incense sacrifices); 4 6.17
(veil); 6 9.19 (court); 1 5.7.8.11; 2 2; 2.5.8.13;
6 9.14.16.20.25, etc (Aaron and his sons as priests); for
chs 11-15 see 12 4.6; 14 11.28; 15 14.29.31 (sanctuary,
tent of meeting, dwelling-place); 11 1; 12 61; 13 1 f:
14 27.33 ff; 15 1 (priesthood); for ch_16 see vs 2.7.
16f.20.23.33 (sanctuary and Holy of Holies, tent of
meeting); 16 2.12 (veil); 16 2.13 ff (id of the Ark of
the Covenant); 16 12.18.20.33 (altar); 16 1 ff (Aaronitic
priesthood); for ch 17 see vs 4-6.9 (tent of meeting);


vs 6.11 (altar); ver 5 (priesthood); for chs 18-20 see
19 30.21 (sanctuary of Jeh, tent of meeting); 19 22


(priesthood); for ch 21f see 21 12 (sanctuary); 21 23
(sanctuaries of Jeh); 21 23 (veil, altar); 21 17.21 (Aaron-
itic priesthood); for chs 23, 24 see 28 2.4.21.24.27.36f
(sanctuary); 24 1ff (candlestick, tent of meeting);

5 ff (table of showbread); 23 10.20 (priesthood);
24 3.9 (Aaronitic priesthood); for ch 26 see vs 2.11.31
(sanctuary, dwelling-place of Jeh, sanctuaries); for ch
27 see vs 10.33 (sanctuary); vs 8 ff (priesthood).

(8) In the same way the sacrificial laws of chs 1-7 are
mentioned in the following pericopes as matters that are
well known. For chs 8-10 see 9 7.15 (sin offering);
9.7.12.16 (burnt offering); 9 17; 10 12 (meal offering);
9 18 (peace offering); 9 3f (all together); cf also Ex
29 14.18.28. In Lev 9 21; 10 14f (wave-breasts and
heave-thigh) direct reference is made to 7 30-36. In
the same manner 10 16 ff presupposes the ordinances
dealing with the different ways of offering the sin offer-
ings in 4 3ff.13ff; 6 24-30; for chs 11-15 see 12 6f:
14 12 ff (cf esp. 14 13 with 4 24); 14 21 ff; 15 14f.
29f; for ch 16 see vs 3.5 1.9.11.15.24 1.27; for ch 17 see
vs 5 ff.8.11; for chs 18-20 see 19 6 ff.21f (here is there-
fore the 'asham found in H, which is claimed to be of a
later date); for ch 21f see 21 6.211; 22 17 ff.29f; for
chs 23, 24 see 23 12f; 18 19.27.37; 24 9. for ch 26 see
vs 301; for ch 27 cf vs 15.19.27.31 with § 16; 6 5.

(y) Laws on clean and unclean: The laws in refer-
ence to the clean and the unclean in chs 11-15 are also
interwoven with the whole book. For chs 1-7 see 5 2f;
6 27; 7.19ff; for chs 8-10 see 10 10f; for ch 16 see vs
16.19; for ch 17 see vs 13.151; for chs 18-20 cf 20 25
with 11 44, and in general with ch 11; for chs 21 f see 21
10; 13 45; 22 3 ff with chs 13-15; for ch 27 see vs 11
and 27, as also ch 11.

(6) The laws in reference to the Day of Atonement
found in Lev 16 are prepared for by those found in chs 11-
15, viz. in 14 4 ff.49 ff (the ceremony with the two birds
in connection with the purification from leprosy), and in
15 31 (cf 16 16.19; see above). For chs 23, 24 cf 23
26 ff with 16 29 ff, and for 25 9 with 16 29 see above;
cf also Ex 30 10.

(©) Ch 17 is reéchoed in chs 1-7 (7 26f) and in chs
18-20 (19 26).

(¢) Finally ch 25 (Year of Rest and Year of Jubilee)
i upboeed in ch 26 (vs 341.43) and in ch 27 (vs 17


The above, however, by no means exhausts this
list of references and similar thoughts, and we have
here given only some leading illustrations. What
literary tricks must be resorted to when, over
against this overwhelming mass of evidence, critics
yet insist that the different parts of the book were
originally independent writings, esp., too, when
the entire tabernacle and utensils of the Aaronitic
priesthood, the Day of Atonement, the Year of
Jubilee, the whole sacrificial scheme and the laws
dealing with the great festivals, the restriction of
the slaying of the sacrificial animals to the central
sanctuary, are regarded as the products of imagina-
tion alone, according to the Wellhausen hypothesis
(cf III, below, and see also Exonvus, III, 5; Day or
AtoneMEnT, III, 1; Ezrxret, JI, 2). And how
little is gained in addition when, as is sometimes
done, in a most arbitrary manner, the statements
found in chs 1-3 concerning the tabernacle of reve-
lation (“tent of meeting”) and concerning Aaron's
sons, or concerning Aaron and his sons together, are
regarded as later additions. In Lev and. Ex 26 ff,
35 ff, everything is so entirely of one and the same
character and has so clearly emanated from one and
the same spirit, that it is impossible to separate
from this product any constituent parts and to
unite these into groups that were originally inde-
pendent, then to split up these still further and to
trace the parts to their sources, and even to con-
struct a scheme of religious and historical develop-
ment on this reconstruction of the sources.

(2) Structure of the individuat pericopes.—As the
windows and the column capitals of a mediaeval
cathedral are arranged according to different schemes
and this divergence is regarded as an enrichment
of the structure, thus, too, we find it to be in the
structure of the various pericopes of the Book of
Lev. These latter, too, possess a certain symphony
of different tones, but all are rhythmically arranged,
and only when united do they produce the entire
symphony.

(a) The laws concerning the sacrifices (Lev 1-


1875


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Leviticus


7): In the first place, the five different kinds of
sacrifices in Israel are mentioned in succession
twice, in 1 1—7 21: Part I, chs 1-6, namely (i) ch
1, burnt offerings; (ii) ch 2, meal offering; (iii) ch
3, peace offerings; (iv) 4 1—6 13, sin offering; (v)
5 14-26, guilt offering; Part II, 6 1—7 21, namely
(i) 6 8-18, burnt offerings; (ii) 6 14-23, meal offer-
ing; (ii) 6 24-30, sin offering; (iv) 7 1-7 with
appendix, vs 8-10, dealing with that part of the
sacrifices which belongs to the priest (see under 1,
above), guilt offering; (v) 7 11-21, peace offer-
ings. With this is found connected in 7 22-27 the
prohibition of the use of the fat or the blood, and
in 7 28-36, the laws concerning the wave-breast
and the heave-thigh. We have accordingly at once
twelve of these laws (cf on Ex 25 1—30 10 in art.
on Exopvs, I], 2, [5] and on Ezextan, I, 2,[5]). But
even apart from this we have no right to ascribe
chs 1-6 and 6 1—7 21, on the ground that they are
duplicates, to different authors.


_. That there is a difference between these two accounts
is proved, not only by the fact that the first set of laws
from chs 1-5 is addressed to all the Israelites (cf 1 2;
4 2), and the second set 6 8; 7 21 to Aaron and his sons
(cf 6 9.25); but the second set has also in content a
number of altogether different viewpoints as compared
with the first set, so that the same author found himseif
induced or compelled to write both sets. On the other
- hand, the fact that both have the same author is evident
from the very close connection between the two sections.
In addition to the fact that both make mention of all
five kinds of sacrifices, we can yet compare 3 5 with
6 22 (fat pieces of the peace offering over the burnt
sacrifices upon the pieces of wood); and, further, the
express reference of 6 17 to ch 4, while 6 30 presupposes
the distinct separation of the sin offering, the blood of
which is brought into the tent of meeting, from the other
sacrifices, as these are given in 4 3 ff.13 ff over against
4 22 ff.27 ff. Ch 4, with its reference to the peace
offerings (vs 10.26.31.35), is again most closely connected
with ch 3. We must accordingly insist that the whole
account is most intimately interwoven. Over against
this, the omission within the first set, chs 1-5,in 5 14-16,
of the ritual for the peace offering, is sufficiently explained
only by the fact that this ritual was to be used in the
second set (6 8—7 21), and here for the first time only in
7 1-15, which fact again speaks for the same author
for both sets and against the supposition that they were
merely mechanically united by a redactor. The fact
that the second set 6 8—7 21 has a different order from
that of chs 1-5, by uniting the sin offering immediately
with the meal offering (6 24 ff with vs 14-23), is probably
on account of the similar ordinances in 7 9 and 7 19
(natner of eating the meal offering and the sin offering).
m the other hand, the position of the peace offering at
the close of the second set (7 11 ff) furnished the pos-
sibility of giving to the piece of the entire pericope em-
braced in 7 22-27.28-36 a suitable conclusion; since
7 22 ff (prohibition of the eating of the fat and_the
blood), connected with 7 19 ff, contained in 7 28 ff an
ordinance that pertained to the peace offering (heave-
breast and wave-thigh). At any rate, these last two
pieces are to be regarded separately from the rest, since
they are no longer addressed to the priests, as is 6 8—
7 21, but to all Israel; cf_7 23.29. n some other data
less intimately connected with the matter, cf above
under 1 :


(b) Consecration of priests and related matters
(Lev 8-10): In this pericope, as in the following,
down to ch 17 inclusive, but esp. from ch 11 on, the
principle of division on the basis of the number
four predominates, in many cases in the details,
+00; so that this could scarcely be regarded as an
accidental feature (cf also the history of Abraham
in Gen 12-26; further, in Ex 36 4—40 38; and in
Exopvs, II, 2, [7]; Lev 16, under Day or ATONE-
ment, I, 2, [1]); Dt 12-26, too, is probably to be di-
vided on this principle, even to the minutest details
(cf finally Lev 2i—22 16; 22 17-30; chs 23f
and 26).

(i) Ch 8, treating of the first seven days of the
consecration of the priests: The outline is found in
ver 2, namely Aaron, the sacred garments, the
anointing oil, the bullock of the sin offering, two
rams, unleavened bread (cf vs 6.7 ff.10 ff.14 ff.18 ff.
22 ff.26 ff). (ii) Ch 9 thefirst sacrifices of Aaron and
his sons on the 8th day (vs 2-4 contain the outline,


after the manner of 8 2; cf vs 7 ff.11 ff, the sin
offering and the burnt offering of Aaron, with ver
2; also vs 15-18, treating of what the people
brought for the sacrifices, with vs 3f; but it is to
be noticed that the meal offering and the peace
offering [vs 17.18] are given in inverted order from
that found in vs 3f). Here too we find the number
seven, if we add the burnt offering for the morning
(ver 17). (iii) 10 1-7, the sin of Nadab and Abihu
and their punishment by death; (iv) 10 8-20,
ordinances concerning the priests, occasioned by
8 1—10 7 and provided with a new superscription
in 10 8, namely (a) 10 8, dealing with the pro-
hibition of the use of wine and intoxicants; (8) 10
9f, distinction between the holy and the unholy;
(vy) 10 12-15, the eating of the sacred oblations;
(5) 10 16-20, the treatment of the goat for the sin
offering.

(c) Laws concerning the clean and unclean (Lev
11-16): () ch 11, treating of clean and unclean ani-
mals. The outline of the chief contents is found in
11 46 with a free transposition of one number.
There are accordingly four pieces, viz. (a) vs 2-8,
quadrupeds; (8) vs 9-12, water animals; (7) vs
13-23, birds (with an_appendix, treating of contact
with the unclean, vs 24-28, which give a summary
of the animals mentioned [«-+-y]; see under 1); (8)
vs 29-45, the small animals upon the earth (again
in four subdivisions, viz. [i] vs 29-38; [ii] vs 39 ff;
[iti] vs 41; [iv] vs 44f).

(ii) Ch 12 treats of women in confinement, also
in four pieces (vs 2-4, birth of a male child; ver 5,
birth of a female child; vs 6f, purification cere-
mony; ver 8, ordinances in case of extreme poverty).
These parts are not joined logically, but in a rather
external manner.

(iii) The passage 13 1—14 53, containing the
laws of leprosy, with the subscription in 14 54 ff.
(Because seven points are to be enumerated, ver 55
[garments and houses], this is not as in its further
exposition separated from the other laws and is
placed in their midst.) The exposition contains
four pieces, viz. («) 13 1-44, leprosy on human
beings (with concluding verses, 45f), with seven
subdivisions, of which the first five longer ones are
constructed along fairly parallel lines, and again
can be divided into four sub-subdivisions, viz. vs
1-8; 9-17; 18-23; 24-28; 29-37; 38f; 40-44.
The significance of the number seven for the struc-
ture (see [2], [b], i, above) is akin to that found, e.g.,
in Ex 24 18b—31 18 (see Exonvs, II, 2, [5]); Lev
8, 9 (see above); Lev 23, 25, and 27; and possibly
26 3-13.14-39 (see below); finally, the whole Book
of Ex is divided into seven parts (see Exopus, IT, 1).
(8) 13 47-59, leprosy in connection with garments,
with four subdivisions, namely vs 47-50; 51f; 53f;
55 ff. The last subdivision can again be readily
separated into four sub-subdivisions, viz. vs 55;
56; 57; 58. (vy) 14 1-32, purifications (ver 2 being
a special superscription), with 4 subdivisions, viz.
(i) vs 2b-3a, the leper before the priest; (ii) vs
30-9, the purification ceremonies on the first seven
days, again divided into 4 sub-subdivisions: vs
3bf; 5-7; 8; 9; (ii) vs 10-20, the ceremony of
the eighth day (4 sacrifices, namely vs 12-18, guilt
offering; ver 19a, sin offering; ver 19b, burnt offer-
ing; ver 20, meal offering; in the 4 sacrifices
(6 12—6 7) there are again 4 different actions: vs 14;
15f; 17; 18; (iv) vs 21-32 (in cases of poverty)
(6) 14 33-53, leprosy in houses, with four subdi~
visions: vs 33-35; 36-38; 39-42; 43-53.

(iv) Ch 16, sickness or natural issues, with 4
subdivisions, viz. (2) 16 I-15, checked or running
issues together with their purification (vs 3-12 con-
tain 12 laws: vs 3; 4a; 4b; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10a; 10b;
11; 12); (6) vs 16-18, issue of seed; (y) vs 19-24,
periods; (6) vs 25-30, other flows of blood and their


Leviticus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1876


purification. a + 8 refer to men and y+ & to
women; and in addition to these implied sugges-
tions, as a+6 to dealing with abnormal issues and
their purification ceremonies, +7 with normal
issues.

(d) The Day of Atonement (Lev 16): See IV, 1,
(2), 2, and under ATONEMENT, Day oF. :

(e) Uses and significance of the blood of sacri-
fices (Lev 17): (i) Vs 3-7, only one place for kill-
ing the sacrifices and the rejection of all foreign
cultures; (ii) vs 8.9, only one place for sacrificing;
(iii) vs 10-14, prohibitive of eating the blood; (iv)
ver 15, pertaining to carcases of animals found dead
or which have been torn by wild beasts.

Here the form and the contents of the section have
been brought into perfect harmony by the author. Vs
3 ff. 8ff. 10 ff.13 ff begin with same words, and each
contains a similar formula in reference to the punish-
ment, while logically vs 10 ff and 13 ff are evidently only
subdivisions of the third part in vs 10-14, which treats
of the prohibition of eating blood. In the fourth di-
vision, again, while in snbstance connected with the rest,
there is lacking the formal agreement with the first three
divisions.

(f) (g) (Lev 18-20, 21): These naturally fall
each into 2 parts. Chs 18-20 contain (i) chs 18f,
religious and ethical laws; (ii) ch 20, laws dealing
with punishments. :

(fi) Religious and ethical laws (chs 18f): (a)
ch 18: Ordinances with reference to marriage and
chastity. («#) 18 1-5, introductory; (8) vs 6-18,
prohibition of marriage between kindred of blood;
(vy) vs 19-28, prohibition of other sexual sins; (8)
vs 24-30, warnings.

The subdivision (8) can perhaps be divided into 10
subordinate parts, if it is permitted to combine the
different degrees of relationship mentioned in vs 12-14
(viz. 7.8.9.10.11.12—14.15.16.17.18). Since (y) of itself
manifestly consists of 5 ordinances (vs 19.20.21.22.23),
this whole section, if we are permitted to divide (a) into
5commandments (vs 2.34.36.4.5) and (8) also into 5 (vs
241, 26-28.29.302.305), would contain 5X5 words; but
this is uncertain.

(6) Ch 19: various commands of the deepest
significance. In order to discover the divisions of
this chapter_we must note the characteristic for-
mula, ‘lam Jeh, your God,” or asimilar expression,
which often appears at the beginning and at the
end of certain divisions, e.g. in series (1) (9) and
(10), but which in the middle series appears in each
case only once, and which in all the series is found
also at the conclusion.

In this way we can compute 10 tetralogues. Thus
after the superscription in ver 2 containing a summary,
we have (i) vs 3.4 (vs 3a.3).4a.40); (ii) vs 5-10 (vs 5f.
7.9.10); (iii) vs 11f (vs 11e.11ba.11b8.12); (iv) vs
13 f (vs 13a.13b.14¢.14b); (v) vs 15f (152.156.162.160);
(vi) vs 17f£ (vs 174.176.182.185); (vii) vs 19-25 (vs
19a.19b.20-22.23-25); (viii) vs 26-28 (vs 264.26).27.28),
(ix) 29-32 (vs 29.30.31.32); (x) vs 33-36 (vs 33.34.35.36) ;
ver 37 constitutes the conclusion of the whole. (Note
that the number ten here is certain in the conviction of
the present writer; but he is not quite so sure of the
number of subdivisions within the main divisions; we
may have to do here with pentalogues and not with
tetralognes. If this is the case, then the agreements
with ch 18 would under certain circumstances he even
greater.)


Possibly groupings of two can yet form a closer
union (cf on Ex 1-18, 21-23, Exonus, II, 2, [1-4]).
At any rate (iii) and (iv) can be summarized under
the general heading of defrauding one’s neighbors;
(v) and (vi) under that of observation of the laws;
(vii) and (viii) under that of heathen abuses; while
(ix) and (x) perhaps intentionally mingle together
the religious and cultural and ethical elements, in
order thereby already to express that all these things
are most intimately connected (but cf also vs 12.14.
17, in the middle sections). In vs 5 ff.20 ff.23 ff,
ie author develops his subject somewhat more
ully.

(fii) Laws dealing with punishments (ch 20):
The regulations in reference to punishments stand


in such close relation to the contents of ch 18 and
to parts of ch 19, that it is absolutely incompre-
hensible how the critics can assign these three
chapters to different authors. Even if certain
regulations of ch 18 are not found here in ch 20
(vs 7.10.176.18), and even if another order has
been followed, this variation, which doubtless also
hangs together with a new grouping of the mate-
rials, is rather an advantage than a disadvantage
for the whole. It is impossible to conceive that
a redactor would have altered anything in two
entirely parallel and similar texts, or would him-
self have written a parallel text differmg from the
other. Ch 20 can probably be divided into 4 parts,
viz. (i) vs 1-8, punishments for idolatry and witch-
craft with a concluding formula, vs 7f; (ii) vs
9-18, punishment of death for ten crimes, all of
which, with the exception of thefirst, are of a sexual
nature (vs 9-18). It is a question whether the first
in the second group (ver 14), i.e. the sixth in the
whole series, was intended to be made prominent
by the peculiar character of the punishment (burn-
ing to death); (iii) vs 19-21, other sexual sins, with
lighter punishments; (iv) vs 22-27, with 4 subdi-
visions (warning, vs 22f; promise, ver 24; em-
phatic repetitions of two commands already given,
vs 25 ff; [cf with 11 44 ff, and in general with
ch 11]; and ver 27 with 19 26.31; 206). Per-
fectly certain in this chapter is the fact that
the different kinds of punishments are likewise
decisive for their order. It is doubtless not to be
regarded as accidental that both at the beginning
and at the end death by stoning is mentioned.

(g) (Lev 21 1—22 33): (i) Laws concerning the
quality of the priests (21 1-22.16); and (ii) con-
cerning sacred oblations (22 17-30) with the sub-
scription vs 31-33.

(gi) Qualities of priests: 21 1—22 16 in four sec-
tions (21 1 ff.10 77.16 ff; 22 1ff; note also in 21
18-20 the 12 blemishes; in 22 4-8 the 7 cases of
uncleanness).

(gii) Sacred oblations: 22 17-30 in four sections
(22 18-20.21-25.26-28.29 f).

(h) Consecration of seasons, etc (chs 23, 24):
(i) ch 28, laws for the feasts (7 sections, viz. vs 3.
4 f.6-14.15-22.23-25 26-32.33-36, with the appen-
dix that in every particular suits the connection,
in vs 39 ffi, added to the feast of the tabernacles);
(ii) 24 1-4, treating of the sacred candlestick, which
represents the moral conduct of the Israelites, and
for this reason suits admirably in the connection;
as this is true also of (iii) 24 5-9, treating of the
shewbread, which represents the results of the labor
of Israel; (iv) 24 10-23, containing the report of
the punishment of a blasphemer of God and of one
who cursed.

Probably the example was made of @ person who took
the name of God in vain at the time which this chapter
describes. But possihly there is a still closer connection
to be found with that which precedes. The shewhread
and the candlestick were found in the holy place, which
with its ntensils pictured the relation of Israel’s char-
acter to their God; while the utensils in the Holy of
Holies indicated God’s relation to His people (cf Hengs-
tenberg, Beitrdge, III, 644 ff). But since the holy place,
in addition to the shewbread end the candlestick, con-
tained only the incense altar, which symbolized the
prayers of Israel, and as the blasphemer represents the
exact opposite of prayer, it is probahle that in 24 10 ff
prayer is indicated by its counterpart. This section
consists of 4 parts, viz. vs 10-12; 13-14; 15-22 (giving
a series of punishments for certain wrongdoings which


are more or less closely connected with that found in the
text); ver 23.


(i) Sabbatic and Jubilee years (ch 25): Sabbatic
aud Jubilee years in 7 sections, viz. vs 1-7; 8-12;
13-28; 29-34; 35-38; 39-46; 47-55.

(7) Conclusion: Curse and blessing (ch 26):
The grand concluding chapter, offering a curse and
a blessing and containing all the prophetic utter-


1877


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Leviticus


ances of later times in a nutshell, viz. (i) vs 1-2,
repetition of four important demands (vs 1a.1b.2a.
2b); (ii) 26 3-13, the blessing, possibly to be di-
vided into 7 stages, one more spiritual than the
other; (iii) 26 4-89, the curse, possibly to be di-
vided into seven stages, one more intense than the
other (cf also the play on words 7 times repeated, in
reference to shabbath, possibly found in vs 34 f, and
certainly found in vs 18.21.24.27f); (iv) 26 40-45,
the mercy finally shown by Jeh for His covenant’s
sake.

(k) Appendix: Finally, the appendix in ch 27,
dealing with vows and tithes, in 7 parts, viz. vs
1-8; 9-13; 14-15; 16-21; 26f; 28-29; 30-33.

HI. Origin.—As in the art. Atonement, Day oF,
I, 2, (2), we took astand against the modern attempts

at splitting up the text, and in III, 1


1. Against against the theory of the late origin
the Well- of the whole pericope, we must, after
hausen _ trying under II to prove ‘the unity of
Hypothesis the Book of Lev, yet examine the


: modern claim that the book as a whole
is the product of later times. Since the entire book
is ascribed to the PC (see II, 1 above), the answer
to the question as to the time when it was written
will depend on the attitude which we take toward
the Wellhausen hypothesis, which insists that the
PC was not published until the time of the exile
in 444 BC (Neh 8-10). :

_ CG) Argument from silence—One of the most
important proofs for this claim is the “argument
from silence’ (argumentum e silentio). How care-
ful one must be in making use of this argument can
be seen from the fact that, e.g., the high priest with
his full title is mentioned but a single time in the
entire Book of Lev, namely in 21 10; and that the
Levites are not mentioned save once (25 82 ff),
and then incidentally. As is well known, it is the
adherents of the Wellhausen hypothesis themselves
who now claim that the bulk of the entire literature
of the OT originated in the post-exilic period and
long after the year 444 BC. Leaving out of con-
sideration for the present the Books of Ch, Ezr and
Neh, all of which describe the history of Israel from
the standpoint of P, we note that this later liter-
ature is not any richer in its references to P than
is the older literature; and that in those cases where
such references are found in this literature assigned
to a late period, it is just as difficult to decide
whether these passages refer merely to a custom or
to a codified set of laws.

(2) Attitude of prophets toward sacrificial system.
—A further proof against the preéxilic origin of the
priestly legislation is found in what is claimed to
be the hostile attitude of the prophets to the sacri-
ficial system (cf Am 5 21ff; 441; Hos 6 6;
Mic 6 6ff; Isa 111ff; Jer 6 20; 7 21ff; Ps
40 6; 508.9; 51 16f). But this cannot possibly
be an absolute antithesis; for in this case, it would
be directed also against the Books of the Covenant
and, in part, too, against Dt, which books in Ex 20
24; 22 19; 28 18; 34 25; Dt 12 5£.11.13.17.
26; 15 19-23; 16 2.5f; 17 1; 18 1.3 also give
directions for sacrifices, and which, at least in part,
are yet regarded as older writings. Further, these
passages under discussion are also, in part, as-
signed to a later and even a very late period (cf
even such cases as Ps 40 6; 50 8f; 51 16f; Mic
6 6 ff, and in addition also Mal 1 10), ie. they are
assigned to a time in which, according to the views
of the critics, the priestly laws are said to have had
their origin or were already regarded as authorita-
tive. Asa rule, the prophets make sacrifices, Sab-
baths, sacred places and persons a part of their
pictures of the future; cf, as far as sacrifices are
concerned, e.g. Jer 17 26; 3114; 33 14ff. Fi-
nally, Lev 26 31 shows how, under certain cir-°


SUSIE, even P can declare sacrifices to be use-
ess.

(3) The people's disobedience.—Further, the
transgressions of the Levitical Jaws in the course
of Israel’s history cannot be regarded as a proof of
the non-existence of the priestly legislation in pre-
exilic times. This is clear from an analogous case.
Idolatry was forbidden by the Books of the Cove-
nant (Ex 20-24; 384), which are recognized as
ancient documents; but according to 2 K 22 the
pious king Josiah down to the year 622 BC takes no
offence at idolatry. Even after the reformation,
which had been inaugurated in consequence of the
finding of the Book of the Law in the temple during
the reign of Josiah (2 K 22f), idolatry was again
practised in Israel, as is proved by Ezk 8 and Jer
44, notwithstanding that the Books of the Covenant
and Dt already were extant at that time, even
according to the views of the critics.

But let us pass on to P itself, and not forget that
the directions given for the Jubilee Year (Lev 25),
according to Jewish tradition, were never actually
observed. According to the reasoning of the critics,
this law could not be in existence even in the present
day. According to all reports the transgressions
of the Divine ordinances began even as early as the
Mosaic period; cf Ex 32 (J, E, golden calf); Am
6 25; Ezk 20; Dt 12 8 and also Lev 17 7 (sac-
rifice to the Satyrs in PC). This condition of
affairs can readily be understood because the reli-
gion of Jeh does not claim to be an emanation from
the spirit of the people, but the result of a revela-
tion from on high. In the light of these facts can
we be surprised, that in the times of the Judges,
when a great prophetic leader was so often not to
be found in Israel, the apostasy was so great and
so widespread? But all of these cases of disobe-
dience, that have been demonstrated as actual facts
in Israel’s history, are not able to eliminate the fact
that there are many data to prove the existence of
a central sanctuary already in the earliest history
of the people, which fact presupposes as a matter
of course that there were also laws for the cultus in
existence (see Exopus, III, 5). We must further
not forget how the sacrifices of the sons of Samuel
(18 2 11 ff), notwithstanding all their arbitrary
conduct, presupposes such passages as Lev 7 30-
32; 1015; Ex 29 31f; Lev 831; Nu 6 19f;
Lev 7 23-32; or that the high priest, as described
in PC, is already before the year 444 BC as well-
known a character as he is after the exile (cf Ezz-
KEL, IT, 2); or that the question of Hag 2 11 ff
takes into consideration a code of cultus-laws, and
that the answer is given on the basis of Lev 6 27;
Nu 19 22.

(4) Indiscriminate sacrificing —To this must be
added that the transgressions, to which the critics
appeal in proof of their claims, and which they
abuse for their own purposes, must in part be inter-
preted differently from what they are. In the case
of sacrificing indiscriminately at any place whatever,
and by any person whatever, we have in many cases
to deal with extraordinary instances of theophanies
(cf Jgs 2 1 ff; 6 11 ff; 13 1 ff), as these had been
foreseen in Ex 20 24. Even the Book of Dt does
not insist throughout (cf 16 21) that the sacrifices
must be made at one and the same place (cf also
PC: Lev 24 31; Josh 22). After the rejection
of Shiloh, at which the central sanctuary had been
deposited, as recorded in 1 8 4, the cultural ordi-
nances of PC, as we learn from Jer 7 11 ff; 26 6;
Ps 78 59 ff, became more or less a dead letter.
Even the Books of Ch, which throughout record
history from the standpoint of the PC, at this
period and down to the dedication of the temple
take no offence at the cultural acts of a Solomon in
contrast with their attitude toward the conduct of


Leviticus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1878


Uzziah (see 2 Ch 16; 6 1-4; 7 1-7, as compared


with 26 16 ff). In the same way the pious people
in the Northern Kingdom, after it had, by Divine
consent, been separated from the Southern, could
not do otherwise than erect altars for themselves,
since they could not participate in the worship of
the calves in Bethel and Dan. Further, modern
criticism overlooks the fact that what is regular
and normal is much less liable to be reported in his-
torical narrative than that which is irregular and
abnormal.

(5) Dt and PC, etce.—It is not possible at this place to
enter into further details; we accordingly refer only to
Exoovs, III and IV; Day or Atonement, ITI, and esp.
Ezexiet, If, 2, where the proof has heen furnished that
this prophet belongs to a later period than PC as far as
Ezk 40-48 (containing his picture of the future) in gen-
eral is concerned, and as far as Ezk 44 4 ff (where it is
claimed that the prophet first introduces the distinction
between priests and Levites) in particular is concerned.
All the important problems that are connected with this
matter, esp. the difficulties which result from the Well-
hausen hypothesis, when the questions as to the purpose,
the form, the success and the origin of the priestly legis-
lation come under consideration, are discussed in my
book, Are the Critics Right? The result of this investi-

ation is all the more noteworthy, as I was myself
‘ormerly an adhereut of the Wellhausen school, but was
forced to the conclusion that this hypothesis is un-
tenable.

We have here yet to refer to the one fact that the
relation of Dt and the PC, as far as Lev in par-
ticular is concerned, justifies the scheme of P fol-
lowed by D as the historical order, while Well-
hausen makes Dolder than P. Dt 10 8f; 33 8 ff
presuppose more detailed ordinances in reference to
the priests such as those which have been given in
P. The book of Dt further takes into account
different kinds of sacrifices (cf 12 5 f.11.13.17.26;
15 19-23; 17 1; 18 1.8, such as are described in
Lev 1ff). The law in Dt 14 (ordinances with
reference to what is clean) agrees almost word for
word with Lev 11, and is in such perfect harmony
with the linguistic peculiarities of PC, that Lev 11
must be regarded as the original, and not vice versa,
Dt 24 &f refers directly to the injunctions concern-
ing leprosy, as we find these in Lev 13f, and the
Deuteronomic passage is doubtless modeled after
that of Lev. Dt 12 15.22; 16 22 cannot be under-
stood at all, except in the light of Lev 17 13. Dt
26 14 ff again expressly takes into account ideas
that have been taken from Lev 22 3ff. As far as
the laws dealing with the great feasts in Dt 16
are concerned, it is impossible to understand ver 9
without Lev 23 15 ff.10f; and the designation
‘feast of tabernacles’’ in vs 13 ff cannot even be
understood without a reference to such a law as we
find in Lev 23 39ff. The other passages to be
discussed on this subject lead us to the following
results. —

Even if the Book of Dt were the product of the
7th cent. BC, the facts that have been stated above

would nevertheless disprove the claim
2. Connec- of the Wellhausen hypothesis as to an


tion with _—_exilic or post-exilic date for the PC.
Mosaic But if Dt, even in its essential and
Period fundamental parts, merely, is Mosaic


(cf Are the Critics Right? 1-55), then
the PC which is still older than Dt must also belong
to the Mosaic period.

(1) PC and desert conditions—This conclusion
is in this point confirmed still further by a series
of facts. As Dt permits the firstborn to be ran-
somed (Dt 14 22 ff), but the PC demands their
consecration in natura (Lev 27 26f; cf Nu 18
15 ff), the latter ordinances could be preferred and
enforced only during the wandering in the desert,
where the whole nation was in the neighborhood of
the sanctuary. The fact that the ordinances deal-
ing with the domestic celebration of the Passover
in the private houses on the 14th of Nisan and the


holy convocation on the 15th of Nisan at the sanc-
tuary could be carried out only during the wander-
ings in the desert (cf Ex 12 3ff.6; Lev 23 5; Nu
28 16; Lev 27 6ff; Nu 28 17ff), and that this
was changed in Dt 16 5f to correspond to changed
conditions, can be seen by reference to Exonus,
III, 3. Still more important is a third command in
Lev 17 in comparison with Dt 12. The command-
ment that every animal that is to be slain is to be
brought to the central sanctuary can have a pur-
pose only for the Mosaic period, and could not even
have been invented at a later period. Because of
the entrance of Israel into Canaan, the Book of Dt
changes this ordinance in such a way that from this
time on the killing of the animals is permitted at
any place (12 13 ff.20ff). The different commands
in reference to the carcases of animals that have died
and of those torn to pieces are all dependent on Lev
17. In Dt 14 21, it was possible to forbid the use
of such animals absolutely for Israel, because from
now on, and in contrast to Lev iT, the killing of
sacrificial animals was permitted at any place (vs
13 ff). In Ex 22 30 all use of such meat could
be forbidden, because Lev 17, with its command
to bring all blood to the sanctuary, had not yet
been given. Lev, now, on the other hand, forbids
this use only to the priests (22 8), and sees in this
use in the case of the other Israelites only a transi-
tory defilement (cf Lev 17 15; 11 40); and in
7 24 forbids only the use of the fat, but not of the
meat of these animals; for now, according to Lev
17 1 ff, all the killing is a sacrifice which only
those who are clean were permitted to eat and
which could not be secured at all times (cf Hoff-
mann, op. cit., 23 f
Our exposition of Lev 17 1 ff is, however, in
another respect also of the greatest significance, for
in vs 46.8f the tent of meeting is presupposed
as existing; in vs 5.8 also different kinds of sacri-
fices, and in ver 6 the priesthood; so that at once
further ordinances concerning the tent of meeting,
the sacrificial code, the priesthood, such as we find
in Ex 26 ff; 35 ff; Lev 1-7; Ex 29; Lev 8—10
21 ff, were possible and necessary, and these very
laws must probably originate in and date from the
Mosaic period. This same conclusion is sustained
by the following considerations. For what other
source or time could be in harmony with such state-
ments found very often in other parts of Lev also,
as “into the camp” in 4 11 ff; 6 11; 13 46; 14 3.8
(unconscious contrast to later times); 14 33 ff.40.
41.45.53; 16 26-28; 24 10-23; or “‘into the desert,”
in 16 10.21f. In 6 15.18; 6 6 (cf also 27 2ff), the
words “according to thy estimation” are addressed
personally to Moses. In 6 20 a calculation is based
on the day on which Aaron was consecrated to the
priesthood, while ver 22 is the first that has general
coloring. Such hints, which, as it were, have only
been accidentally scattered in the body of the laws,
and which point to the situation of the lawgiver and
of his times, are of especial value for the argument
in favor of the Mosaic origin of these laws. Further,
we everywhere find that Aaron and his sons are
as yet the only incumbents of the priestly office
(cf 1 5.7.8.11; 2.3; 3 13; 6 9.14.16, etc). All the
laws claim to have been given through Moses
or Aaron or through both at Mt. Sinai (see I above).
And who, in later times, if it was the purpose to
magnify the priesthood of Aaron, would have
thought of inventing the fact that on the Day of
Atonement and on other occasions it was necessary
for Aaron to bring a burnt offering and a sin offer-
ing for himself (Lev 16; 8-10; 6 19 ff), or that
Moses in his view of a certain cultural act had been
mistaken (cf Lev 10 16 ff)? The law concerning
the Jubilee Year (Lev 25) presupposes that each
«tribe is confined in its own district and is not inter-


1879


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Leviticus


mingled with the other tribes, a presupposition
which was no longer possible after t e occupation
of Canaan, and is accordingly thinkable only in the
Mosaic times. And now let us remember that this
fact, when we recall (see II, above) that the unity
of the book was proved, is a ground for claiming
that the entire book dates from the Mosaic period.
As far as Lev at least is concerned, there is nothing
found in the book that calls for a later date. Lev
18 24 ff can be regarded as post-Mosaic only if we
translate these verses thoughtlessly, as though the
inhabitants of the country were here described as
being expelled earlier. On.the other hand, in ver
24, just as is the case with the parallel passage, 20
22 fi, the idea is, without any doubt, that Israel
is not yet in the Holy Land. Accordingly the waw
consecutives at this place are to be regarded not as
indicating temporal but logical sequences. In the
passage 18 27, we further find the archaic form ha’al
for ha’élleh; cf in the Pent Gen 19 8.25; 26 3.4;
Dt 4 42; 7 22; 19 11. Just as little does ch 26
take us into the exilic period. Only dogmatical
prejudices can take offence at prediction of the
exile. Lev 26 cannot be regarded as a “prophecy
after the event,” for the reason, too, that the resto-
ration of the poe by God’s pardon is here prom-
ised (cf vs 40 ff). And, too, the exile is not the only

unishment with which Israel is threatened; and

nally as far as Israel is concerned, by the side of
the statements concerning their dwelling in one
single country (vs 34.38.41.44), it is also said that
they are to be scattered among many nations and
countries (cf vs 23.36.39).

(2) Unity and construction point to Mosaic
origin.—If to this we yet add the unity of the
thought and of the external construction, looking
at the whole matter, we do not see anything that
would lead us to accept a post-Mosaic period for
this book. Then, too, it is from the outset in itself
only probable that Moses gave his people a body
of cultus-laws and did not leave this matter to
chance. We need only think of the great réle
which among the oriental peoples was assigned to
their religious cultus. It is indeed nowhere said,
in so many words, that Moses wrote even the laws
of the PC. But the references made by Dt to the
PC; the fact that Nu 33, which also is credited to
Moses, is characterized by the style of PC; further,
that the author of Dt could write in the style of P
(cf Dt 14 with Lev 11); and, per contra, that the
author of Lev 26 had the mastery of the style
peculiar to Dt (cf Dt 28)—all this makes it probable
that Moses even wrote these things himself; .at any
rate, no reasons can be cited against this view.
Very interesting in connection with the question of
the unity of the Pent are the close connecting links
between Ley 18 24 ff; 20 22ff, and JE. The
question whether Moses in the composition of the
book made use of his own notes or of those of others,
cannot be decided; but this is an irrelevant matter.
What the facts may be in reference to the develop-
ment of other ordinances, which have taken differ-
ent forms in the Books of the Covenant and in PC
or in Dt and in PC, and whether the existence of
these differences in the cases of particular laws
compels us to accept later additions, cannot be dis-
cussed at this place. Yet from the outset it is to
be emphasized that already in the Mosaic period
there could possibly have been reasons for chang-
ing some of these laws; esp. was this so in the Book
of Dt, just before the people entered the promised
land (cf e.g. the laws concerning tithes, Dt 12
6.17 ff; 14 22 ff; 26 12 ff; Lev 27 30ff; Nu 18
20 ff, or the laws concerning contributions for sacri-
fices, Dt 18 3; Lev 7 29 ff).


Then, too, the decision whether this development took
place as eariy as the time of Moses or not is not to be


made agpendont ou the possibility of our being abie to
explain the reasons for such changes. We iack both the
daily practice in these culturai ordinances, as also the
orai instruction which makes these ordinances inteili-
ible. The manner in which in Lev iff the different
nds of sacrifices are introduced sounds as though these
were already known to the peopie and were practised
by them, except in the case of sin and guiit offerings.
s is further in harmony with earlier narratives, which
already report concerning sacrifices. It is possible that
in this way we can also explain a certain relationship
between the Jewish sacrificial rituai and that of Babylon
(cf Zimmern, Beiirdge zur Kenntnis der babyloniachen
Religion). The ordinances in reference to the ciean and
the unciean may aiso have emanated from religious and
ethical ideas which are oider than Moses’ times. In this
matter the thought was decisive, that everything that
was impure, everything that suggested death or decay
or sin or dispieasure to God, should be Heo separated
and apart from the reiigion of Jeh. In ali such cases
it is not the newness of the laws but their adaptability
to the character and spirit of the Jeh-religion that is to
be regarded as the decisive factor.


IV. The Significance.—(1) The law contains
God's will, although in transitory form. In the art.
Ezex1eu under II, 2, (3) we have re-

1. Positive ferred to the fact that Leviticism is an
important and necessary stage in the
development of true religion, and that the entire OT
did not advance heyond this stage and was not in-
tended to go beyond it. The leading prophets
(sa 40 ff, Jer, Ezk), even in their visions of the
future, cling to the temple, sacrifices, holy obla-
tions, sacred seasons and persons. Christianity
was the first to discard this external shell, after it
had ripened the kernel that was concealed in this
shell (cf worship in the spirit and in the truth, Jn
4 20-24). Down to this time, kernel and shell
were inseparably united. This must not be for-
gotten, if we would appreciate the Book of Lev
properly. It is true that this book to a large extent
deals with laws and ordinances, to which we Chris-
tians should not and need not return (cf the voice
from heaven to Peter, Acts 10 15, ‘‘What God hath
cleansed, make not thou common,” and Paul’s
opposition to all work-righteousness that was based
on compliance with these external institutions,
e.g. in Rom, Gal, Col, as also his independent atti-


| tude over against the Jewish law in those cases


where it could not be taken into consideration as
the way to salvation; cf Acts 21 17 ff; Rom 14
1ff; 1 Cor 9 19ff). But these laws and ordi-
nances were something more than merely external
matters, since they contained the highest religious
thoughts. We surely should not forget from the
outset that Lev 19 contains also the word, “Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself” (ver 18), a
command which in vs 33f is even made to cover
the strangers too, and which by Jesus, next to the
absolute love demanded for God, is designated as
the chief commandment of the law (Mt 22 39);
and when in 19 17f the hatred of the brother and
desire for revenge on him are forbidden, we already
seem to breathe the atmosphere of Christianity.
The entire ch 19 is, in addition, as it were, a sermon
on almost all of the commandments of the Deca-
logue, the abiding authority of which the Christian,
after the example and interpretation of Jesus, will
at once recognize. But as the Decalogue itself is
found inclosed in the specifically Jewish national
shell (cf Ex 20 2, exodus out of Egypt; ver 8,
Sabbath commandment; ver 12, promise of the
holy land; ver 17, slaves), so, too, this is the case
in Lev 19 (cf vs 3.6 ff.20-22.23-25.29.30.33 f).
But how little the specifically Levitical ordinances,
in the narrower sense of the term, exclude the spirit-
ual factor, and how closely they are interwoven
with the deepest of thoughts, can be seen from ch
26, according to which all merely external sacrifices,
into which formalism naturally the Levitical legal
code could degenerate, do not protect from punish-
ment, if the heart remains uncircumcised (vs 30 f.41),


Leviticus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1880


Libnah


Above all, there are four leading thoughts which
are emphasized forcibly, particularly by the legal
system of PC. In reality all times, all places, all
property, all persons are sacred to God. But as
it is impossible that this ideal should be realized
in view of the imperfections and guilt of man, it
was decided that certain particular seasons and
places, gifts and persons should be separated from
others, and that in these this sacredness should be
realized as far as possible, and that these repre-
sentatives should by their mere existence contin-
ually remind the people of God’s more compre-
hensive claims, and at the same time arouse and
maintain the consciousness that their entire life
was to be saturated by the thoughts of a holy God
and His demands. From this point of view, none
of the particular laws are worthless; and when they
are once appreciated in this their central signifi-
cance, we can understand that each law has its
share in the eternal authority of the law (cf Mt 5
17f). Paul, too, who absolutely rejects the law
as a way to salvation expresses no doubt that the
law really contains the will of God (Rom 8 31);
and he declares that it was the purpose of the send-
ing of Jesus, that the demands made upon us by the
law should be fulfilled; and in Rom 13 10 he tells
us that love is the fulfilment of the law (cf ver 8);
and according to Rom 7 12, it is certain that the
law is holy and the commafidment is holy, righteous
and good.

(2) The law prepares for the understanding of
Christianity But the ceremonial law, too, con-
tains not only the demands of God’s will. It pre-
pares also for the understanding of the work, the
person and the mission of Jesus. In Ex 25 8; 29
45f; 40 34 ff the indwelling of God in the tent of
meeting is declared, which prophesied the incarna-
tion of God in Christ Jesus (Jn 1 14); and then
the indwelling of God through the Holy Ghost in
the Christian congregation (1 Pet 25; Eph 4 12)
and in the individual (1 Cor 3 16; 6 19; 2 Cor
616; Jn 14 23). Through the sacrificial system
in Lev 1-7, and the ordinances of the Day of
Atonement (Lev 16), we are enabled to understand
the character of sin, of grace and of the forgiveness
of sin (cf AronemENT, Day or, TT). Let us remem-
ber to what extent Jesus and Paul, the Ep. to the
He, and the other NT writings operate with OT
thoughts, particularly with those of Lev (priest-
hood, sacrifices, atonement, Passover, signification
of blood, etc), and Paul correctly says that the
righteousness of God was prophesied, not only by
the prophets, but also by the law (Rom 3 21).

(8) The law as a tutor unto Christ—Finally, the
ceremonial law too has the purpose to protect Israel
from the errors of the heathen, a thought that, is
esp. emphasized in the Law of Holiness (cf Lev 18
3.24 ff; 19 26 ff; 20 2 ff.22 ff; 26 1) and which is
in harmony with the elementary stage of Israel’s
education in the OT, when the people still stood in
need of the “tutor... . unto Christ” (Gal 3
23f; 41). This already leads us over to the
negative side, which Paul particularly emphasizes.

The law is in itself holy, and the commandment
is holy and righteous and good (Rom 7 12), but

it has lost its power because the flesh
2. Negative of man is sinful (cf Rom 8 3); and

thus it happens that the law is the
occasion for sin and leads to a knowledge of sin and
to an increase of sin (cf Rom 3 20; 4 15; 5 20;
7 13); and this shall be brought about according
to the purposes of God in order that in upright
hearts the desire for forgiveness should arise. It is
true that nothing was so well adapted as were the
details of the law, to bring to consciousness in the
untutored mind that in which man yet came short
of the Divine commands, And as far as the removal


of the guilt was concerned, nothing was needed
except the reference to this in order to make
men feel their imperfections (cf He 7-10). God
merely out of grace was for the time being con-
tented with the blood of goats and of calves as a
means for atonement; He was already counting
on the forgiveness in Christ (Rom 3 25). All the
sacrifices in Lev 1-7, e.g., did not make the ritual
of the Day of Atonement superfluous (Lev 16);
and in this case the very man who brought the sac-
rifice was also a sinful creature who must first secure
the forgiveness of God for himself. Only Jesus,
at once the perfect priest and the perfect sacrifice,
has achieved the perfect redemption. It according-
ly remains a fact that the righteousness which avails
before God can be secured only through faith in
Jesus Christ, and not through the deeds of the law
(Rom and Gal).

_ The law with its incomplete atonement and with
its arousing of the consciousness of sin drives man
to Jesus; and this is its negative significance.
Jesus, however, who Himself has fulfilled the de-
mands of the law, gives us through His spirit the
power, that the law with its demands (1, [1]
above) may no longer stand threateningly over
against us, but is now written in our hearts. In
this way the OT law is fulfilled in its transitory
form, and at the same time becomes superfluous,
after its eternal contents have been recognized,
maintained and surpassed.

LitERaTURE.—Comms. by Ryssel, Lange, Keil,
Strack, Baentsch, Bertholet; esp. for the Law of Holi-
ness see Horst, Lev 17-26 and Ezk; Wurster, ZATW,
1884, 112 ff; Baentsch, Das Hetlighkeitsgesetz; Kloster-
mann, Der Pentateuch, 368ff; Delitasch, Zettschrift
fur kirch. Wissenschaft und Leben, 1880, 617 ff; Intros
to the OT by Baudissin, Strack, Kuenen, Kénig, Cornill,
Driver, Sellin; Archaeology, by_Benzinger, Nowack;
History of Israel, by K6hler, Konig, Kittel, Octtli,
Klostermann, Stade, Wellhausen; for kindred laws in
Babylonia, cf Zimmern, Bettrdge zur Kenntnis der babyl.
Religion; against the Graf-Wellhausen hypothesis,
Moller, Are the Critics Right? (ib, ‘‘ Literature’'), and
art. Ezexie. in this Encyclopaedia; Orr, POT; Wiener,
EPC, OP; Hoffmann, Die wichtigsten Instanzen gegen die
Graf-Wellhausensche Hypothese; Kegel, Wilh. Vatke und
die Graf- Wellhausensche Hypothese.


WILHELM M6LLER
LEVY, lev’i. See War.


LEWD, lid, LEWDNESS, lnd’nes (MAT, zim-
mah, ATA, mzimmah, NND2, nabhlath; wovnpéds,
ponérés, padiotpynpa, rhadioirgéma):

There are three Heb words tr? “lewd,’’ “lewd-
ness”: (1) Zimmah, meaning a ‘‘plan,” a ‘‘purpose,”’

so tr’ several times and then shading
an the off into “evil plan’’; tr also “heinous


crime,” “wicked purpose or device.”
It is the most frequent word for
“lewdness’’: Eizk 16 27, “lewd way’; found in Jgs
20 6; Ezk 16 27.43.58; 22 9.11; 23 21.27.29.35.44.
48.49; 2413; Hos 69. (2) M*zimmah means a
“plan,” generally “{evil] machination’; used only
in Jer 11 15, “lewdness.” (3) Nabhlaih, meaning
“disgrace” in reference to females. Found only in
Hos 2 10, ARVm ‘‘shame.”
The word tr? “lewd,’”’ “lewdness’” in AV occurs
only twice in the NT, and in each instance is more
correctly tr? in RV by another word:
2. Inthe (1) Ponéros, found in Acts 17 5, tr¢in
NT ARV “vile.” The Gr word elsewhere
is tr? “bad,” “evil,” “grievous,” “‘harm-
ful,” “malicious,”’ “wicked.” AV “lewd” gives the
wrong impression. The idea of unchastity is not
pret in the text or context. (2) Rhadiourgéma
ikewise occurs only once, viz. Acts 18 14, and is
correctly tr? in RV and ARV “wicked villany.” The
thought of impurity or lewdness is foreign to the
meaning in this connection. ‘;
WittraM Epwarp RaFFety


1881


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Leviticus
Libnah


LIBANUS, lib’a-nus. See LeBanon.


LIBATION, li-ba’shun. See Sacrirtce.


LIBERAL, lib’ér-al, LIBERALITY, lib-ér-al’i-ti,
LIBERALLY, lib’ér-al-i: The different forms of the
word all refer to one who is generous, bountiful,
willing and ready to give and to help. Both the
Heb words of the OT and the Gr words of the NT
tr4 into the Eng. word “liberal” have a deeper and
nobler meaning than is generally conveyed by the
Eng. word. {in Prov 11 25, the liberal” soul
(nephesh berakhah) means a soul that carries a bless-
ing. InIsa 32 5, ARV has “bountiful” where AV
has “‘liberal,’”’ and in ver 8 “noble” takes the place
of “liberal’’ (nadhibh). The principal Gr words
are dm\érys, haplétés, lit. “simplicity,” ‘sincerity,’
and ydps, chdris, ‘grace,’ “favor.’ In 1 Cor
16 3, “bounty” substitutes “liberality.” It is well
to bear in mind that a Bib. liberality can spring only
out of a noble soul, and is Godlike in its genesis and
spirit. G. H. Grrserpine


LIBERTINES, lib’ér-tinz, li-bdr’ting (AvBeprivor,
Libertinoi): These were among Stephen’s oppo-
nents: ‘There arose certain of them that were of
the synagogue called [the synagogue] of the Liber-
tines, and of the Cyrenians, and of the Alexandrians,
and of them of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with
Stephen” (Acts 6 9).

How many synagogues are denoted? The answer may


aid in the interpretation of ‘‘Libertines’': (1) The words
may be read as denoting one synagogue


4. “Syna- (Calvin). However (a) the number of
yu. worshippers would be extremely large, (b)
gogue of the bond of union is not obvious, (c) rab-
the Liber- _binic tradition speaks of 480 synagogues
tines” in Jerus. (2) The double één (‘‘of them")


seems to denote two parties, the one con-
sisting ‘‘of them that were of the syna-
gogue called [the synagogue] of Libertines and Cy-
renians and Alexandrians,” the other ‘‘of them_of
Cilicia and Asia’? (Winer, Wendt, Holtzmann). But
the second tén is dependent on synagogue. ‘'As Cy-
renians and Alexandrians both belong to towns... .
@ change of designation wonld be necessary when the
Jews of whole provinces came to be mentioned: this
being the case, the article could not but he repeated,
without any reference to the tén before’’ (Alford).
(3) There were three synagogues: (a) that of the Liber-
tines, (b) that of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians and
(c) that ‘‘of them of Cilicia and Asia" (Alford).. There
is no grammatical reason for this division, but itis based
on an interpretation of ‘Libertines.’ There were
‘‘Libertines,”’ Africans and Asiatics. (4) Each party
had a separate synagogue (Schiirer, ausrath). The
number of worshippers, their different origin and con-
nections, and the number of synagogues in Jerus give
weight to this view.


(1) They are ‘‘freedmen,”’ liberated slaves or their
descendants. Against this it is held that the Gr
equivalent (apelettheroi) would have

2. Interpre- been used in this case. However, the


tation of Rom designation would be common all
“Liber- over the empire. In what sense were
tines” they “freedmen’’? Various answers are


given: (a) they were freedmen from
Jewish servitude (Lightfoot); (b) they were Italian
freedmen who had become proselytes; (c) they were
“the freedmen of the Romans’’ (Chrysostom), the
descendants of Jewish freedmen at Rome who had
been expelled by Tiberius. In 63 BC Pompey had
taken’ prisoners of war to Rome. These, being
liberated by those who had acquired them as slaves,
formed a colony on the banks of the Tiber (Philo,
Legat. ad Caium). Tacitus relates that the senate
decreed (19 AD) that a number of Jewish Liber-
tines ‘should be transported to Sardinia, and that
the rest should leave Italy, unless they renounced,
before a certain day, their profane customs (Ann.
ii, 85; see also Jos, Ant, XVIII, iii, 5). Many
would naturally seek refuge in Jerus and build there
a synagogue.


(2) They are an African community, ‘here
were two synagogues, one of which was Asiatic.
In the other were men from two African towns
(Cyrene and Alexandria), therefore the Libertines
must have been African also, all forming an African
synagogue, Various explanations are given: (a)
They were inhabitants of Libertum, a town in
Africa proper: an ‘‘Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae
Libertinensis” sat in the Synod of Carthage (411
AD). (b) Some emend the text; Wetstein and
Blass, following the Armenian VS, conjecture
Lnbustinén, “of the Libystines.” Schulthess reads
for “Libertines and Cyrenians” (Libertinén kat
Kiirénatén) ‘Libyans, those about Cyrene’ (Lib-
don tin katd Kurénén) (cf Acts 2 10).

These emendations are conjectural; the MSS
read “Libertines.” It seems, therefore, that 2, (1)
(c) above is the correct interpretation.

: 8. F. HuntTer

LIBERTY, lib’ér-ti (M197, drér, DT, rahabh;
KXevdepla, eleutherta): The opposite of servitude
or bondage, hence applicable to captives or slaves
set free from oppression (thus d‘ror, Lev 26 10;
Isa 61 1, etc). Morally, the power which enslaves
is sin (Jn 8 34), and liberty consists, not simply in
external freedom, or in possession of the formal power
of choice, but in deliverance from the darkening of
the mind, the tyranny of sinful lusts and the enthral-
ment of the will, induced by a morally corrupt state.
In a positive respect, it consists in the possession
of holiness, with the will and ability to do what is
right and good. Such liberty is possible only in a
renewed condition of soul, and cannot exist apart
from godliness. Even under the OT’ godly men
could boast of a measure of such liberty (Ps 119
45, rahabh, ‘“‘room,”’ ‘‘breadth’’), but it is the gospel
of Christ. which bestows it in its fulness, in giving
a full and clear knowledge of God, discovering the
way of forgiveness, supplying the highest motives
to holiness and giving the Holy Spirit to destroy
the power of sin and to quicken to righteousness.
In implanting a new life in the soul, the gospel lifts
the believer out of the sphere of external law, and
gives him a sense of freedom in his new filial relation
to God. Hence the NT expressions about ‘‘the
glorious liberty’’ of God’s children (Rom 8 21 AV;
ef Gal 2 4; 6 13, etc), about liberty as resulting
from the possession of the Spirit (2 Cor 3 17),
about “‘the perfect law of liberty” (Jas 1 25). The
instrument through which this liberty is imparted
is ‘the truth” (Jn 8 82). Christians are earnestly
warned not to presume upon, or abuse their liberty
in Christ (Gal 6 13; 1 Pet 2.16). Jamus Orr


LIBNAH, lib’na (a= , libhnah, ‘‘whiteness,”
“transparency,” “pavement” [cf Ex 24 10 where
min? , libhnath, is tr¢ “paved work’’ or a ‘‘compact
foundation”]; AeBvé, Lebnd):

(1) A desert camp of the Israelites between
Rimmon-perez and Rissah (Nu 33 20.21). Prob-
ably the same as Laban (Dt 1 1). See WanpvEr-
ings of IsraEL.

(2) A town in the Shephelah of Judah (Josh 15
42). “Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all
Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against
Libnah: and Jeh delivered it also, and the king
thereof, into the hand of Israel... .. And Joshua
passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto
Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought
against it’? (Josh 10 29-31; 1215). It was one
of the cities given to the ‘‘children of Aaron’”’ (Josh
21 18; 1 Ch 6 57). In the reign of Joram, Lib-
nah joined the Edomites in a revolt against the king
of Judah (2 K 8 22; 2 Ch 21 10). In the reign
of Hezekiah, Libnah was besieged by Sennacherib
(2 K 19 8; Isa 37 8). The wife of King Josiah


Libni
Libraries


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1882


was “Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Lib-
nah,” she was the mother of Jehoahaz and Zede-
kiah (2 K 23 31; 24 18; Jer 52 1).

The site of this important stronghold remains
unknown. In the Onom it is described, under the
name Lobana or Lobna, as near Eleutheropolis
(Beit Jebrin). All the indications point to a site
in the S.W. of the Shephelah, not very far from
Laehish. The Palestine Exploration Fund sur-
veyors suggested (PEF, III, 259) the commanding
site ‘Ardk el Menshtyeh, or rather the white chalky
mound 250 ft. high to the N. of this village, and
Stanley proposed Tell es Safi. (Both these identi-
fications are due to the interpretation of Libnah as
meaning ‘“‘whiteness.’’) In the PEFS (1897, Sh XX)
Conder suggests a ruin called el Bendéwy, 10 miles
8.E. of Lachish. E. W. G. MastermMan


LIBNI, lib’nt (772, libhni):

(1) Son of Gershon (Ex 6 17; Nu 3 18; 1 Ch
6 17.20). Families who traced their descent from
Libni are called Libnites (Nu 3 21; 26 58).

(2) A son of Merari (1 Ch 6 29). See Lanan.


LIBNITES, lib’nits (750, ha-libhni).
Lipn1.


See


LIBRARIES, li’bra-riz, li’brér-iz:
. The Bible a Library
Mythological and_Apocryphal Librarles
. Libraries for the Dead
Memory Libraries
Prehistoric and Primitive Libraries
Mesopotamian Period
. Patriarchal Period
Egyptian Period
. The Exodus
. Palestine at the Conquest
. Period of the Judges
. Saul to the Maccabees
13. NT Times
14. Bookcases and Buildings
LiITeERaTuRE


A library is a book or books kept for use, not for
sale. A one-book library is just as much a library
as a one-cell animal is animal. The earliest libra-
ries, like the earliest plants and animals, were very
simple, consisting of a few books or perhaps only a
single tablet or manuscript. An arehive is a library
of official documents not in active use; a registry,
a library of going documents.

The Bible is itself a library. During the Middle
Ages it was eommonly ealled, first, “The Divine

Library,” and then, ‘The Library”


ered
NE SOHN DOR WN


1. The (Bibliotheca), in the same exclusive
Bible a sense as it isnow known as ‘‘The Book”
Library (Biblia as Lat sing.). Even the word


“Bible” itself is historically “Library”
rather than “Book” (for it was originally the neuter
pl. Biblia, “The Books’’; cf Dnl 9 2). The Bible
is also a library in that it is an organized colleetion
of books rather than a single work.

This fact that the Bible is itself a library is in-
ereasingly mentioned of late, esp. in OT studies
(Kent, Narratives of the Beginnings of Heb History, 1,
“The Old Testament as a Library’; Delitasch,
Babel and Bible, 4, ‘the Old Testament, that small
library of books of the most multifarious kind”).
Its profound bearing on the theory of the composi-
tion and inspiration of the Bible (ef Boor) has given
the fact new significanee and makes an understand-
ing of the nature of a library one of the best tools
for the interpretation of the Bible in the face of
modern problems. While it is not possible to elabo-
rate this within these limits, it may be said briefly
that the logical end of the application of the doctrine
of evolution to books and libraries is that the Bible
is, like man, the result of natural selection, and is as
unique among books as man among the animals.
And, whatever may be true of men, in the case of


books the formation of a book-library by natural
selection tends toward the elimination of error.
The more numerous the individuals and the longer
the period, the greater the reduction of error, so
that the logical inference as to the Bible is that on
purely natural grounds it may be, or is, the nearest
approximation to inerrancy among books, because
of its history as a library. “This does not quite lead
to the position that the Bible is as unique among
books as Jesus Christ among men, but under the
doctrine of a creative Providence, it does imply
what may be ealled real superhuman authorship
and authority.


Somewhat apart from historical libraries, but closely
connected with Bible study, are the alleged superhuman
libraries, libraries of, or written by, the
9. Myth gods, libraries for the dead and apocryphal
Ria ytho- libraries. The Vedas are said to have ex-
logical and jisted as a collection even before the Creator
Apocryphal created Himself (Manu 121). Allreligions
Librari have their book-gods—Thoth and Seshait,
ibrarles Apollo, Hermes, Minerva, Ida, Bridget,
Soma, Brahma, Odin, Kvasir, Ygdrasil
and many others. To the ancient Babylonians the
whole firmament was a library of ‘celestial tablets.’’
The mythological ideas often have important bearing on
Bib. doctrines, e.g. the Creation, the Word, the Tree of
Life, the Book of Life, the Holy Spirit. Apocryphal
libraries include the library which Jeh is alleged to have
formed on the 7th day of creation on a mount E, of the
Garden of Eden, and other libraries ascribed to Enoch,
Noah and Seth. See for this the OT pseudepigrapha,
Another class of collections of real books, written or
gathered for mythological purposes, is what_ may be
called libraries for the dead. It is well


3. Libra- known that in most countries of antiquity,
ries for at one time or another, and among primi-

1e tive people like the American Indians, in
the Dead modern times, it has been the custom to


bury with the dead the things which
friends thought would be useful in the Elysian fields or
happy hunting grounds, or on the way thither—the
bow and horse of the warrior, the ushebti servants,
children's playthings, the models of food objects, and
so on. This same motive led also to the burying of
books with the dead. For long periods in the histor
of Egypt every Egyptian of any position was buried wit!
one or more books. These books were not his chance
possessions, buried with' him as, in some burials, all
& man's personal belongings are, but books selected for
their usefulness to him after death. For the most part
these were of the nature of guidebooks to the way to
the heavenly world, magic formulae for the opening of
doors, instruction as to the right method of progress
toward, or introduction into, paradise, etc. These books
were afterward gathered together aud form what is now
known as ‘‘the Book of the Dead’' and other such books.
In modern times the actor or professional story-teller
often has in memory a collection of remembered books
which is in effect a library. Among primi-
4. Memory tive peoples the medicine-man was lit. a
= i library of tribal traditions. The priests
Libraries of India and the minstrels of Greece or of
the Middle Ages often had a large reper-


tory. By the prevailing theory of the origin of the


books of the OT such memory traditions, transmitted
orally, were the chief source of the Hex, but in view of
what is now known of the library situation of the time,
this must be doubted.
In general terms it may be said that when man began
not only to make but to keep records, libraries began.
Even a memorial stone contains the germ
5. Pre~ of a mnemonic library. The primitive
* ze medicine-man's collection of notched
historic and message sticks, tallies, quipus or wampum
Primitive belts is a great advance in complexity on
Libraries these, and the simplest collection of pic-
ture narratives of Hottentot or American
eae: Indian, an advance on this. <A com-
bination of pictures with signs is still another forward
step, and this step is already to be found in the Pyre-
nean caves of the Stone Age (see Writina). Most of
these earliest libraries were kept at the sanctuary. The
gathering together of books in libraries had its origin
in the ideas of (1) preservation, (2) gathering together
like books in order to join together their contents, and
(3) circulation—the great modern expansion of the idea.
The owner of flocks and herds gathers together his lists
of cattle or other possessions, his receipts for purchases
and record of sales, whether these are recorded on the
walls of his cave or on wooden tallies or on knotted cords
or on clay tablets gathered in little jars and burled under
the floor of his house. Large owners and sovereigns and
the temples of Egypt and Assyria gathered large stores
of these archival records aud with them records of trib-
ute, oracles, etc. As early as 2700 BO we have the
account of King Dedkere Isesl, his archlval library and


1883


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Libni
Libraries


his librarian Senezemib. The annals of Thutmose III
were preserved in the palace library as well as cut in
selections on the walls of the temple. A few years later,
and we know that the archival records were kept in a
special room in the palace at Amarna—and many of the
records themselves were found there. All this was before
the year 1300.


Bible history through the 10th chapter of Gen
covers the whole civilized world, but its main line


up to about 2000 BC is almost wholly
6. Mesopo- Mesopotamian. Up to the time of


tamian Abram’s migration from Haran, the
Period history of Bib, libraries and the his-

tory of Bab and Sumerian libraries
areone. Most of the cities mentioned in this period


are now known to have had collections of books in
those days. At the time when Abram left Haran
there were hundreds of collections of written docu-
ments in scores of different geographical localities
and containing millions of tablets.

From Abram’s emigration out of Haran to Jacob’s
emigration to Egypt was, on the face of Bib. data,

mainly a time of wandering in Pal, but
7. Patriar- this was not wholly nomad nor wholly
chal Period Palestinian. Whether there were li-

braries in Pal at this time or not, the
Patriarchs were all in close personal contact with
the library lands of Babylonia and Egypt. Abram
himself was familiar with both Mesopotamia and
Egypt. His son Ishmael married an Egyptian, his
son Isaac a Mesopotamian. His grandson Jacob
married two wives from between the rivers, and had
himself 20 years’ residence in the region. While it
does not appear that Isaac lived at any time either
in Syria or in Egypt, during most of his life all the
members of his nearest family, father, mother, wife,
sons’ wives, had had from one to three score years’
life in the mother-country. Whether there were
public records in this region at this time is another
matter, but it would seem that the whole region
during the whole period was under the influence of
the Bab civilization. It was freely traversed by
trading caravans, and the Hittite and Mesopo-
tamian records extend at least a little back into
this period.

The Egyp period of Bible history begins with the
immigration of Jacob and his sons, but fringes back

to the visit of Abram (Gen 12 10-20),
8. Egyptian if not to Mizraim of Gen 10 6. On
Period the other hand, it ends properly with

the exodus, but fringes forward
through frequent points of contact to the flight of
the Virgin and Pentecost. Whether the sojourn
was 430 or 215 years, or less, it was a long residence
at a time when libraries were very flourishing in
Egypt. Already at the time of Abram’s visit, col-
lections of books, not only of official accounts, but
of religions texts, medical texts, annals, and the like,
had been common in Egypt for nearly 1,000 years,
and had perhaps existed for 1,000 years or more
before that. .

Under the older of the modern datings of the
exodus, the period of the sojourn included the
times of Thothmes III (Thutmose), and in this reign
there are peculiarly interesting records, not only of
the existence of temple and palace libraries, but of
the nature of their contents. The official recorder of
Thothmes III, accompanying him on his campaign
in Syria and Pal, set down each day the events of
the day, while he or others also made lists of tribute,
spoils, commissary matters, etc. These daily rec-
ords were deposited in the palace library, as it
appears, but a narrative compiled from these and
written on a leather roll was deposited in the temple
library, and from this rol! in turn an abstract was
engraved on the walls of the temple, where it remains
to this day. This probably gives the library sit-
uation of the time in a nutshell: (1) the simple


saving of utilitarian documents, oftcn on papyrus
or wood tablets, (2) the gathering of books written
for information on more durable material, (3) pre-
serving choice books for posterity by a local series
of inscriptions.

The rolls must have been kept in chests or in
small boxes, like the box containing the medical
papyri of King Neferikere some 1,300 years before,
or the “many boxes’ at Edfu Jong after. Many
pictures of these book-chests or bookcases are found
in the monuments (Birt, Buchrolle, 12, 15 ff).

Again, the palace library of King Akhnaton (c¢
1360 BC) at Amarna, which contained collections
of the royal foreign correspondence on clay tablets,
has been excavated. Its bricks bear the inscription
“Place of the records of the palace of the king,” and
some hundreds of tablets from this spot have been
recovered.

At the time of the exodus there were thus prob-
ably libraries in all palaces, temples and record
offices, although the temple libraries were by no
means confined to sacred writings or the palace to
secular. There were also at least archives, or regis-
ters, in the royal treasury and in all public depart-
ments. Schools for scribes were, it would secm,
held in the palace, temple and treasury libraries.
There were, therefore, apparently, at this time
millions of documents or books, in hundreds of
organized collections, which could be called archives
or libraries.

Supposing any exodns at all, Moses and Aaron
and all the Heb ‘officers’ (“‘scribes” or writers)
under the Egyp taskmasters (Ex 5
6.10.14.15.19), brought up as they
were in the scribal schools, were of
course quite familiar with the Egyp
ways of keeping their books. It is not surprising,
therefore, to find the first and chief provision which
Moses made for the Tabernacle was a book-chest
for the preservation of the sacred directions given
by Jeh. It makes little difference whether the
account is taken in its final form, divided horizon-
tally into Ex, Lev, Nu, Dt and Josh, or divided per-
pendicularly into J, E, D, P, the fact of the ark and
enough of its details are given even in the very old-
est sources to show that the authors understood
the ark to be a glorified book-chest in or near which
were kept written documents: the tables of stone,
the inscribed rod, all the testimony given from the
mercy-seat which formed its lid, and perhaps the
Book of Dt. The ark is in fact much the size and
shape of a portable bookcase, and the LXX ir
renders the word by the ordinary technical Gr word
for the book-chest (kibétés; cf Birt, op. cit., 248-49).
It appears also to have been the later Heb word for
book-chest (cf Jew Ene, Il, 107 ff). At the exodus,
whenever that may have been, Moses is alleged to
have made the ark the official library, and in it
apparently he is thought to have kept the oracles
as uttered from time to time and the record of his
travels from day to day (as well as the tables of
stone), precisely as the scribe of Thutmose recorded
his Syrian campaigns from day to day. This
record (if it was a record) was in all likelihood on a
leather roll, since this became the traditional form
of books among the Hebrews, and this too was like
the annals of Thutmose. When the tribes sepa-
rated to N. and §., the books may have been either
separated or copied, and doubtless they suffered
much wear and tear from the harsh times until we
find Dt turning up again in a temple library (2 K
22 8 ff; 2 Ch 34 14 ff).

The evidence from Egyp, Bab, Mitannian,
Amorite and Hittite documents shows the exist-
ence of official chanceries and by implication of
archives throughout the whole region of Syria and
Pal at the time when the ‘Hebrew’ invasion


9. The
Exodus


Libraries


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1884


began (Winckler, Tell el-Amarna Tablets). The Am
Tab and the tablets from the Hittite archives at
Boghaz-keui (Winckler, DOG Mitt.,


10. Pales- 1907, no. 35) include actual letters from
tine at the the princes, elders and governors of
Conquest dozens of places, scattered all over this


region from Egypt to the land of the

Hittites and the Mitannians. These places include

among others Jerus, Damascus, Tyre, Sidon, Acco,
Ashkelon, Gaza, Lachish, Keilah and Aijalon.

Remains of two of such archival libraries have

been dug up—one at Lachish and one at Taanach

ne Megiddo, hoth dating back to the 14th cent.


Whether there were temple libraries as well does
not appear so clearly from external evidence but
may probably be inferred from the names, Debir
and (perhaps) Neho, as well as from the well-
known fact that each of the many city-lands must
have had its center of worship. When it was
thought that writing did not exist to any extent
in Pal before the time of David, it was the fashion
to account for the name of the city of ‘“Kirjath
Sepher,” the “City of Books,” by curious tours de
force of conjectural emendation (Sephdr for Sepher,
Tabor for Debir), but with the recent progress of
excavation the possibility of the name has been fully
established and the insight of Sayce probably
justified.

That the situation at the Conquest continued
also during the period of the Judges appears from
sundry considerations: (1) The fact
that all the surrounding nations, Moab-
ites, Edomites, Amorites, Hittites,
Mitannians, etc, were literate nations
with public archives. (2) The high
state of organization under David requires an evo-
lutionary background. (8) Even the extreme (and
quite untenable) theory that the Hebrews were
illiterate wild Arab nomads and remained so for a
long time would actually demonstrate the matter,
for, as has heen pertinently observed (Sellin, Hindi,
7), many atleast of the Can. cities were not destroyed
or even occupied for a long time, but were surrounded
hy the Hebrews, and finally occupied and assimi-
lated. It follows, therefore, that the archival
system continued, and, under this theory, for a long
time, until the Hebrews absorhed. the culture of
their neighbors—and, hy inference, libraries with
the rest. (4) Taking the evidence of the documents
as they stand, the matter is simple enough; various
works were kept in or near the ark. Joshua added
to these at least the report of a boundary commis-
sion (Josh 18 9.10) which was brought to the
sanctuary, and Samuel “laid up” the book that he
wrote ‘before Jeh,’”’ ic. at the ark. Moreover,
the Books of Jasher, the Wars of Jeh, etc, imply a
lit. which in turn implies libraries. Whenever or
however composed, there is no good reason to dis-
trust their historical existence. (5) Even on the
extreme critical hypothesis, ‘‘Most of the stories
found in the first 8 books of the OT originated
before or during the age of song and story (c 1250-
1050)” (Kent, Beginnings, 17). (6) To this may
also be added, with all reservations, the mysterious
metal ephod which appears only in this period.
The ephod seems to have been either (a) a case
(BDB, 66) or (6) an instrument for consulting an
oracle (BDB, 65). The linen ephod had a pouch
for the Urim and Thummim. The metal ephod
seems to be distinguished from the image and may
have contained the written oracular instructions
(torah?) as well as the oracular instruments. (7)
The Kenite scribes of Jabez (1 Ch 2 55); thesimple
fact that a chance captive from Succoth could write
out a list of names and some one at least of the
rudest 300 survivals of Gideon’s 32,000 primitive


11. Period
of the
Judges


warriors in those bloody frontier times could read
it, the reference to the staff of the muster-master,
marshal or scrihe, and the ‘“‘governors’’ (inscribers),
in Deborah’s Song, point in the same direction.

While, therefore, the times were doubtless wild,
the political unity very slight, and the unity of
worship even less, there.is evidence that there were
both political and religious libraries throughout
the period. :

Beginning with the monarchy, the library sit-
uation among the Israelites appears more and more

clearly to correspond with that of the
12. Saul to surrounding nations. The first act
the Mac- recorded after the choice and proc-
cabees lamation of Saul as king was the

writing of a constitution by Samuel
and the depositing of this in the sacred archives
(1 § 10 25). This document (LXX biblion) was
perhaps one of the documents (“words’’) of Samuel
whose words (i Ch 29 29, history, chronicles,
acts, book, etc) seem to have been possibly a regis-
ter kept by him, perhaps from the time that he suc-
ceeded Eli, as later the high-priestly register (day-
book) of Johannes Maccabaeus was certainly kept
ics beginning of his high-priesthood (1 Mace

Whether these “words” of Samuel were equiva-
lent to the technical register or ‘‘book of the words
of days” or not, such registers were undoubtedly
kept from the time of David on, and there is nothing
so illuminating as to the actual library conditions
of the times as the so-called chronicles, histories
or acts—the registers, journals or archives of the
time. The roll-register seems to be called in full
“the book of the words of days,” or with explanatory
fulness ‘‘book of the records of the words of days,”
but this appears to be an evolution from ‘words of
days” or even ‘‘words,” and these forms as well as
the abbreviations ‘book of days” and ‘“‘book’’ are
used of the same technical work, which is the en-
grossing in chronological book-form of any series
of individual documents—all the documents of a
record-office, general or local. The name is used
also of histories written up on the basis of these
register-hooks (the Books of Ch are in Heb, ‘‘words
of days’) but not themselves records. These
charter-books, of course, so far as they go, mirror
the contents of the archives which they transcribe,
and the key to the public-library history of the
period, both sacred and royal, as regards contents,
at least, is to be found in them, while in turn the
key to the understanding of this technical book-
form itself lies in the understanding of the “word”
as a technical book-form.

The “word’’ in Heb is used of books, speeches,
sayings, oracles, edicts, reports, formal opinions,
agreements, indictments, judicial decisions, stories,
records, regulations, sections of a discourse, lines
of poetry, whole poems, etc, as well as acts, deeds,
“matters,” ‘affairs,’ events and words in the nar-
rowest sense. Jt is thus very exactly, as well as
lit., tr? in the LXX by légos, which as a technical
book-term (Birt, Antikes Buchwesen, 28, 29) means
any distinct. composition, long or short, whether
a law, an epigram, or a whole complex work. The
best Eng. equivalent for this ‘work-complete-in-
itself,’’ in the ease of public records, is ““document,”’
and in the case of literary matters, it is “work or
writing.” The ‘words’ of Samuel or David thus
are his ‘‘acts” or “deeds” in the sense, not of doings,
but of the individual documentary records of those
doings quite in the modern sense of the “acts and
proceedings” of a convention, or the “deeds” to
property.

In the pl., dibhré and légoi or légia alike mean a
collection of documents, works or writings, i.e. “a
library.” Sometimes this is used in the sense of


1885


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Libraries


archives or library, at other times as a book con-
taining these collected works.

‘These collected documents in register-form con-
stituted apparently a continuous series until the
time when the Book of Ch was written and were
extant at that time: the “words” of Samuel,
“chronicles” and “last words’ of David (1 Ch 23
27; 27 24), the “book of the words [acts] of Solo-
mon’’ (1 K 11 41), the book of the words of days
of the kings of Judah, and the book of the words of
days of the kings of Israel—the kingdoms after
division each having naturally its own records.

The general situation during the period as to
archival matters is pretty well summarized by
Moore in the EB, From the time of Solomon, and
more doubtfully from the time of David, he recog-
nizes that “records were doubtless kept in the
palace,”’ and that “the temples also doubtless had


Plan of Pergamon.
(Showing typical relation of temple, colonnades, and library.)


their records,” while there may have been also local
records of cities and towns. These records con-
tained probably chief events, treaties, edicts, etc—
probably brief annals “never wrought into narrative
memoirs.” The temple records contained annals
of succession, repairs, changes, ete (ZB, II, 2021-
28). The records were, however, probably not
brief, but contained treaties, ete, verbatim in full.
To this should moreover be added the significant
fact that these archives contained not only busi-
ness records but also various works of a more or
less literary character. Those mentioned include
letters, prophecies, prayers, and even poems and
Wisdom literature. The “words” of the kings of
Israel contained prayers, visions and other matter
not usually counted archival. The “acts’? (words)
of Solomon also contained literary or quasi-literary
material. According to Jos the archives of Tyre con-
tained similar material and this was also true of the
‘Amarna archives (c 1380 BC) and those at _Boghaz-
keut, as well as of the palace archives of Nineveh
and the great temple archives of Nippur and Abu
Habeh (Sippara). So, too, in Egypt the palace
archives of King Neferikere contained medical
works and those of Rameses III, at least, magical
works, while the temple archives in the time of
Thutmose III (Breasted, Ancient Records) con-
tained military annals, and those of Denderah cer-
tainly many works of_a non-registerial character.
The temples of early Greece also contained literary
works and secular laws as well as temple archives


proper.


In short, the palace collections of Israel were no
exception to the general rule of antiquity in con-
taining, besides palace archives proper, more or less
of religious archives and literary works, while the
temple collections contained more or less political
records and literary works.

This record system in Israel and Judah, as appears
from the OT itself, was the system of Persia in OT
times. It was the system of the Jews in Maccabean
times, of Egypt during this whole period and for
centuries before and after, and of Northern Syria
likewise at about this time (Zakar-Baal, of Gebal,
e¢ 1113 BC). The books of Ex, Lev, Nu and Dt,
whenever written, reveal the same system, Ex to
Nu being in the form of a register, and Dt repre-
sented as an abstract prepared for engraving on
stone, a use which Joshua is said to have made of it.
We have, therefore, the same system existing before
and after and on all sides geographically.

All this neighboring practice points to a sys-
tem of (1) archival collections, (2) contemporary
book registers, (3) contemporary publication by
inscription, and, in the light of these, the OT method,
from the time of David at least, becomes clear,
certainly as to archival collections and registers and
hardly fess so as to the setting-up of inscriptions in
permanent material. Even if D is not earlier than
621 BC, it assumes public inscription long before
that time, quite comparable in extent to the inscrip-
tions of Thutmose I1I or King Mesha of Moab,
and, although few long inscriptions have been re-
covered thus far, there is at least the Siloam _in-
scription (cf also Isa 30 8; Job 19 23.24; Isa 8 1;
Jer 17 1; also the Decalogue). Each one of these
three elements (even the collection of inscriptions
in the temple) was, it must be remembered, called
in antiquity a “library.”

The reference to ‘‘the books” in Dul (9 2) may pos-
sibly point to or foreshadow the synagogue library.

Little weight is generally and properly given to
the statement of 2 Macc 2 13, that Nehemiah
founded a library and gathered into it the writings
“about the kings, the prophets and David, and the
letters of the kings concerning votive offerings,”
but it is, as a matter of fact, evident that he, as well
as Judas Maccabaeus, who 1s linked with him in the
statement, must have done just this.

From the time of the LXX tr, the idea of the
library (bibliothék2) and even the public library
(“books of the people,” i.e. public records) was
familiar enough, the LXX itself also, according to
Jos, linking the temple library of Jerus with the
Alexandrian library through the furnishing of books
by the former to the latter for copying.

With the Rom conquest and the rise of the Idu-
maeans, naturally the methods developed in accord-

ance with Rom practice. It appears
13. NT from the frequent references of Jos
Times that the public records were extensive
and contained genealogical records
as well as official letters, decrees, etc. The triple
method of record continues. It appears, further
(Blau, 96; Krauss, II, 179), that there were libraries
and even lending libraries in the schools and syna-
gogues, not of Pal only, but wherever Jews were
settled. Jos and Chrysostom with the Mish econ-
firm the already very clear inference from St. Luke’s
account of Our Lord’s teaching in the synagogue
that at this time, and probably from the beginning of
the synagogue, the books, the manner of their keep-
ing and the ritual of their using were already essen-
tially asin the modern synagogue. The first preach-
ing-places of the Christians were the synagogues,
and when churches succeeded these, the church
library naturally followed, but whether in Bible
times or not is a matter of conjecture; they appear
at least in very early churches.


Libraries
Lie, Lying


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1886


Whether the rich secular lit. to which Jos had
access was in public or private libraries does not
appear directly. It is well known that it was as
much a part of Rom public policy in Herod’s time
to found public libraries in the provinces as it was
to restore temples. Twenty-four such provincial
libraries, chiefly temple libraries, are known.

The Rom practice of the time still mixed literary
with the archival material, and it is likely therefore
that the public records of the Jewish temple had
in them both Gr and Lat secular books in con-
siderable quantity, as well as the Gr Apoc and a
large amount of Aram. or late Heb lit. of Talmudic
character.

As to the receptacles and places in which the
books were kept, we have reference even in the Heb

period to most of the main forms used


14. Book- among the nations: the wooden box,
cases and the clay box or pot, the pouch, and on
Buildings the other hand, once, the “house of


books” so familiar in Egyp use and
apparently referring to an individual chamber or
semi-detached building of temple
or palace. Most significant, how-
ever, is the statement that the
books were kept in the palace
and temple treasuries or store-
houses.

The sacred ark (drén), what-
ever it may have originally con-
tained, was looked on when D
was written as a sacred wooden
book-chest, and the ark in which
the teaching priests carried the law
about for public reading was in
fact likewise a chest.

Such chests were common among
the Jews later, some with lids and
some with side-opening (Jew Enc,
II, 107-8; Blau, 178). It is tempting to find in
D, where the book is to be put “by [AV ‘in”]
the side of the ark’’ (Dt 31 26), a chest having both
lid and openings in the side, but more likely per-
haps D means a separate chest, like the coffer or
pouch with the golden mice, which was also put “by
the side” (miccadh) of the ark (1 S 6 8).

In the NT the “cloak” which Paul left behind at
Troas (2 Tim 4 13) was probably (Wattenb., 614;
see also Birt and Gardthausen), if not a wooden
“capsa,’’ at least some sort of bookcase or cover.

The earthen vessel in which Jeremiah (82 14)
puts the two “books” (tr? “deeds”), one sealed and
one unsealed, was one of the commonest bookcases
of the ancient world. This information has lately
been widely reinforced and associated with Bib.
history by the discovery of the Elephantine papyri,
which were, for the most part, kept in such clay
jars (Meyer, Papyrusfund, 15). The word Penta-
teuch perhaps harks back to a five-roll jar, but more
likely to a basket or wooden box with five compart-
ments (Blau, 65; Birt, Buchrolle, 21, 22). It was
the collective label of a five-roll case, whether of
earthenware, wood or basket work.

The pouch or bag bookcase has perhaps its repre-
sentative in the phylactery (Mt 23 5), which was
a sort of miniature armarium in that each of the
four little rolls of its four compartments was tech-
nically a “book” (sépher), This name is commonly
explained as an amulet guarding against evil spirits,
but the term actually occurs in the papyri (Biblio-
phylax) of the preservation of books.

The “house of books” (Ezr 6 1m) or “place of
books” is a very close parallel to bibliotheké, by
which (in the pl.) it is tr4in the LXX. The phrase
was a common term in Egypt for library, perhaps
also sometimes for scriptorium or even registry,
and it points to a chamber or semi-detached room or


Old Egyptian
Bookcase,


building where the book-chests, jars, etc, were kept.
That at Edfu is a semi-detached room and contained
many such cases. :

While there is little record of libraries in_ Bib.
times, the very formation of the Canon itself,
whether by the higher critical process, or by natural
processes of gathering whole literary works, implies
the gathering together of books, and the temple
libraries common to both Egypt and Assyria-
Babylonia are almost inevitably implied wherever
there was a temple or sanctuary, whatever may be
the facts as to the temple libraries. According
to Hilprecht there were certainly such libraries and
from very ancient times. The palace library of
Assurbant-pal, though itself a discovery of the last
times, brings the story down to the times of the
written history. For the rest of the story see lit.
below, esp. Dziatzko, Bibliotheken, and the art. on
“Libraries” in the Enc Brit. See also NiInsveu,
Liprary oF.

In the earlier period at least and including for the
Jews the NT times, the particular locality in palace
or temple seems to have been the treasury. In the
Book of Ezr, search for the decree of Cyrus was to
be made in the king’s treasure-house (Ezr 6 17),
and was made in the ‘house of books where the
treasures were laid up” (Ezr 6 1m). The document
was finally found in the palace at Ecbatana—so
too in 1 Mace 14 49 the archives are placed in the
treasury.

In NT times there had already been a good deal
of development in the matter of library buildings.
A general type had been evolved which consisted of
(1) a eolonnade, (2) a lecture-room, a reading-room
or assembly room, (3) small rooms for book storage.
Such accounts as we have of the Alexandrian li-
braries, with the excavations at Pergamus, Athens
and Rome, reveal the same type—the book-rooms,
the colonnade where masters walked or sat and
talked with their pupils, the rooms for assembly
where the senate or other bodies sometimes sat.
In short, as long before in Egypt, whether in palace
or temple, the place of teaching was the place of
books.

It is significant thus that Our Lord taught in the
Treasury, which in Herod’s Temple was in the
court of the temple proper—probably the porticos
under the women’s gallery, some of the adjoining
rooms being used for books. As this was within
the barrier which no Gentile could pass, Herod
must have had also a library of public records
in the outer colonnade. See further, NiNEvEn,
Liprary oF.


Literaturs.—Ludwig Blau, Studien zum althe-
brdischen Buchwesen, Strassburg i, E, 1902, 178-80:
Sam. Krauss, Talmudische Archdologie, Leipzig, 1912, III,
193-98; J. W. Clark, Care of Books, Cambridge, 1901:
E. C. Richardson, Biblical Libraries: A Sketch of Library
History from 3400 BC to 150 AD. London. Oxford
University Press, 1914. See the lit. under Waritina.


. C. RicHarpson
LIBRARY OF NINEVEH. Sce Nineven, Li-
BRARY OF.


LIBYA, lib’i-a, LIBYANS, lib’i-anz: In the OT
the word occurs in AV in 2 Ch 12 3; 16 8; Nah
39 for “Lubim” (thus RV). RV, however,
retains “Libyans” in Dnl 11 43. In Jer 46 9;
Ezk 30 5; 38 5, the words are replaced in RV by
Pur (q.v.). In the NT the word “Libya”? (A:Sén,
Libié) occurs, in close connection with CyrENnE
(q.v.) (Acts 2 10). Gr and Rom writers apply
the term to the African continent, generally exclud-
ing Egypt. See Lusi.


LICE, lis (0°33, kinntm [Ex 8 17.18; Ps 1065
31), 025, kinnim [Ex 8 16], O23, kinndm [Ex 8 17.
18]; LXX cxvides, skniphes [Ex 8 16.18], rav


1887


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Libraries
Lie, Lying


ckvida, tén sknipha, once in Ex 8 18; cvines,
sknipes [Ps 105 31]; Vulg scniphes; acc. to Lid-
dell and Scott, s.v. ov}, Slav. sknipa=culez):
The references, both in Ex and in Pss, are all to the
plague of “lice.” RVm suggests ‘‘fleas” or “sand-
flies.’ The LXX rendering would favor “sand-
flies’ or “mosquitoes,” between which two insects
the OT writers would hardly be expected to dis-
crimiuate. Mosquitoes belong to the order of
Diptera, family Culicidae; the sandfly (Plebotomus
papatact) to the family of Simuliidae of the same
order. The sandflies are much smaller than mos-
quitoes, and are nearly noiseless, but give a sharp
sting which may leave an unpleasant irritation.
They are abundant in the Levant. In South-
ern Europe they cause the ‘three-day fever” or
“Dapataci.”’ As stated under Guat (q.v.), there is
little ground other than the authority of the LXX
for deciding between “‘ice,” ‘‘fleas,” ‘“sand-flies,”
or “mosquitoes” as tr* of kinnim. See also under
Gnat the note on kén, RVm “‘gnat?’ (Isa 61 6).
Aurrep Ety Day

LICENCE, li’sens: This word is not found at all
in RV (except in Jth 11 14; Ecclus 15 20; 1 Macc
1 13), and twice only in AV (except in 2 Mace 4
9), both times in Acts. In Acts 21 40 (as tr of
éritpérw, epitrépd) ARV has “leave” where AV has
“licence.” In 26 16, “opportunity to make his de-
fence” (as tr of rérov drodoytas, tépon apologias) takes
the place of ‘‘have liceuce to answer for himself.”


LIDEBIR, Jid’é&-bér (nao: lidh*bhir): For “of
Debir’ in EV; RVm suggests the name ‘‘Lidebir”
(Josh 13 26), a city in the territory of Gad. It is
probably identical with Lo-pEBar (q.v.).


LIE, li, LYING py, sheker [usually, e.g. Isa 9
15; Zec 13 3], or IT3, kazabh vb. [Job 34 6; Mic


2 11); ‘peidSos, pseidos [In 8 44;
1, Lying Rev 21 27], ‘‘to speak falsely,” ‘to
Defined fabricate,” ‘to make a false state-


ment”; petiSopno1, pseidomai, in Acts 5
3.4): In its very essence, a lie is something said
with intent to deceive. It is not always a spoken
word that is a lie, for a life lived under false pre-
tenses, a hypocritical life, may be a lie equally with
a false word (Jer 23 14). A vain thing, hke an
idol, may be a lie (Isa 59 4), as also a false system
(Rom 3 7). Error, as opposed to truth, is a lie
(1 Jn 2 21). The denial of the deity of Jesus
Christ isregarded as “the” lie (1 Jn 2 22).
The origin of lies and lying is traced to Satan who
is called “a liar, and the father thereof’? (Jn_8 44;
Acts 5 3). Satan’s dealing with Eve (Gen 3)
furnishes us with a splendid illustration of the first
lie, so far as we have any record of it. .
The whole race is guilty of this sin: “The wicked
are estranged from the womb: they go astray as soon
as they are born, speaking lies” (Ps 58
2. ARacial 3). It is a part of the old Adamic
Sin nature, “the old man” (Col 3 9),
which the believer in Jesus Christ is
called upon to put off. So prominent a factor is
it in the experience of the race that among the
condensed catalogue of sins, for the commission of
which men are finally condemned, the sin of lying
finds its place: “All liars shall have their part in
the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone”
(Rev 21 8 AV). an
God’s attitude toward this sin is strongly marked
throughout both the OT and NT. The righteous
are called upon to hate lying (Prov


3. God’s 13 5), to avoid it (Zeph 3 13), to
Attitude respect not those who lie, and utterly
to It reject their company (Ps 40 4; 101


7), to pray to be delivered from it (Ps


119 29). The wicked are said to love lying (Ps


52 3), to delight in it (Ps 62 4), to seek after it
(Ps 4 2), and to give heed to it (Prov 17 4).
Lying leads to worse crimes (Hos 4 1.2).

The punishment to be meted out to liars is of the
severest kind. They are positively and absolutely

excluded from heaven (Rev 21 27;

4. The 22 15), and those who are guilty of this
Penalty sin are cast into the lake of fire (Rev
21 8). Weare reminded of the awful
fate meted out to Ananias and Sapphira when the
lied to God and man (Acts 6 1-11). God will
“destroy them that speak lies” (Ps 5 6), and ‘‘he
that uttereth lies shall not escape’ (Prov 19 5),
yea ‘‘a sword is upon the liars’ (Jer 50 36 AV).
The liar is thereby debarred from rendering any true
and acceptable worship unto the Lord (Ps 24 4).

The Scriptures abound with illustrations of lying
and the results and penalties therefor. A careful
study of these illustrations will reveal the subtilty
of falsehood. Sometimes a lie is a half-truth, as
set forth in the story of Satan’s temptation of Eve
(Gen 3). Cain’s lie (Gen 4 9) was of the nature
of an evasive answer to a direct question. Jacob’s
deception of his father, in order that he might
inherit the blessing of the firstborn, was a bare-
faced and deliberate lie (Gen 27 19). The answer
which Joseph’s brethren gave to their father when
he asked them concerning the welfare of their
brother Joseph is an illustration, as well as a reve-
lation, of the depth of the wickedness of hearts that
deliberately set. themselves to falsify and deceive
(Gen 37 31.32). Even good men are sometimes
overtaken in a lie, which, of course, is no more ex-
cusable in them than in the wicked; indeed, it is
more shameful because the righteous are professed
followers of the truth (David in 1 § 21 2). What
more striking example of the heinousness of lying
in the sight of God can we have than the fate which
befell Gehazi who, in order to satisfy a covetous
desire for possessions, misrepresented his master
Elisha to Naaman the Syrian whom the prophet
had healed of his leprosy: ‘The leprosy therefore of
Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed
for ever. And he weut out from his presence a
leper as white as snow” (2 K 6 22-27)? The story
of Peter’s denial of his Lord, and his persistent
asseverations that he did not know Him and was not
one of His followers, makes us shudder to think that
it is possible for a follower of Christ so far to forget
himself as not only to lie, but buttress lying with
swearing (Mt 26 72).


Throughout the Scriptures we find pseudos joined to
other words, e.g. ‘false apostles’ (WevSardarodos,
, pseudapéstolos, 2 Cor 11 13), so called

&. Pseudés probably because a true apostle delivers


. the message of another, namely, God,
Vad while these ‘‘false apostles” cared only
wh er for self. Such are from Satan, and, like
Words him, they transform themselves into


angels of light, and sail under false colors.
We read also of ‘‘false prophets” (pevsorpodyzns,
pseudoprophétés, Mt 7 15; cf Jer 23 16f), thereby mean-
ing those who falsely claim to bring messages from God
aud to speak in behalf of God. Mention is made also of
“false brethren’’ (wevdddeAgos, pseuddédelphos, 2 Cor 11
26), meaning Judaizing teachers, as in Gal 2 4; ‘‘false
teachers" (evdodtsaonados, pseudodiddskalos, 2 Pet 2
1), men whose teaching was false and who falsely claimed
the teacher’s office. We read further of ‘‘false wit-
nesses’’ (Wevdduaprus, pseudémartus, Mk 26 60); by
such are meant those who swear falsely, and testify to
what they know is not true. So, too, we find mention
of the ‘‘ false Christs”” (pevddxpurror, pseudédchristoi, Mt 24
24, Mk 13 22). This personage does not so much deny
the existence of a Christ, but rather, on the contrary,
builds upon the world’s expectations of such a person, and
falsely, arrogantly, blasphemously asserts that he is the
Christ promised and foretold. It is the Antichrist who
denies that there is a Christ; the false Christ affirms him-
self to be the Christ. Of course thereis a sense in which
the man of sin will be both Antichrist and a false Christ.
See Fause Curists; FALSE PROPHETS; FALSE SWEARING,
Fase WiTNESs.


WILiiaM Evans


Liers-in-Wait
Life


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1888


LIERS-IN-WAIT, li-érz-in-wat’ (Jgs 9 25; 16 12;


20 36 ff). See AmBusH.
LIEUTENANT, lia-ten’ant, lef-ten’ant. See
SarTraps,


LIFE, lif (OD, hayytm, WD2, nephesh, 77,
ruth, I, hayah; Loh, 208, puxh, psuché, Blos,
bios, wvetpa, pneima):

I. Tur Terms

II. Taz OT Txzacuino

1. Popular Use of the Term
2. Complexity of the Idea
Ill. Is tae Apocrrrua
IV. In tHe NT
. In the Synoptic Gospels
. In the Fourth Gospel
. In the Acts of the Aposties
. In the Writings of Paul
. In the Writings of John
. In the Other Books of the NT
LITERATURE

i. The Terms.—Of the Heh terms, hayah is the vb.
which means ‘‘to llve,”’ ‘‘to have life," or the vital prin-
ciple, ‘‘to continue to live," or ‘‘to live prosperously."’
In the Piel it signifies ‘' to give life, or preserve, or quicken
and restore life.’’ The Hiphil is much like the Piel.
The noun hayyim generally used in the pl. is an ahstract
noun meaning “‘life,’' i.e. the possession of the vital prin-
ciple with its energies and activities. Nephesh often
means ‘living heing’’ or ‘“‘creature.’’ Sometimes it
has the force of the reflexive ‘self.’ At other times it
refers to the seat of the soul, the personality, the emo-
tions, the appetites—passions and even mental acts.
Frequently it means “life,” the ‘‘seat of life,” and in
this way it is used ahout 171 t in the OT, referring to the
principle of vitality in both men and animals. Rich
signifies '‘ wind,” ‘‘ breath,’' principle or source of vitality,
but is never used to signify life proper.


Il. The OT Teaching.—The term ‘‘life” is used
in the OT in the popular sense. It meant life in
the body, the existence and activity
1. Popular of the man in all his parts and energies.
Use of the It is the person complete, conscious
Term and active. There is no idea of the
body being a fetter or prison to the
soul; the body was essential to life and the writers
had no desire to be separated from it. To them the
physical sphere was a necessity, and a-man was
living when all his activities were performed in the
light of God’s face and favor. The secret and
source of life to them was relationship with God.
There was nothing good or desirable apart from
this relation of fellowship. To overcome or be rid
of sin was necessary to life. The real center of
gravity in life was in the moral and religious part
of man’s nature. This must be in fellowship with
God, the source of all life and activity.

The conception of life is very complex. Several
meanings are clearly indicated: (1) Very frequently
: it refers to the vital principle itself,
2. Complex- apart from its manifestations (Gen 2
ity of the 7). Here it is the breath of life, or
Idea the breath from God which contained

and communicated the vital principle
to man and made him a nephesh or living being
(see also Gen 1 30; 6 17; 7 22; 45 5, etc). (2) It
is used to denote the period of one’s actual existence,
ie. “lifetime” (Gen 23 1; 25 7; 47 9; Ex 6 16;
18.20, etc). (3) The life is represented as a direct
gift from God, and dependent absolutely upon Him
for its continuance (Gen 1 11-27; 2 7; Nu 16 22).
(4) In a few cases it refers to the conception of
children, denoting the time when conception was
possible (Gen 18 10.14m; 2 K 4 16.17m). (5) In
many cases it refers to the totality of man’s relation-
ships and activities, all of which make up life (Dt
32 47; 18 25 29; Job 10 1, etc). (6) In a few
instances it is used synonymously with the means of
sustaining life (Dt 24 6; Prov 27 27). (7) Many
times it is used synonymously with happiness or
well-being (Dt 30 15.19; Ezr 6 10; Ps 16 11;
30.5; Prov 219, and frequently). (8) It is


OD OUP Cobo


always represented as a very precious gift, and
offences against life were to be severely punished
(Gen 9 4.5; Lev 17 14; 24 17).


Capital punishment is here specificaily enjoined be-
cause of the value of the life that_has been taken. The
lex talionis required life for life (Ex 21 23; Dt 19 21);
and this even applies to the beast (Lev 24 18). The life
was represented as abiding in the blood and therefore
the blood must not he eaten, or lightly shed upon the
ground (Lev 17 15; Dt 12 23). The Decalogue for-
bids murder or the taking of human life wrongfully
(Ex 20 13; Dt 5 17). Garments taken in pledge
must not he kept over night, for therehy the owner's
life might be endangered (Dt 24 6). That life was
considered precious appears in_2 K 10 24; Est 7 7;
Job 24; Prov 4 23; 26. ‘The essence of sacrifice
consisted in the fact that the life (the nephesh) resided
in the blood; thus when blood was shed, life was lost
(Dt 12 23; Lev 17 11). Oppression on the pare of
judges and rulers was severely condemned because
oppression was detrimental to life.


(9) Long life was much desired and sought by the
Israelites, and under certain conditions this was
possible (Ps 91 16). The longevity of the ante-
diluvian patriarchs is a problem by itself (see
ANTEDILUVIANS). It was one of the greatest of
calamities to be cut off in the midst of life (Isa 38
10-12; 53 8); that a good old age was longed for
is shown by Ex 20 12; Ps 21 4; 34 12; 61 6, etc.
This long life was possible to the obedient to
parents (Ex 20 12; Dt 5 16), and to those obe-
dient to God (Dt 4 4; Prov 3 1.2; 10 27); to
the wise (Prov 3 16; 9 11); to the pure in heart
(Ps 34 12-14; 91 1-10; Eccl 3 12.13); to those
who feared God (Prov 10 27; Isa 65 18-21; 38
2-5, etc). (10) The possibility of an immortal life
is dimly hinted at in the earliest writing, and much
more clearly taught in the later. The Tree of Life
in the midst of the garden indicated a possible im-
mortality for man upon earth (Gen 2 9; 3 22.24)
(see TREE OF LiFe).

Failing to partake of this and falling into sin by par-
taking of the ‘tree of the knowledge of good and evil,”’
they were driven forth from the garden lest they should
eat of the tree of life and become immortal beings in their
sinful condition. To deprive man of the possibility of
making himself immortal while sinful was a blessing
to the race; immortality without holiness is a curso
rather than a blessing. The way to the tree of life was
henceforth guarded hy the cherubim and the flame of a
sword, so that men could not partake of it in their con-
dition of sin. This, however, did not exclude the possi-
bility of a spiritual immortality in another sphere.
Enoch’s fellowship with God led to a bodily translation;
so also Elijah, and several hundred years after their
deaths, God called Himself the God of Ahraham and
Isaac and Jacob, implying that they were really alive
then. In Isa 26 19 there is a clear prophecy of a resur-
rection, and an end of death. Dnl 12 2 asserts a resur-
rection of many of the dead, some to everlasting life and
some to shame and everlasting contempt. Some of the

salmists firmly believed in the continuity of the life
n fellowship with God (Ps 16 10.11; 17 15; 23 6; 49
15; 73 24.25). The exact meaning of some of these
statements is difficult to understand, yet this much 1s
clear: there was a revolt against death in many pions
minds, and a helief that the life of fellowship with God
could not end or be broken even by death itself. See
IMMORTALITY.


(11) The fundamental fact in the possession of
life was vital relationship with God. Men first
lived because God breathed into them the breath
of life (Gen 2 7). Man’s vital energies are the
outflowing of the spirit or vital energies of God,
and all activities are dependent upon the vitalizing
power from God. When God sends forth His spirit,
things are created, and live; when He withdraws that .
spirit they die (Ps 104 30). “In his favor is life”
(Ps 30 5AV). He is the fountain of life (Ps 36
9; 63 3). ‘All my fountains are in thee” (Ps 87
7). The secret of Job’s success and happiness was
that the Almighty was with him (Job 29 2). This
fellowship brought him health, friends, prosperity
and all other blessings. The consciousness of the
fellowship with God led men to revolt against the
idea of going to Sheol where this fellowship must


1889


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Liers-in-Wait
if


cease. They felt that such a relationship could
not cease, and God would take them out of Sheol.


dl. In the Read Ee slmilar conception of lIlfe
appears here asin the OT. Zoé and psuché are used and
occur most frequently in the books of Wisd and Ecclus.
In 1 and 2 Esd the word Is little used: 2 Esd 8 5;
16 61 are but a quotation from Gen 2 7, and refer to
the vital principle; 2 Hsd 14 30, Tob, Jth, Ad Est use
it in the same sense also. Wisd and Ecclus use It in
several senses closely resembling the use in Prov (cf
Ecclus 4 12; Prov 3 18; 10 16). In general there Is
no additional meaning attached to the word. The Ps
Sol refer to everlasting life in 3 16: 13 10; 14 2.6.

IV. In the NT.— Of the Gr terms bios Is used at times
as the equivalent of the Heb hayyim. It refers to life
extensively, i.e. the period: of one's existence, a lifetime;
also to the means of sustaining life, such as wealth, etc.
Psuché is also equivalent to hayyim at times, hut very
frequently to nephesh and sometimes to riahk. Thus
it means the vital principle, a living being, the imma-
terial part of man, the seat of the affections, desires and
appetites, etc. The term 262 corresponds very closely
to hayyim, and means the vital principle, the state of
one who is animate, the fulness of activities and rela-
tionship both in the physical and spiritual realms.


The content of the word 26é is the chief theme of
the NT. The life is mediated by Jesus Christ. In
the OT this life was through fellowship with God,
in the NT it is through Jesus Christ the Mediator.
The OT idea is carried to its completion, its highest
development of meaning, being enriched by the
supreme teaching and revelation of Jesus Christ.
In the NT as well as in the OT, the center of gravity
in human life is in the moral and religious nature of
man.

The teaching here regarding life naturally links
itself with OT ideas and the prevailing conceptions

of Judaism. The word is used in the


1. Inthe sense of (1) the vital principle, that
Synoptic which gives actual physical existence
Gospels (Mt 2 20; Mk 10 45; Lk 12 22f;


tt)

14 26). (2) It is also the period of
one’s existence, i.e. lifetime (Lk 1 75; 16 25).
(3) Once it may mean the totality of man’s relation-
ships and activities (Lk 12 15) which do not con-
sist in abundance of material possessions. (4)
Generally it means the real life, the vital connection
with the world and God, the sum total of man’s
highest interests. It is called ‘eternal life” (Mt
19 29; 25 46). It is called ‘life’ (Mt 18 8.9;
19 17; Mk 9 43.45.46). In these passages Jesus
seems to imply that it is almost equivalent to
‘laying up treasures in heaven,” or to “entering
the kingdom of God.”’ The entering into life and
entering the kingdom are practically the same, for
the kingdom is that spiritual realm where God con-
trols, where the principles, activities and relation-
ships of heaven prevail, and hence to enter into
these is to enter into “life.” (5) The lower life of
earthly relationship and activities must be sub-
ordinated to the higher and spiritual (Mt 10 39;
16 25; Lk 9 24). These merely earthly interests
may be very desirable and enjoyable, but whoever
would cling to these and make them supreme is in
danger of losing the higher. The spiritual being
infinitely more valuable should be sought even if the
other relationship should be lost entirely. (6)
Jesus also speaks of this life as something future,
and to be realized at the consummation of the age
(Mt 19 29; Lk 18 30), or the world to come.


This in no wise contradicts the statement that eternal
life can be entered upon in this life. As Jesus Him-
self was in vital relatiouship with the spiritual world and
lived the eternal life, He sought to bring others into the
same blessed state. This life was far from being per-
fect. The perfection could come only at the consumma-
tion when all was perfection and then they would enter
into the perfect fellowship with God and connection
with the spirit-world and its blessed experiences. There
is no conflict in His teaching here, no real difficulty, only
an illustration of Browning’s statement, ‘* Man never Is
but wholly hopes to be."’ Thus in the synoptists Jesus
teaches the reality of the eternal life as a present pos-
session as well as future fruition. The future is but the


flowering out and perfection of the present. Wlthout


the present bud, there can be no future flower.

(7) The conditions which Jesus lays down for
entering into this life are faith in Himself as the one
Mediator of the life, and the following of Him in a
life of obedience. He alone knows the Father and
can reveal Him to others (Mt 11 27). He alone
can give true rest and can teach men how to live
(11 28f). The sure way to this life is: “Follow
me.’ His whole ministry was virtually a prolonged
effort to win confidence in Himself as Son and Me-
diator, to win obedience, and hence bring men unto
these spiritual relationships and activities which
constitute the true life.

The fullest and richest teachings regarding life
are found here. The greatest word of this Gospel


is “life.” The author says he wrote
2. Inthe the Gospel in order that “ye may have
Fourth life’ (20 31). Most of the teachings
Gospel recorded, circle around this great word


: ‘life.’ This teaching is in no way
distinctive and different from that of the synoptists,
but is supplementary, and completes the teaching of
Jesus on the subject. The use of the word is not
as varied, being concentrated on the one supreme
subject. (1) In a few cases it refers only to the
vital principle which gives life or produces a, life-
time (10 11.15-18; 13 37; 15 13). (2) It repre-
sents Jesus the Logos as the origin and means of all
life to the world. As the preincarnate Logos He
was the source of life to the universe (1 4). As the
incarnate Logos He said His life had been derived
originally from the Father (6 26; 6 57; 10 18).
He then was the means of life to men (3 15.16;
4 14; 6 21.39.40); and this was the purpose for
which He came into the world (6 33.34.51;
10 10). (3) The prevailing reference, however, is
to those activities which are the expression of fellow-
ship with God and Jesus Christ. These relation-
ships are called “eternal life’ (3 15.16.36; 4 14,
etc). The nearest approach to a definition of
eternal life is found in 17 3. Though not a scien-
tific or metaphysical definition, it is nevertheless
Jesus’ own description of eternal life, and reveals
His conception of it. _It is thus more valuable than
a formal definition. It is “to know God and Jesus
Christ whom He hath sent.”

This knowledge js vastly more than mere intellect-
ual perception or understanding. It is mora] knowledge,
it is personal acquaintance, it is fellowship, a contact,
if we may so speak, of personality with personality, an
inner affinity and sympathy, an experience of similar
thoughts, emotions, purposes, motives, desires, an inter-
change of the heart's deepest feelings and experiences.
Itis a bringing of the whole personality of man into right
relationship with the personality of God. This rela-
tion is ethical, personal, binding the two together with
ties which nothing can separate. It is into this expe-
rience that Jesus came to bring men. Such a life Jesus
says is satisfying to all who hunger and _thirst for it
(4 14; 6 35); it is the source of light to all (1 4; 8 12);
it is indestructible ‘8 58; 11,26); it is like a well of
water in the soul (4 14); it is procured by personally
partaking of those qualities which belong to Jesus (6 53).


(4) This life is a present possession and has also
a glorious future fruition. (a) To those who exer-
cise faith in Jesus it is a present experience and

ossession (4 10; 6 24.40). Faith in Him as the
oar of God is the psychological means by which
persons are brought into this vital relationship with
God. Those who exercised the faith immediately
experienced this new power and fellowship and
exercised the new activities. (6) It has a glorious
fruition in the future also (4 36; 5 29; 6 39.44.54).
John does not give so much prominence to the
eschatological phase of Jesus’ teachings as to the
present reality and actual possession of this blessed
life.


(5) It has been objected that in speaking of the Logos
as the source of life John is pursuing a metaphysical line,


Life
Light


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1890


whereas the life which he so much emphasizes has an
ethical hasis, and he makes no attempt to reconcile the
two, The objection may have force to one who has
imbihed the Ritschlian idea of performing the impos-
sible task of eliminating all metaphysics from theology.
It will not appeal very strongly to the average Christian.
It is a purely academic objection. The ordinary mind
will think that if Jesus Christ is the source of ethical and
eternal life it is because He possesses somethiug of the
essence and being of God, which makes His work for
men possible. The metaphysical and the ethical may
exist together, may run concurrently, the one being the
source aud seat of the other. There is no contradic-
tion. Both metaphysics and ethics are a legitimate and
necessary exercise of the human mind.


Ju His intercessory prayer (Jn 17), Jesus said His
mission was to give eternal life to as many as the
Father had given Him (17 2). The
3. Inthe record in Acts is the carrying out of
Acts of the that purpose. The word “life” is used
Apostles in several senses: (1) the vital prin-
ciple or physical life (17 25; 20 10.24;
27 10.22); (2) also the sum total of man’s relation-
ships and activities upon earth (5 20; 26 4); (3)
Jesus Christ is regarded as the source and principle
of life, being called by Peter, “the Prince of life”
(8 15). Also the life eternal or everlasting is
spoken of with the same significance as in the
Gospels (11 18; 13 46.48).
Here also the words for “‘life”’ are used in various
senses: (1) the vital principle which gives physical
vitality and existence (Rom 8 11.38;


4,Inthe 11 15; 1 Cor 3 22; Phil 1 20; 2 30):
Writings (2) the sum total of man’s relationships
of Paul and activities (1 Cor 6 3.4; 1 Tim 2


2; 48; 2Tim11; 3 10 AV); (3)
those relationships with God and with Christ in the
spiritual realm, and the activities arising therefrom
which constitute the real and eternal life. This
is mediated by Christ (Rom 5 10). It is in Christ
(Rom 6 11). It is the free gift of God (6 238). It
is also mediated or imparted to us through the
Spirit (Rom 8 2.6.9.10; 2 Cor 2 16; 36; Galé
8). It comes through obedience to the word (Rom
7:10; Phil 2 16); and through faith (1 Tim 1 16).
It may be apprehended in this life (1 Tim 6 12.
19). It is brought to light through the gospel (2
Tim 110). Itis areward to those who by patience
in well-doing seek it (Rom 2 7). It gives conquer-
ing power over sin and death (Rom 6 17.18.21).
It is the end or reward of a sanctified life (Rom 6
22). It is a present possession and a hope (Tit
12; 37). It will be received in all its fulness
hereafter (Rom 2 7; 2 Cor 6 4). Thus Paul’s
use of the word substantially agrees with the teaeh-
ing in the Gospels, and no doubt was largely based
upon it.

In the Johannine Epp. and Rev, the contents of
the term “‘life’”’ are the same as those in the Fourth


Gospel. Life in certain passages (1
5. Inthe Jn316; Rev 89; 1111; 12 11)
Writings is mere physical vitality and existence
of John upon earth. The source of life is


Christ Himself (1 Jn 1 1f; 5 11.16).
The blessed eternal life in Christ is a present pos-
session to all those who are iu fellowship with the
Father and the Son (1 Jn 6 11.12). Here is an
echo of the words of Jesus (Jn 17 3) where John
describes the life, the eternal life which was with the
Father and was manifested unto us. It is virtually
fellowship with the Father and with the Son (1 Jn
1 2.4). Life is promised to those who are faithful
(Rev 2 7); and the crown of life is promised to
those who are faithful unto death (Rev 2 10).
The crown of life doubtless refers to the realization
of all the glorious possibilities that come through
fellowship with God and the Son. The thirsty are
invited to come and drink of the water of life freely
(Rev 21 6; 22 17). The river of life flows through
the streets of the New Jerusalem (22 1), and the


tree of life blooms on its banks, bearing twelve

manner of fruit (22 2.14). See Trex or Lire.
The Ep. to the He speaks of our lifetime or
periods of existence upon earth (2 15; 7 3), like-
wise of the power of an indissoluble


6. Inthe life (7 16); James promises the crown
Other of life to the faithful (1 12). This
Books of reward is the fulness of life’s possi-
the NT bilities hereafter. Our lifetime is


mentioned in 4 14 and represented as
brief as a vapor. Peter in 1 Pet 3 7 speaks of man
and wife as joint-heirs of the grace of life, and of
loving life (8 10), referring to the totality of rela-
tionships and activities. The “all things that per-
tain unto life and godliness” (2 Pet 1 3) constitute


the whole Christian life involving the life eternal.
Litztraturs.—Articles on ‘Life’ in HDB, DCG,
Jew Enc; on “Soul,” ‘Spirit,’ ete, ibid, and in #nc
Brit, EB, Kitto, Smith, Standard, etc; Laidlaw, Bible
Doctrine of Man; Delitzsch, A System of Bib. Psychology;
comms, on the various passages; Davidson, OT Theology;
Oehier and Schultz, OT Theology; Stevens, Johannine
Theology and Pauline Theology; Holtazmann, NT The-
ology, I, 293 ff; G. Dalman, Words of Jesus; Phillips
Brooks, More Abundant Life; B. F. Westcott, Historic
Faith; F.J. A. Hort, The Way, the Truth, the Life; J.G.
Hoare, Life in St. John's Gospels; E. White, Life and
Christ; Salmond, The Christian Doctrine of Immortality;
Knowling, Witness of the Epistles and The Testi-
mony of St. Paul to Christ; comms. on the various pas-
sages; McPherson, ‘‘The NT View of Life,’’ Expos,
I, ser. v, 72 ff; Massie, ‘Two NT Words Denoting Life,”
Expos, II, ser. iv, 380 ff; Schrenk, Die Johannistische
Anschauung vom Leben.
J. J. REEVE


LIFE, TREE OF. See Tren or Lire.
LIFT: To make lofty, to raise up. A very com-


‘mon word in EV representing a great variety of


Heb and Gr words, although in the OT used chiefly
as the tr of NID}, nasa’. Of none of these words,
however, is “lift”? used as a technical tr, and “lift”
is interchanged freely with its synonyms, esp.
“exalt” (cf Ps 75 5; 89 24) and “raise” (cf Eccl
410; 28 1217). “Lift” is still perfectly good
English, but not in all the senses in which it is used
in EV; e.g. such phrases as ‘‘men that lifted up
axes upon a thicket” (Ps 74 5), “lift up thy feet
unto the perpetual ruins” (Ps 74 3, etc), and even
the common ‘lift up the eyes” or ‘“‘hands”’ are dis-
tinctly archaic. However, almost all the uses are
perfectly clear, and only the following need be noted.
“To lift up the head” (Gen 40 18.19.20; 2 K 25
27; Ps 3 3; Sir 11 13; Lk 21 28) means to raise
from a low condition (but on Ps 24 7.9 see Garr).
To “lift up the horn” (Ps 75 5) is to assume a
confident position, the figure being taken from
fighting oxen (see Horn). ‘‘Lift up the face” may
be meant lit. (2 K 9 32), or it may denote the
bestowal of favor (Ps 4 6); it may mean the atti-
tude of a righteous man toward God (Job 22 26),
or simply the attitude of a suppliant (Ezr 9 6).
; Burton Scorr Easton

LIGHT, lit (WIN, ’dr, TINA, ma’or; ds, phés;

many other words):


1. Origin of Light
2. A Comprehensive Term
1) Natural
2) Artificial
3) Miraculous
4) Mental, Moral, Spiritual
3. An Attrihute of Holiness
(1) God
(2) Christ
(3) Christians
(4) The Church
4, Symbolism
5. Expressive Terms


The creation of light was the initial step in the
creation of life. “Let there be light” (Gen L 3)
was the first word of God spoken after His creative
Spirit “moved” upon the primary material out of
which He created the heavens and the earth, and


1891


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Life
Light


which lay, until the utterance of that word, in
the chaos of darkness and desolation. Something
akin, possibly, to the all-pervasive
electro-magnetic activity of the aurora
borealis penetrated the chaotic night
: of the world. The ultimate focusing
of light (on the 4th day of creation, Gen 1 14) in
suns, stars, and solar systems brought the initial
creative process to completion, as the essential
condition of all organic life. The origin of light
thus finds its explanation in the purpose and very
nature of God whom John defines as not only the
Author of light but, in an all-inclusive sense, as

light itself: “God is light’? (1 Jn 1 5).
The word “light” is Divinely rich in its compre-
hensiveness and meaning. Its material splendor
is used throughout the Scriptures as


1. Origin
of Light


2. ACom- the symbol and synonym of all that is
prehensive luminous and radiant in the mental,
Term moral and spiritual life of men and


angels; while the eternal God, because
of His holiness and moral perfection, is pictured as
“dwelling in light unapproachable”’ (1 Tim 6 16).
Every phase of the word, from the original light
in the natural world to the spiritual glory of the
celestial, is found in Holy Writ.

(1) Natural light—The light of day (Gen 1 5);
of sun, moon and stars; “lights in the firmament”’
(Gen 1 14-18; Ps 74 16; 1367; 148 3; Eccl
12 2; Rev 22 5). Its characteristics are beauty,
radiance, utility. It “‘rejoiceth the heart” (Prov 15
30); “Truly the light is sweet”? (Eccl 11 7); with-
out it men stumble and are helpless (Jn 11 9.10);
it issomething for which they wait with inexpressible
longing (Job 30 26; cf Ps 130 6). Life, joy,
activity and all blessmgs are dependent upon light.


Light and life are almost synonymous to the inhabit-
ants of Pal, and in the same way darkness and death.
Theirs is the land of sunshine. When they go to other
lands of clouded skies their only thought is to return to the
brightness and sunshine of their native land. In Pal
there is hardly a day in the whole year when the sun
does not shine for some part of it, while for five months
of the year there is scarcely an interruption of the sun-
shine. Time is reckoned from sunset to sunset. The
day's labor closes with the coming of darkness. ‘Man
goeth forth unto his work and to his labor until the
evening” (Ps 104 23). :

The suddenness of the change from darkness to light
with the rising sun and the disappearance of the sun in
the evening is more striking than in more northern coun-
tries, and it is not strange that in the ancient days there
should have arisen a worship of the sun as the giver of
light and happiness, and that Job should mention the
enticement of sun-worship when he ‘‘ beheld the sun when
it shined, or the moon walking in brightness" (Job 31 26).
The severest plague in Egypt next to the Aang of the
firstborn was the plague of darkness which fell upon the
Egyptians (Ex 10 23). This love of light finds expres-
sion in both OT and NT in a very extensive use of the
word to express those things which are most to be desired
and most helpful to man, and in this connection we find
some of the most beautiful figures in the Bible.


(2) Artificial light—When_ natural light fails,
man by discovery or invention provides himself
with some temporary substitute, however dim and
inadequate. The ancient Hebrews had “oil for
the light” (Ex 25 6; 36 8; Lev 24 2) and lamps
(Ex 36 14; Mt 5 15). “There were many lights
[Aazrds, lampds] in the upper chamber” at Troas,
where Paul preached until midnight (Acts 20 8);
so Jer 25 10 RV, “light of the lamp,” AV “candle.

(3) Miraculous light—When the appalling plague
of “thick darkness,” for three days, enveloped the
Egyptians, terrified and rendered them helpless,
“atl the children of Israel had light in their dwell-
ings’ (Ex 10 23). Whether the darkness was due
to a Divinely ordered natural cause or the light
was the natural light of day, the process that pre-
served the interspersed Israelites from the encom-
passing darkness was supernatural. Miraculous,
also, even though through natural agency, was the


“pillar of fire’ that gave light to the Israelites
escaping from Pharaoh (Ex 13 21; 14 20; Ps 78
14), “He led them. ... all the night with a light
of fire.’ Supernatural was the effulgence at
Christ’s transfiguration that made “his garments
.... White as the light’ (Mt 17 2). nder the
same category Paul classifies ‘the great light’ that
‘suddenly shone round about him from heaven’
on the way to Damascus (Acts 22 6; ef 9 3).
In these rare instances the supernatural light was
not only symbolic of an inner spiritual light, but
instrumental, in part at least, in revealing or pre-
paring the way for it.

(4) Mental, moral, spiritual light—The phenom-
ena of natural light have their counterpart in the
inner life of man. Few words lend themselves with
such beauty and appropriateness to the experiences,
conditions, and radiance of the spiritual life. For
this reason the Scriptures use “‘light’’ largely in the
figurative sense. Borrowed from the natural world,
it is, nevertheless, inherently suited to portray
spiritual realities. In secular life a distinct line of
demarkation is drawn between intellectual and
spiritual knowledge and illumination. Education
that enlightens the mind may leave the moral man
untouched. This distinction rarely obtains in the
Bible, which deals with man as a spiritual being and
looks upon his faculties as interdependent in their
action.

(a) A few passages, however, refer to the light that
comes chiefly to the intellect or mind through Divine in-
struction, e.g. Ps 119 130, ‘‘The opening of thy words
giveth light”; so Prov 6 23, ‘‘ The law is light."" Even
here the instruction includes moral as well as mental en-
lightenment.

(b) Moral: Job 24 13.16 has to do exclusively with
man's moral attitude to truth: ‘rebel against the light";
“know not the light.'’ Isa § 20 descrihes a mora! con-
fusion and blindness, which cannot distinguish light
from darkness.

(c) For the most part, however, light and life go
together. It is the product of salvation: ‘‘Jeh is my
light and my salvation" (Ps 27 1). ‘'Light,”' figuratively
used, has to do preéminently with spiritual life, including
also the illumination that floods all the faculties of
the soul: intellect, conscience, reason, will. In the
moral realm the enlightenment of these faculties is
dependent wholly on the renewal of the spirit. ‘In
thy light... . wesee light” (Ps 36 9); “The life was
the light of men” (Jn 1 4).


Light is an attribute of holiness, and thus a per-


sonal quality. It is the outshining of Deity.
(1) God.—God is light, and in him
3. An is no darkness at all” (1 Jn 1 5).
Attribute | Darkness is the universal symbol and
of Holiness condition of sin and death; light the
bol and expression of holiness.


sym.

“The light of Israel will be for a fire, and his Holy
One for a flame” (Isa 10 17). God, by His pres-
ence and grace, is to us a “‘marvellous light’’ (1 Pet
29). The glory of His holiness and presence is
the “everlasting light” of the redeemed in heaven
(Isa 60 19.20; Rev 21 23.24; 22 5).

(2) Christ, the eternal Word (Aéyos, légos, Jn
1 1), who said ‘‘Let there be light” (Gen 1 3), is
Himself the ‘‘effulgence of [God’s] glory” (He 1 3),
“the light which lighteth every man, coming into
the world” (Jn 1 9) (cf the statements concerning
Wisdom in Wisd 7 25f and concerning Christ in
He 1 3; and see Creens; Locos; JOHANNINE
TuroLoey; Wispom). As the predicted Messiah,
He was to be ‘for a light of the Gentiles” (Isa, 42 6;
49 6). His birth was the fulfilment of this prophecy
(Lk 2 32). Jesus called Himself “‘the light of the
world” (Jn 8 12; 9 5; 12 46). As light He was
“God ....manifest in theflesh” (1 Tim 3 16 AV).
“The Word was God” (Jn 11). Jesus as Aéyos is
the eternal expression of God as a word is the ex-
pression of a thought. In the threefold essence of
His being God is Life ({w%, zdé) (In 5 26; 6 57);
God is Love (éyérn, agépé) (1 In 4 8); God ts Light


Light, Lightness
Lime


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1892


(6s, phds) (1 Jn 1 5). Thus Christ, the Jogos,
manifesting the three aspects of the Divine Nature,
is Life, Love and Light, and these three are insep-
arable and constitute the glory which the disciples
beheld in Him, “glory as of the only begotten
from the Father’ (Jn 1 14). In revealing and
giving life, Christ becomes ‘‘the light of men”
(Jn 1 4). God gives “the light of the knowledge of
{his] glory in the face of Jesus Christ”? (2 Cor 4 6),
and this salvation is called ‘the light of the gospel
of the glory of Christ” (4 4). Christ is thus the
Teacher, Enlightener (‘Christ shall give thee light,”
Eph 5 14 AV), Guide, Saviour of men.

(8) All who catch and reflect the light of God_and of
Christ are called ‘‘light,"’ “‘lights.’’ (a) John the Baptist:
“a burning and a shini light” (Jn_.5 85 AV). It is
significant that this pre-Christian prophet was termed a
Auxvos, lichnos, while the disciples of the new dispensa-
tion are called ¢ws, phés (Mt 2 14): “Ye are the light of
the world.'' (6) Henceforth Christians and saints were
called ‘‘children of light’' (Lk 16 8; Jn 12 36; Eph
5 8), and were expected to be ‘‘seen as lights in the
world"’ (Phil 2 15). (c) The Jew who possessed the
law mistakenly supposed he was ‘‘a light of them that
are in darkness’ (Rom 2 19).

(4) The church.—Zion was to “shine” because her
‘ight had come’ (lsa 60 1). The Gentiles were
to come to her light (60 3). Her mission as the
enlightener of the world was symbolized in the
ormnamentations of her priesthood. The Urim of
the high priest’s breastplate signified light, and
the name Itself is but the pl. form of the Heb ’ér.
It stood for revelation, and Thummim for truth.
The church of the Christian dispensation was to
be even more radiant with the light of God and of
Christ. The seven churches of Asia were revealed
to John, by the Spirit, as seven golden candlesticks,
and her ministers as seven stars, both luminous
with the light of the Gospel revelation. In Eph,
Christ, who is the Light of the world, is the Head of
the church, the latter being His body through which
His glory is to be manifested to the world, “to make
all men see,”’ ete (Eph 3 9.10). “Unto him be the
glory in the church” (ver 21), the church bringing
glory to God, by revealing His glory to men through
its reproduction of the life and light of Christ.

Light symbolizes: (1) the eye, ‘The light of the
body is the eye’ (Mt 6 22 AV; Lk 11 34); (2)
watchfulness, “Let your lights [RV
“lamps’’] be burning,” the figure being
taken from the parable of the Vir-
gins; (3) protection, “armor of light’’
(Rom 13 12), the garment of a holy and Christ-
like life; (4) the sphere of the Christian’s daily walk,
‘4nheritance of the saints in light’? (Col 1 12);
(5) heaven, for the inheritance just referred to in-
cludes the world above in which ‘the Lamb is the
light thereof’; (6) prosperity, relief (Est 8 16; Job
30 26), in contrast with the calamities of the wicked
whose “light .... shall be put out” (Job 18 5);
(7) joy and gladness (Job 3 20; Ps 97 11; 112 4),
(8) God’s favor, “the light of thy countenance” (Ps 4
6; 44 3; 89 15), and a king’s favor (Prov 16 15);
(9) life (Ps 138 3; 49 19; Jn 1 4).

Expressive terms are: (1) ‘‘fruit of the light’”’ (Eph 5
9), i.e. goodness, righteousness, truth; (2) ‘‘light in the

Lord" (Eph § 8), indicating the source of
5. Express- light (cf Isa 2 5); (8) ‘‘inheritance of the
ive Terms saints in light” (Col 1 12), a present

experience issuing in heaven; (4) ‘‘Father
oflights’' (Jas ] 17), signifying the Creator of the heaven-
ly hodies; (5) ‘marvellous light’ (1 Pet 2 9), the light
of God's presence and fellowship; (6) ‘‘ Walkin the light’’
(1 Jn 1 7), in the light of God's teaching and compan-
jonship, (7) ‘‘abideth in the light’’ (I Jn 2 10), in
love, Divine and fraternal; (8) ‘Light of the glorious
gospel of Christ"’; ‘‘light of the knowledge of the glory

od"' (2 Cor 4 4.6 AV).


4, Sym-
bolism


Dwicat M. Prarr


_ LIGHT, LIGHTNESS, lit’nes: “Light’’ is used
in Scripture, as in ordinary speech, in the sense of


what is small, slight, trivial, easy; “lightness” with
the connotation of vacillation or lasciviousness.
Thus in the OT, “a light thing,” a small, easy,
slight thing (2p, kalal, 2 K 3 18; Isa 49 6;
Ezk 8 17; 22 7, in the last case “to treat slight-
ingly”). ‘‘Lightness”’ ip, kél) occurs in Jer 3 9
(“the lightness of her whoredom”); in 23 32, RV
changes “lightness” (a different word) to ‘‘vain
boasting.” In the NT the phrase occurs in Mt 22
5, “made light of it’? (due\dw, ameléd), i.e. ‘treated
it with neglect”; and St. Paul asks (2 Cor 1 17),
“Did I show lightness?” (RV “fickleness”). These
examples sufficiently illustrate the meaning.
JamEs ORR

LIGHTNING, lit’ning (P73, darak, TI, haziz,
dotpart, astrapé): Lightning is caused by the dis-
charge of electricity between clouds or between
clouds and the earth. In a thunder-storm there is
a rapid gathering of particles of moisture into clouds
and forming of large drops of rain. This gathers
with it electric potential until the surface of the
cloud (or the enlarged water particles) is insufficient
to carry the charge, and a discharge takes place,
producing a brilliant flash of light and the resulting
thunder-clap. Thunder-storms are common in
Syria and Pal during the periods of heavy rain in
the spring and fall and are often severe. Light-
ning is usually accompanied by heavy rainfall or
by hail, as at the time of the plague of hail (Ex 9
24). See Hain.

In the Scriptures it is used: (a) indicating the
power of God: The power of God is shown in His
command of the forces of Nature, and He is the
only one who knows the secrets of Nature: ‘He
made... .a way for the lightning” (Job 28 26);
“He directeth .... hislightning” (Job 37 3 AV);
“Canst thou send forth lightnings, that they may
go?” (Job 38 35); “Ask ye of Jeh.... that
maketh lightnings’ (Zec 10 1). See also Ps 18
14; 974; 1357; Job 36 32; Jer 10 13; (0)
figuratively and poetically: David sings of Jeh,
“He sent... . lightnings manifold, and discom-
fited them” (Ps 18 14); used for speed: ‘The
chariots . . . . run like the lightnings” (Nah 2 4);
“His arrow shall go forth as the lightning” (Zec 9
14); ‘The living creatures ran and returned as the
appearance of a flash of lightning” (Ezk 114). The
coming of the kingdom is described by Jesus as the
shining of the lightning from one part of heaven to
another, even “from the east unto the west” (Mt 24
27; Lk 17 24); (c) meaning bright or shining:
Daniel in his vision saw a man and “his face [was]
as the appearance of lightning” (Dn! 10 6). See
also Rev 4 5; 8 5; 16 18. AtrreD H. Jory


LIGN-ALOES, lin-al’dz, lig-nal’dz. See Axozs.


LIGURE, lig’tr (Ex 28 19; 839 12 AV, RV “ja-
cinth’’). See Stonzs, Precious.


LIKE, lik, LIKEN, ltk’n, LIKENESS, lik’nes,
LIKING, lik’ing: (1) Asa noun, “like” in modern
Eng. is virtually obsolete, except in the phrase “and
the like,” which is not found in EV. “The like,”
however, occurs in 1 K 10 20||}2 Ch 9 19; 2 Ch
112; Ezk 59; 1810 (RV “any one of these
things’’—the text is uncertain); 45 25; Joel 2 2;
Wisd 16 i (RV “creatures like those’); Sir 7 12.
“His like’”’ is found in Job 41 38; Sir 13 15; “their
like” in Sir 27.9. “And such like” (Gal 5 21) is
only slightly archaic, but ‘“doeth not such like”
(Ezk 18 14) is quite obsolete.

(2) As an adj. “like” is common in AV in such
combinations as “like manner” (frequently), “like
weight” (Ex 30 34), “like occupation” (Acts 19
25), etc. Modern Eng. would in most cases replace


1893


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Light, Lightness


“like” by ‘the same,” as has been done in 1 Thess
214RV (cf Rom 15 5; Phil 2 2). So RV has
modernized the archaic “like precious faith” of
2 Pet 11 by inserting “a” before “like.” AV’s
rendering of 1 Pet 3 21, “the like figure where-
unto,” could not have been very clear at any time,
and RV has revised completely into ‘‘after a true
likeness” (m ‘‘in the antitype’’).

(3) Asan advb. “like” is used in Jer 38 9, ‘‘He is
like to die’; Jon 1 4, “like to be broken.” RV
could have used “likely” in these verses. Most com-
mon of all the uses of “like” is the quasi-prepo-
sitional construction in “He is like a man,” ete.
This is of course good modern Eng., but not so when
“like” is. enlarged (as it usually is in EV) into the
forms “like to” (Dnl 7 5), “like unto” (very com-
mon), “like as’ (Isa 26 17, etc). These forms and
the simple “like” are interchanged without much
distinction, and the RV has attempted little system-
atizing beyond reducing the occurrences of “‘like as”’
(cf Mt 12 13, and ARV Isa 18 4; Jer 23 29).

(4) The vb. “‘like’’ has two distinct meanings, “be
pleased with’ and “give pleasure to.” The latter
sense occursin Dt 23 16 (AV, ERV), “in one of thy
gates, where it liketh him best,’”’ and in Est 8 8;
Am 45 AV; Sir 33 13 (ARV has “‘pleaseth” in
the three OT passages). The other use of ‘“‘like”
belongs also to modern Eng., although in a much
weakened sense. On account of this weakening,
1 Ch 28 4 AV, “liked me to make me king” and
Rom 1 28 AV, “did not like to retain God,” have
become in RV “‘took pleasure in” and “refused to”
(m “did not approve”). It would have been better
if Dt 25 7.8, ‘like not to take,’’ had been modified
also into “hath no wish to take.” From this use of
‘Tike’ is derived liking in the modern sense in Wisd
16 21, ‘‘tempered itself to every man’s liking’ (RV
“choice”’). In 1 Esd 4 39, ‘“‘All men do well like of
her works” is a further obsolete use.

(5) Liken and ‘make like’ are common. To be
noted only is that, in He 7 3, ‘‘made like unto the
Son of God,” the sense really is “likened to,” ‘pre-
sented by the writer with the qualitiesof.”’ Likeness
normally means ‘“‘a copy of,” butin Ps 17 15it means
the actual form itself (“form” in ARV, ERVm); ef
Rom 6 5; 8 3; Phil 2 7, and perhaps Acts 14 11.
Closely allied with “likeness” is an obsolete use of
“Viking” (quite distinct from that above) in Job 39 4
AV, ERV, “Their young ones are in good liking”;
Dni 4 10, “‘see your faces worse liking.” The mean-
ing is “appearance,” “appearing,” and ARV renders
“their young ones become strong,” “‘see your faces
worse looking.’ Likewise varies in meaning from
the simple conjunction ‘‘and” to a strong advb., “in
exactly the same way.” RV has made some at-
tempt to distinguish the various forces (e.g. cf AV
with RV in Lk 22 36; 16 7; 22 20). But com-
plete consistency was not attainable, and in certain
instances was neglected deliberately, in order to
preservé the familiar wording, as in Lk 10 37, “Go,
and do thou likewise.” Burton Scotr Easton


LIKHI, lik’hi (P>, likhi): A descendant of
Manasseh (1 Ch 7 19).


LILITH, lil’ith, li/lith. See Nraar-Monstsr.


LILY, lili (JWAW, shashen [1 K 7 19], MEWW,
shéshannah [2 Ch 4 5; Cant 211; Hos 14 5];
pl. [Cant 2 16; 4 5; 5 18; 62f; 72; Ecclus
39 14; 50 8]; kplvov, krinon [Mt 6 28; Lk 12
27]): The Heb is probably a loan word from the
Egyp, the original s-sh-n denoting the lotus-flower,
Nymphaea lotus. This was probably the model of
the architectural ornament, tr? “lily-work,’”’ which
appeared upon the capitals of the columns in the
temple porch (1 K 7 19), upon the top of the


pillars (ver 22) and upon the turned-back rim of the
“molten sea’’ (ver 26).

Botanically the word shdshannah, like the similar
modern Arab. Susan, included in all probability a
great many flowers, and was used in a way at least
as wide as the popular use of the Eng. word “‘lily.”’
The expression “lily of the valleys” (Cant 2 1)
has nothing to do with the plant of that name;
the flowers referred to appear to have been asso-
ciated with the rank herbage of the valley bottoms
(Cant 4 5); the expression ‘His lips are as lilies”
(6 13) might imply a scarlet flower, but more prob-
ably m oriental imagery signifies a sweet-scented
flower; the sweet scent of the lily is referred to in
Ecclus 39 14, and in 50 8 we read of “‘lilies by the
rivers of water.” The beauty of the blossom is
implied in Hos 14 5, where Jeh promises that
repentant Israel shall “blossom as the lily.” A
‘heap of wheat set about with lilies’ (Cant 7 2)
probably refers to the smoothed-out piles of newly
threshed wheat on the threshing-floors decorated by
a circlet of flowers.

The reference of Our Lord to the “‘ilies of the
field” is probably, like the OT references, quite a
general one.

The Heb and the Gr very likely include not only
any members of the great order Liliaceae, growing
in Pal, e.g. asphodel, squill, hyacinth, ornithogalum
(‘Star of Bethlehem’’), fritillaria, tulip and_colo-
cynth, but also the more showy irises (‘“Tabor
lilies,’ “purple irises,” etc) and the beautiful
gladioli of the N.O. Irideae and the familiar nar-
cissi of the N.O. Amaryllideae.

In later Jewish lit. the lily is very frequently
referred to symbolically, and a lotus or lily was
commonly pictured on several Jewish coins.

E. W. G. MastermMan

LILY-WORE: The ornament of the capitals on
the bronze pillars, Jachin and Boaz, in front of
Solomon’s temple (1 K 7 19.22). See Laity;
TEMPLE; JACHIN AND Boaz.


LIME, lim ({1] ™W, sidh; cf Arab. oL&, shdd,
“to plaster”; [2] ""3, gir; ef Arab. A > , jir, ‘“Byp-


sum” or “quick-lime”’; [3] "2-"2Q4N, ’abhené-ghir):
Sidh is tr4 “lime” in Isa 33 12, ‘And the peoples
shall be as the burnings of lime, as thorns cut down,
that are burned in the fire,” and in Am 2 1, “He
burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime.”
It is tr4 “plaster” in Dt 27 2, “Thou shalt set thee
up great stones, and plaster them with plaster,” also
in Dt 274. Gir is tr? “plaster” m Dnl 5 5,
‘wrote ... . upon the plaster of the wall.” In
Isa 27 9 we have, ‘He maketh all the stones of the
altar as chalkstones” (abhené-ghir).

Everywhere in Pal limestone is at hand which
can be converted into lime. The lime-kiln is a
thick-walled, cylindrical or conical, roofless structure
built of rough stones without mortar, the spaces
between the stones being plastered with clay. It
is usually built on the side of a hill which is slightly
excavated for it, so that the sloping, external wall
of the kiln rises much higher from the ground on the
lower side than on the upper. The builders leave
a passage or tunnel through the base of the thick
wall on the lower side. The whole interior is filled
with carefully packed fragments of limestone, and
large piles of thorny-burnet and other shrubs to serve
as fuel are gathered about the kiln. The fuel is intro-
duced through the tunnel to the base of the lime-
stone in the kiln, and as the fire rises through the
mass of broken limestone a strong draft is created.
Relays of men are kept busy supplying fuel day
and night. By day a column of black smoke rises
from the kiln, and at night the flames may be seen


Limit
Lion


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1894


bursting from the top. Several days are required
to reduce the stone to lime, the amount of time
depending upon the size of the kiln and upon the
nature of the fuel. At the present day, mineral
coal imported from Europe is sometimes employed,
and requires much less time than the shrubs which
are ordinarily used. See CHALKsTONE; Cuay.
Aurrep Evy Day

LIMIT, lim’it (033, gbhul, “bound’’): Occurs
once in Ezk 43 12 (“limit’’ of holy mountain).
“Limited” (Ps 78 41) and “‘limiteth” (6pi{w, horizo,
He 4 7) are changed in RV to “provoked”’ (m re-
tains “limited”) and ‘“‘defineth”’ respectively.


LINE, lin (IP, kaw, 53, hebhel): Usually of a
measuring line, as Jer 31 39; Ezk 47 3; Zec 1
16 (kaw); Ps 78 55; Am 7 17; Zec 2 1 (hébhel).
Other Heb words mean simply a cord or thread
(Josh 2 18.21; 1K 715; Ezk 403). In Ps
19 4 (kaw, “Their line is gone out through all the
earth’’), the reference is probably still to measure-
ment. (the heaven as spanning and bounding the
earth), though the LXX, followed by Rom 10 18,
takes it as meaning a musical cord (Péyvyos,
phthéggos). The ‘‘line,” as measure, suggests a
rule of conduct (Isa 28 10). For “line” in Isa
44 13, RV reads “pencil,” m “red ochre” (seredh),
andin 2 Cor 10 16, “province,” m “limit” (kanén).
Sce also Measurine Linr; Wesicuts anp Mras-
URES. Jammus ORR


LINEAGE, lin’é-4] (warp, patrid): Found only
once in Lk 2 4 (AV, RV ‘family”), and signifying
the line of paternal family descent. A word preg-
nant in meaning among the Jews, who kept all
family records with religious care, as may be seen
from the long genealogical records found everywhere
in the OT.


LINEN, lin’en (73, badh, ‘‘white linen,” used
chiefly for priestly robes, 73 , big, “byssus,” a fine
white Egyp linen, called in the earlier writings UW,
shésh; WD, pesheth, “flax,” [1O, sadhin; Bicros,
bissos, o8dviov, othdnion, Alvov, linen, avwSdv,
sindén): Thread or cloth made of flax.

Ancient Egypt was noted for its fine linen (Gen
41 42; Isa 19 9). From it a large export trade

was carried on with surrounding na-
1, History tions, including the Hebrews, who

early learned the art of spinning from
the Egyptians (Ex 35 25) and continued to rely
on them for the finest linen (Prov 7 16; Ezk 27 7).
The culture of flax in Pal probably antedated the
conquest, for in Josh 2 6 we read of the stalks of
flax which Rahab had laid in order upon the roof.
Among the Hebrews, as apparently among the
Canaanites, the spinning and weaving of linen were
carried on by the women (Prov 31 13.19), among
whom skill in this work was considered highly
praiseworthy (Ex 35 25). One family, the house
of Ashbea, attained eminence as workers in linen
(1 Ch 4 21; 2 Ch 2 14).

Linen was used, not only in the making of gar-

ments of the finer kinds and for priests, but also
for shrouds, hangings, and possibly for

2. General other purposes in which the most

Uses highly prized cloth of antiquity would
naturally be desired.

The robes of the Heb priests consisted of 4 linen
garments, in addition to which the high priest wore

garments of other stuffs (Ex 28, 39;
3. Priestly Lev 6 10; 164; 18 2218; Ezk
Garments 44 17.18). Egyp priests are said to
have worn linen robes (Herod. 31.37).
In religious services by others than priests, white
linen was also preferred, as in the case of the


infant Samuel (1 8 2 18), the Levite singers in
the temple (2 Ch 6 12), and even royal person-
ages (28614; 1 Ch 16 27). Accordingly, it
was ascribed to angels (Ezk 9 2.3.11; 10 2.6.7;
Dnl 10 5; 12 6.7). Fine linen, white and pure,
is the raiment assigned to the armics which are in
heaven following Him who is called Faithful and
True (Rev 19 14). It is deemed a fitting symbol
of the righteousness and purity of the saints (Rev
19 8).

Garments of distinction were generally made of
the same material: e.g. those which Pharaoh gave
Joseph (Gen 41 42), and those which
Mordecai wore (Est 8 15; cf also
Lk 16 19). Even a girdle of fine
linen could be used by a prophet as a
means of attracting attention to his message (Jer
18 1). It is probable that linen wrappers of a
coarser quality were used by men (Jgs 14 12.13)
and women (Prov 31 22). The use of linen, how-
ever, for ordinary purposes probably suggested
unbecoming luxury (Isa 3 23; Ezk 16 10.13; cf
also Rev 18 12.16). The poorer classes probably
wore wrappers made either of unbleached flax or
hemp (Ecclus 40 4; Mk 14 51). The use of a
mixture called sha‘atnéz, which is defined (Dt 22
11) as linen and wool together, was forbidden in
garments.

The Egyptians used linen exclusively in wrapping
their mummies (Herod. 1.86). many as one

hundred yards were used in one band-
5. Shrouds age. Likewise, the Hebrews seem to

have preferred this material for wind-
ing-sheets for the dead, at least in the days of the
NT (Mt 27 59; Mk 15 46; Lk 23 58; Jn 19
40; 20 5ff) and the Talm (Jerus Killayim 9 32b).

The use of twisted linen (shésh moshzar) for fine
hangings dates back to an early period. It was

used in the tabernacle (Ex 26 1; 27


4. Other
Garments


6. Hang- 9; 35; 36; 38; Jos, Ant, ITI, vi, 2),
ings in the temple (2 Ch 3 14), and no

doubt in other places (Mish, Ydma’,
i1.4). Linen cords for hangings are mentioned in


the description of the palace of Ahasuerus at Shu-
shan (Est 1 6).
Other uses are suggested, such as for sails, in
the imaginary ship to which Tyre is compared (Ezk
27 7), but judging from the extrava-
7. Other  gance of the other materials in the
Uses ship, it is doubtful whether we may
- infer that such valuable material as
linen was ever actually used for this purpose. It
is more likely, however, that it was used for cover-
ings or tapestry (Prov 7 16), and possibly in other
instances where an even, durable material was
needed, as in making measuring lines (Ezk 40 3).
Exta Davis Isaacs


LINTEL, lin’tel. See Hovss, IT, 1,(4).


LINUS, li’nus (Alves, Linos [2 Tim 4 21)):
One of Paul’s friends in Rome during his second and
last imprisonment in that city. He was one of the
few who remained faithful to the apostle, even when
most of the Christians had forsaken him. And
writing to Timothy when he realized that his exe-
cution could not be very far distant—for he was
now ready to be offered, and the time of his depart-
ure was at hand (2 Tim 4 6)—he sends greeting
to Timothy from four friends whom he names, and
Linus is one of them. There is a tradition that
Linus was bishop of the church at Rome. “It is
perhaps fair to assume, though of course there is no
certainty of this, that the consecration of Linus to
the government of the Rom church as its first bishop
was one of the dying acts of the apostle Paul”
(H.D.M. Spence, in Elicott’s NT Comm.on 2 Tim).

Irenaeus—bishop of Lyons about 178 AD—in


1895


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Limit
Lion


his defence of orthodox doctrine against the Gnos-
tics ‘‘appeals esp. to the bishops of Rome, as de-
positarics of the apostolic tradition.” The list of
Irenaeus commences with Linus, whom he identifies
with the person of this name mentioned by St. Paul,
and whom he states to have been “entrusted with
the office of the bishopric by the apostles. ....
With the many possibilities of error, no more can
safely be assumed of Linus... . than that he
held some prominent position in the Rom church”
(Lightfoot’s “Dissertation on the Christian Min-
istry,” in Comm. on Phil, 220 f).

“Considering the great rarity of this Gr mytho-
logical name as a proper name for persons, we cau
hardly doubt that here, as Irenaeus has directly
asserted, the same Rom Christian is meant who,
according to ancient tradition, became after Peter
and Paul the first bishop of Rome. Among the
mythical characters in Apos Const, vii, 46 occurs
Ianos ho Klaudias, who is declared to have been
ordained by Paul as the first bishop of Rome. He
is thus represented as the son or husband of the
Claudia whose name comes after hisin 2 Tim 4 21.

“These meager statements have been enlarged upon by
Eng. investigators. The Claudia mentioned here is,
they hold, identical with the one who, according to Mar-
tial, married a certain Pudens (85-90 AD), and she, in
turn, with the Claudia Rufina from Britain, who is then
made out to be a danghter of the British king, Cogidum-
nus, or Titus Claudius Cogidubnus. For a refutation of
these assumptions, which, even chronologically con-


sidered, are impossible, see Lightfoot, St. Clement, I,
_ 76-79" (Zahn, Intro to the NT, 20).


JoHN RUTHERFURD
LION, li’un: (1) Occurring oftenest in the OT
is TW, Varyéh, pl. NYS, 'drayoth. Another
form, ""W&, ’dr7, pl. DUT, 'drayim, is
found less often.

Cf oR, dri'él, ‘* Ariel” (Ezr 8 16; Isa 29 1.2.7):
Sean , har’él, “upper altar,’’ and Se. drv'él, ‘altar
hearth” (Ezk 43 151); TON, ‘aryeh, “Arich” (2 K
15 25); “ORAN, "ar'eli, * Areli”’ and ‘‘ Arelites” (Gen 46
16; Nu 26 17). (2) ""DD. kephir, ‘young lion,’’ often
tr? “Hon” (Ps 35 17; Prov 19 12; 28 1, ete). (3)
Sou. shahal, tr4 ‘fierce lion" or “lion’’ (Job 4 10;
10 16; 28 8; Hos 5 14). (4) wd, lavish, tra “old
lion’’ or “lion” (Job 4 11; Prov 30 30; Isa 30 6).


Ct Arab. Gand, leith, “lion”; w>, lavish, ‘ Laish,”
or ''Leshem’’ (Josh 19 47; Jgs 18 7.14.27.29); wd,
layish, “Laish” (18 25 44; 283815). (5) 45,
lebhi, pl. Da, kebha’im, “loness”; also wad, labhi’,
and W95, ibhiya’ (Gen 49 9; Nu 28 24; 24 9); cf
town in §. of Judah, Lebaoth (Josh 15 32) or Beth-


lebaoth (Josh 19 6); also Arab. Bo, labwat, *'lioness"’;
Sy)


ee

hate) (6) “Vid. gar,
“454, oor, ‘‘whelp,” with ‘aryéh or a pronoun, e.g. “Jue
dah is a lion's whelp,"' gar ‘aryéh (Gen 49 9); “young
ones” of the jackal (Lam 4 3). Also wad or
bené labhi’, ‘* whelps [sons] of the lioness’’ (Job 4 11);
and PPS WDD. kephir 'drayéth, young lion," lit.
*'the young of lions” (Jgs 14 5). In Job 28 8, AV has
“‘lion's'whelps’’ for yow 32, bené shahac, RV “proud
beasts.”’ RVm ‘‘sons of pride’; cf Job 41 34 (Heb 26).
(7) Aéwv, lédn, “lion” (2 Tim 4 17; He 11 33; 1 Pet 5
8; Rev 47; 5 5; Wisd 11.17; Ecclus 4 30; 13 19;
Bel 31.32.34). (8) oxvuvos, skimnos, ‘'whelp’’ (1 Macc
8 4).


1. Names


Lebweh, a town in Coele-Syria.


The lion is not found in Pal at the present
day, though in ancient times it is known to have
inhabited not only Syria and Pal but

2. Natural also Asia Minor and the Balkan pen-
History insula, and its fossil remains show that
it was contemporary with prehistoric

man in Northwestern Europe and Great Britain.


Its present range extends throughout Africa, and
it is also found in Mesopotamia, Southern Persia,
and the border of India. There is some reason to
think that it may be found in Arabia, but its occur-
rence there remains to be proved. The Asiatic
male Jion does not usually have as large a mane as
the African, but both belong to one species, Felis leo.


Lion (Felis leo).


Lions are mentioned in the Bible for their strength
(Jgs 14 18), boldness (2 8 17 10), ferocity (Ps
7 2), and stealth (Ps 10 9; Lam 3
10). Therefore in prophetical refer-
ences to the millennium, the lion, with
the bear, wolf, and leopard, is men-
tioned as living in peace with the ox, calf, kid, lamb
and the child (Ps 91138; Isa 11 6-8; 665 25).
The roaring of the lion is often mentioned (Job 4
10; Ps 104 21; Isa 31 4 [RV “growling”]; Jer
61 38; Ezk 22 25; Hos 1110). Judah is a
“lion’s whelp” (Gen 49 9), likewise Dan (Dt 33
22). It is said of certain of David’s warriors (1 Ch
12 8) that their “faces were like the faces of lions.”
David’s enemy (Ps 17 12) “‘is like a lion that is
greedy of his prey.” ‘The king’s wrath is as the
roaring of a lion” (Prov 19 12). God in His wrath
is “unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to
the house of Judah” (Hos 5 14). ‘The devil, as
a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he
may devour” (1 Pet 6 8). ‘Lion’ occurs in the
figurative language of Ezk, Dnl, and Rev. The
figures of lions were used in the decorations of
Solomon’s temple and throne (1 K 7 29.36; 10
19f).

Nearly all references to the lion are figurative.
The only notices of the lion in narrative are of the
lion slain by Samson (Jgs 14 5); by
David (1 § 17 34f); by Benaiah (28
23 20; 1 Ch 11 22); the prophet
slain by a lion (1 K 13 24; also 1 K
20 36); the lions sent by the Lord among the set-
tlers in Samaria (2 K 17 25); Daniel in the lions’
den (Dnl 6 16). In all these cases the word used
igs ’aryéh or ’dri.

The Arab. language boasts hundreds of names for
the lion. Many of these are, however, merely

adjs. used substantively. The com-
5. Vocabu- monest Arab. names are sab‘, ’asad,
lary laith, and labwat, the last two of

which are identified above with the
Heb layish and labhi’. As in Arab., so in Heb, the
richness of the language in this particular gives
opportunity for variety of expression, as in Job 4
10.11:


“The roaring of the lion [’eryéh], and the voice of
the fierce lion [shahal},


3. Figur-
ative


4, Narra-
tive


Lip THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lit., Sub-apostol.


1896


And the teeth of the young lions [kephirim], are


broken.
The old lion [layish] perisheth for lack of prey,
And the whelps of the lioness [bene labhi’] are
scattered abroad.’?
In Jgs 14 5-18, not less than three different
terms, k*phir ’draydth, ’aryéh, and ’dri, are used of
Samson’s lion. Autrrep Exy Day


LIP (MDW, saphah, MDW, sepheth, “lip,” “lan-
guage,”’ “speech,” “talk” [also “rim,” “border,”
“shore,” “bank,” etc], ODW, sdpham, “[upper]
lip,” “‘moustache,” “beard”; xeiAos, chetlos, “lip”
[also once, ‘‘shore” in the quotation He 11 12=
Gen 22 17]): (1) Lips stand in oriental idiom for
speech or language, like “mouth,” ‘tongue’ ; there-
fore they stand in parallelism. ‘The lip of truth
shall be established for ever; but a lying tongue
is but for a moment” (Prov 12 19). ‘“To shoot ont
the lip” (Ps 22 7) means to make a mocking,
contemptuous, scornful face. As the lips are the
chief instrument of speech, we find numerous
idiomatic phrases for “speaking,” such as: ‘‘the
utterance of the lips” (Nu 30 6.8), ‘to proceed out
of the lips” (Nu 30 12), ‘to open the lips” (Job 32
20), “‘to go out of the lips” (Ps 17 1). These ex-
pressions do not convey, as a rule, the idea that the
utterance proceeds merely out of the lips, and that
it lacks sincerity and the consent of the heart, but
occasionally this is intended, e.g. ‘“This people
draw nigh unto me, and with their mouth and with
their lips do honor me, but have removed their
heart far from me” (Isa 29 13; cf Mt 15 8).
The “fruit of the lips’ (Isa 57 19=He 13 15)
and “calves of the lips’ (Hos 14 2 AV) designate
the praise and thanksgiving due to God. ‘‘Fervent
[AV “burning’’] lips” (Prov 26 23) are synonymous
with eloquence. ‘‘To refrain the lips’ (Ps 40 9;
Prov 10 19) means to keep silence, where the godless
or unwise would wish to assert his rights.

Numerous other expressions need uo further explana-
tion, such as ‘‘perverse lips’' (Prov 4 24), ‘‘uncircum-
cised lips’’ (Ex 6 12.30), ‘‘feigned lips" (Ps 17 1),
‘lying lips'’’ (Ps 31 18: Prov I0 18; 12 22), ‘‘ wicked
for false] lips” (Prov 17 4), ‘‘unclean lips” (Isa 6 5),
“strange (AV ‘‘stammering'’'] lips'' (Isa 28 11), ‘‘flatter-
ing lips’ (Ps 12 2.3; Prov 7 21), ‘righteous lips"
(Prov 16 13).

(2) The Heb word sa@pham is found only in the
phrase ‘‘to cover the lip or lips,” which is an ex-
pression of mourning, submission and shame. The
Oriental covers his lips with his hand or a portion
of his garment, when he has been sunk into deep
grief and sorrow. He expresses, thereby, that he
cannot open his mouth at the visitation of God.
Differently, however, from common mourners,
Ezekiel was forbidden of God ‘‘to cover his lips”
(Ezk 24 17; see also ver 22), i.e. to mourn in the
usnal way over Israel’s downfall, as Israel had
brought these judgments upon himself. The leper,
victim of an incurable disease, walks about with
rent clothes and hair disheveled, covering his lips,
erying: ‘“Unclean, unclean!’ (Lev 18 45). The
thought here is that even the breath of such a one
may defile. The prophet calls upon all seers and
diviners, to whom God has refused the knowledge
of the future, to cover their lips in shame and con-
fusion (Mic 8 7). H. L. E. Lurrina


LIQUOR, lik’ér: Every sort of intoxicating
liquor except the beverage prepared from the juice
of the grape (yayin), according to the usage of the
OT, is comprehended under the generic term 130,
shékhar (cf shakhar, to ‘be drunk’’), rendered
“strong drink” (cf Gr sikera in Lk 115). The two
terms, yayin and shékhar, “wine” and “strong drink,”
are often found together and are used by OT writers
as an exhaustive classification of the beverages in


use among the ancient Hebrews (Lev 10 9; 18 1
15; Prov 20 1, etc). See Winn; Drinx, STRONG.


LIST: A variant of “lust” (see Lust), meaning
“to wish,” found in AV of Mt 17 12 || Mk 9 183;
Jn 3 8, as tr of Oéd\w, thélo, and in Jas 3 4 as tr of
Bobrouar, bovilomai. The last case ERV has ren-
dered ‘‘will,”’ and ARV has made the same change
throughout. The word is obsolete in modern Eng.,
but Jn 3 8 is still used proverbially, “The wind
bloweth where it listeth.”


LITERATURE, lit’ér-a-tir, SUB-APOSTOLIC,

sub-ap-os-tol’ik (Christian) :

I. Epistie or CLEMENT TO THE CORINTHIANS
- Authorship and Date
- Occasion and Contents
. Apologetic Testimony
. Doctrinal Testimony
. Office-Bearers and Organization
. Ritual
wE Didache
. Dissepearance and Recovery

ate


DOV CODD


II.


4


Pobre


. Standpoint, Authorship and Object
. Testimony to NT Writings
5. Contents and Notabilia
III. Eristzzs of Ionarivs
1. Author and Date
2. Genuineness
3. Leading Ideas
4. Other Notahilia
IV. Episttes or Potycarp
1. Date and Genuineness
2. Occasion and Contents
3. Notahilia
V. Papras Fragments
1. Author and Date
2. Testimony to St. Matthew and St. Mark
3. Other Notabilia
VI. Epistie or BARNABAS
1. Authorship
2. Date
3. Object and Contents
4. Notabilia


VII. Pastor or Hermas
1. Authorship and Date
2. Object and Contents
3. Notabilia
VIII. Seconp EpistLte or CLEMENT


1. Nature and Document

2. Date and Authorship

3. Contents

4. Notabilia
IX. Aprorooy or ARISTIDES

1. Recovery and Date

2. Contents

3. Notabilia
X. Justin Martyr
1. Incidents of Life
2. First Apology
3. Second Apology
4. Dialogue with Trypho the Jew
5. Notabilia
Epistte to Dioonetus ©
1. Date and Authorship
2. Contents
LITERATURE

The Sub-apostolic Age is usually held to extend

from the death of St. John, the last surviving
apostle, about 100 AD, to the death of Polycarp,
St. John’s aged disciple (155-56 AD). The Chris-
tian literature of this period, although as a whole
of only moderate intrmsic value, is of historical
interest and importance. This is owing to the light
which it throws back on apostolic times, and the
testimony borne to Christian life, thought, worship,
work and organization during an age when the
church was under the guidance, mainly, of men who
had been associated with the apostles and who
might be supposed, therefore, to know their mind.
Some writings are omitted from this review, having
been dealt with in previous articles. For the
Protevangelium of James and the Gospel and
Apocalypse of Peter see APocrYPHAL GOSPELS;
ApocryPHAL Acts. For an account of extant
fragments of Basilides and Valentinus, see GNosT1-
cismM. For pseudo-Clementine writings see Parsr,
EristLEs or; Simon Macus.


XI,


«


1897


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Lip


Lit., Sub-apostol.


I. Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians.—Only
the larger part had previously been extant, when
the complete ep. was recovered in


1. Author- 1875 by Bryennios, bishop of Nicome-
ship and dia. The high honor in which it was
Date held by early Christendom is attested


(1) by its position in Codex A, at the
end of the NT, and in an ancient Syr MS, between
the Catholic and Pauline Epp.;, (2) by its being
publicly read in many churches down to the 4th
cent. (ZH, ITI, 16). The work is anonymous, but
sent in the name of the Rom church. Dionysius
of Corinth (170 AD) refers to it as written by the
agency of (did) Clement (HE, IV, 23); Clement of
Alexandria states distinctly the Clementine author-
ship (Strom., iv.17). The writer is evidently a
leading office-bearer of his church, and is identi-
fied with the Clement whom Eusebius designates
as third “bishop” (or chief presbyter) of Rome after
St. Peter, and as holding office between 92 and 101
AD (HE, III, 34). Clement is further identified
by Origen (Comm. on St. John) and in HE, I, 15
with the Clement of Phil 4 3; but the name is
too common and the interval too long to render
this identity more than possible. Some conjecture
the writer to be the consul, Flavius Clemens, whom
Domitian (his cousin) put to death in 95 AD for
alleged ‘‘atheism,” i.e. probably, profession of Chris-
tianity (see Harnack, Gesch. Lit., 1, 253, note 1).
But Clement the “bishop” is never otherwise re-
ferred to as a martyr, and a member of the imperial
family would hardly have been head of the Rom
church without so signal a fact being noted by some
contemporary or later writer. Lightfoot, with
some probability, supposes (Apostolic Fathers, I,
61) that Clement was a “freedman or the son of a
freedman, belonging to the household of Flavius
Clemens.” From St. Paul’s time (Phil 4 22) the
imperial household included Christians; and many
slaves were men of culture. To such a Christian
freedman’s influence the consul’s conversion may
have been due. Internal evidence points to Clem-
ent having been a Hellenist Jew or proselyte of
Judaism; for he writes with some classical culture
and with knowledge of OT history and of the LXX;
his style, moreover, has a “strong Hebraistic tinge”’
(Lightfoot, p. 59). The date of the ep. is fixed
approximately by a reference to a persecution at
Rome in progress or very recent; this persecution
(during Clement’s episcopate’) was doubtless that
by Domitian in 95 AD. Clement’s Ep. is thus not
strictly within the Sub-apostolic Age, but it is uni-
formly included in sub-apostolic literature.

The occasion was a church feud at Corinth, and the
expulsion of some faithful presbyters. The writer
. seeks to procure their restoration and
2. Occasion to heal the dissension. He quotes OT
and examples of the evil issue of envy and
Contents strife, and of the blessedness of humility,
submission and concord. He adduces
as a pattern the peace and harmony of Nature. In
this connection occurs an anticipation of geographi-
cal discovery, when the author writes (ch xx) of “the
impassable ocean and_ the worlds beyond it’ (cf
Seneca, Medea ii.375; Strabo i.4; Plut. Mor. ix.41).
St. Paul’s warnings in 1 Cor about party spirit are
recalled; a not unworthy echo of 1 Cor 13 is em-
bodied; and the erring community is solemnly ad-
monished.
In the course of the letter, with obvious reference to
1 Cor 15, Clement introduces the resurrection, for which
he argues from the OT and from natural analogles. He
refers to the phoenix which lives 500 years, and, when
dissolution approaches, builds a nest of spices into which
it enters to die. As the flesh decays, however, a ‘‘ worm
is generated, which is nurtured from the dead bird's
Moisture and putteth forth wings.” The fable is men-
tioned by Herodotus and Pliny.


A lengthy prayer of intercession for “all sorts
and conditions of men” is abruptly introduced near
the end, in order, presumably, to imbue Corinthian
Christians with that charity which they needed and
which is the chief incentive to intercession. The
ep. closes with a hopeful anticipation of restored
concord and peace.

Apologetic testimony is found to (1) books of the
NT, viz. to the Pauline authorship of 1 Cor; t

St. Mark’s Gospel, through which
8. Apolo- (ch xv) he quotes Isa 29 13, repro-
getic Testi- ducing St. Mark’s variations from the
mony LXX; to Acts, through which he simi-
larly quotes (ch xviii) 1 S 13 14; to
Rom, Eph, 1 Tim, Tit, Jas, 1 Pet (chs xxxv, xlvi,
xxi, 1i, xlvi, xlix, respectively). The ||s between
Clement and He are so numerous that the latter
work has from early times been ascribed to him by
some (HF, VI, 25). But the general type both of
thought and of diction is dissimilar; (2) against the
Tiibingen theory of essential divergence between
the doctrine of St. Peter and of St. Paul. The chief
presbyter of Rome could not have been ignorant of
such divergence; yet he refers the partisanship of
which the two apostles were victims entirely to the
Corinthians, not at all to the apostles (ch xlix).

Doctrinal testimony is found: (1) to the Trinity,

“As God liveth and the Lord Jesus Christ liveth,
and the Holy Spirit” (ch lviii); (2) to
4. Doctrinal the personality of Christ, ‘The Lord
Testimony Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory
and the majesty forever.’ In union
and communion with Christ we have life, are sanc-
tified, possess love, manifest godliness (ch i, xxxvi) ;
(3) to the atonement: Clement ascribes to Christ’s
death not merely subjective moral influence, but
objective vicarious efficacy in securing our salvation,
without any attempt, however, to explain the mys-
tery. Christ hath “given his flesh for our flesh, his
life for our lives” (ch xlix); (4) to justification which
is distinctly enunciated as before God through faith
(ch xxxii). But this faith (as in St. Paul’s writings)
is a “faith which worketh” (ch xxxv), and such
justification is consistent with our being justified by
works before men; (5) to the inspiration of Scrip-
ture, which is real (“the Holy Spirit saith’), but not
verbal; for quotations are often inexact. Apocry-
phal books are quoted, but not with a formula
indicating Divine authority. ;

(1) The basis of authority is not sacerdotal, but
a combination of official succession and popular

call; office-bearers are appointed “by
5. Office- the apostles or afterward by men of
Bearers and repute with consent of the whole
Organiza-_ ecclesia.”’ (2) Clement indicates no
tion distinction between presbyter and

bishop. Office-bearers designated as
presbyters (chs xlvii, liv) are referred to (chs xlii,
xliv) as filling the office of bishop. Addressing a
church on congregational strife and insubordination,
he refers to no single bishop in authority over the
church. Had the episcopate, in the post-NT sense
of mono-episcopate, been apostolically enjoined,
surely the injunction would have been obeyed or
enforced in Corinth. (3) None the less we discern
in Clement’s own position and action the anticipa-
tion of the later episcopate. Clement is an example
of how, through the personal qualities and ecclesi-
astical services of the man, the status of presiding
presbyter developed out of seniority into superiority,
out of representativeness into official authority.
(4) The early germ of the papacy is disclosed in the
passage: “If certain persons should be disobedient
unto the words spoken by God through us, let them
understand that they will entangle themselves in no
slight transgression and peril’’ (ch lix).


Lit., Sub-apostol. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1898


Such assumption by a revered man like Clement might
give no offence, and the Corinthians plainly needed cor-
rection. Still we have here the first stage in the process
which ultimately issued in the Rom claim to universal
spiritual supremacy. The assumption, however, is not
grounded on Ciement’s own official position (he speaks
always in the 1st person pl.), but on the superior dignity
of the Rom church. The later theory of supremacy
builds Rom authority on the primacy of St. Peter and
his successors; but here the authority of the leading
presbyter, in dealing with a provincial church, resis on
the suggested primacy of the ecciesia in which he presides.

(1) The long prayer (chs lix-lxi) bears internal
evidence of liturgical character, through its balanced

; and rhythmical style, its somewhat re-
6. Ritual mote relevance to the special object of
: the ep., and greater suitability for con-
gregational worship, than as part of a counsel to a
sister church. This internal testimony is confirmed
by the correspondence of the prayer in certain
verbal details with the earliest extant liturgies,
particularly those of St. Mark and St. James, pomt-
ing to the early use in the Rom church of forms of
prayer afterward incorporated into these liturgies.
While there is evidence that down at least to the time
(148 AD) of Justin’s Ist Apology (ch ]xvii) a, minister
offered up prayers of his own composition, this
prayer of Clement’s Ep. indicates that before the
close of the Apostolic Age, forms of supplication
had begun to be introduced, not to the exclusion of
“free prayer,” but simply as a mode of congre-
gational devotion countenanced by a venerated
leader of the church at Rome. (2) In ch Ivi Clem-
ent writes abont “compassionate remembrance of
them [i.e. the erring brethren] before God and the
saints.” By the saints, however, are most probably
meant, not the beatified dead, but the living Christian
brotherhood, asin 1 Cor 1 2; 2 Cor 8 4.

This ep. leaves on readers’ minds two different yet
mutually compatihle impressions—impressions both
apparently made on the early church, by which the letter
was widely read at public worship and yet excluded from
the Canon of Scriptures, We realize, on the one hand,
ths inferiority of this writing to epp. of apostles. Clem-
ent's mind is receptive, not creative; and the freshness
of thought characteristic of NT writers is absent. What

T book, moreover, contains such a foolish legend as
that of the phoenix? On the other hand, this ep.
breathes much of the spirit, as it adopts in considerable
measure the phraseology and style of apostolic writings.
ltis as if, although the sun of special inspiration had sunk
below the horizon, there remained to the church for a
while a spiritual afterglow.


Il. The ‘‘Didache’’ or Teaching (longer title,


“The Teaching of the Lord, by [did] the XII Apostles,
to the Gentiles” ).—This work is quoted


1. Disap- as “Scripture,” without being named,
pearance by Clement of Alexandria (c 170 AD, in
and Re- Strom., 1.20). It is mentioned in HE,
covery III, 25 as the “Teachings so-called


of the Apostles,” “recognized by most
ecclesiastical writers,’ although “not a genuine”
composition of apostles. Athanasius (Fest. E'p., 39)
denies its canonicity, but acknowledges its utility.
The latest ancient reference to the work from per-
sonal knowledge is by Nicephoros (9th cent.) who
includes it among apocryphal writings. Thence-
forth it disappears until its recent recovery in 1875
by Bryennios.
There is no reliable external testimony to date. Re-
semblances too considerable to be accidental exist be-
tween the Didache and the Ep. of Barna-
2. Date bas; but opinion is divided asto priority
of composition. Lightfoot and others
favor a common lost source. As to internal evidence
the simplicity of the Eucharist and of baptism as
here described, with no formal admission to the
catechumenate (ch vii); the use of “bishop” to de-
note the same office-bearer as presbyter; and the
expectation of an impending Second Advent—
point to an early date. On the other hand it is
unlikely that a writing which professes to give the


Teaching of the Twelve would be issued until all
or most apostles had passed away; and the writer
seems to be acquainted with writings of St. John
(Did., ix.2; x.2; x.5; see Schaff, Oldest Church
Manual, 90). Probably the document went through
a series of recensions (Harnack in Sch-Herz; Bartlet
in DB, V), and the date or dates of composition
may be put between 80 and 120 AD.

The work does not profess to be written by
apostles; but the author seems to be a Jewish Chris-
tian, for he calls Friday ‘Prepara-
tion Day,” and the style and diction
are Hebraic. The work is neither
Judaistic nor Ebionite: circumcision,
the Sabbath, and special Mosaic ob-
servances, areignored. From the book
in whole or in part being addressed specially, al-
though not exclusively, to Gentiles, we infer that
the community among whom it was composed, while
mainly Jewish Christian, made special provision
for conversion and instruction of Gentiles. The
doctrinal standpoint is neither Pauline nor anti-
Pauline, but resembles that of Jas. Canon Spence
(Teaching) conjectures plausibly that the author
may be Simeon, cousin of James the Lord’s brother,
who became chief presbyter of the Jewish Christian
community, first at Jerus, afterward at Pella, until
his martyrdom in 107 AD.

Mt was certainly in the writer’s hands; for the
Didache contains 22 quotations from, or reminis-

cences of, that Gospel, extending over


3. Stand-
point,
Authorship
and Object


4. Testi- ten chs of it. Particularly notable is
mony to Did., viti.2, ‘‘Neither pray ye as the
NT hypocrites, but as the Lord com-
Writirgs manded in His Gospel; after this


manner pray ye, Our Father,’ etc

(see also vii.1; ix.5; xvi.6). There are also refer-

ences to the Gospel of Lk (Did., iii.5, 16); St. John’s

writings (see above); Acts (Did., iv.8), Rom (Did.,

iv.5), 2 Thess (Did., xiv.1), 1 Pet (Did.,i4). No
extra-canonical saying of Our Lord is recorded.

The contents and notabilia may be examined as

follows: (1) Didactic (chs i-vi), intended for cate-

chumens in preparation for baptism.

6. Contents This catechetical manual (the earliest


an of its kind) opens with the words:
Notahilia ‘There are two ways: one of life and

one of death” (suggested probably by
Jer 21 8). From this text the writer gives a sum-


mary of Christian duty esp. toward our neighbor,
based on the Decalogue, the Golden Rule, and the
Sermon on the Mount, which is frequently quoted.


Among notable precepts is a command to fast as well
as pray for enemies; a warning against infanticide
which, in the case of sickly infants, heathenism approved,
and against augury and astrology as generating idolatry;
an admonition not to “stretch out one’s hands for receiv-
ing and to draw them in for giving"; an injunction to
‘share all things with thy brethren, and not to say that
they are thine Own"; a command to ‘‘love some above
thine own life’; and a quaint corrective against indis-
criminate and ill-informed beneficence: ‘“‘Let thine
alms sweat into thy hands until thou know to whom
thou shouldest give.’’ <A precept to ‘‘give with thy
hands a ransom for sin’’ may not mean more thau that
sinful habits are subdued by good works, but it stggests
and paves the way for the error of the atoning efficacy
of Sree ne The summary of duty relates chiefly to
the second Table of the Law; duty toward God is after-
ward (so far) dealt with under ‘worship.’ _This may
account for obedience to parents being strangely omitted:
for among the Jews the Fifth Commandment was in-
cluded in the First Table.


(2) Devotional: worship and rites (chs vii-x, xiv) —
The Lord’s Prayer is to be used thrice a day.
“Heaven” and “‘debt’”’ are found instead of ‘“heav-
ens” and “debts.” The Doxology is added (with
“kingdom” omitted)—its earliest recorded use in
this connection. Christians are to fast on Wed-
nesday cand Friday, the days of the betrayal and
crucifixion. Fasting is enjoined for a day or two


1899


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Lit., Sub-apostol.


before baptism, both on baptizer and on baptized;
it is recommended to “others who can.” There is
no mention of oil, salt, or exorcism. The baptismal
formula, “In the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost,” is commanded, confirming the
historical trustworthiness of Mt 28 19. Triple im-
mersion in ‘‘living water’ is assumed to be normal;
but where this is impracticable, other water and
affusion are permitted (see Trine Immmrston).
The Lord’s Supper is dealt with only on its euchar-
istic side, the writer’s object being not to expound
the nature of the rite, but to give models of thanks-
giving.

The phrase, ‘‘after being filled give thanks,'' suggests
that the Agape was still associated with the sacrament:
the dissociation had hegun when Pliny wrote to Trajan
in 112 AD. A liturgical element in sacramental worship
is indicated by the prescription of forms of thanksgiving
for the cup, the broken bread, and spiritual mercies.
‘“Give thanks thus.'" The thanksgiving for the cup is as
follows: ‘‘We give thanks to thee cur Father, for the
holy vine of David, thy servant, which thou hast made
known to us through Jesus Christ.'' But nothing sug-
gests that the entire service is liturgical, and the forms
Supplied are not rigidly imposed; for prophets are to
offer thanks in such terms as they choose. On the Lord's
Day congregational worship and eucharistic bread-
breaking, after confession to Bod and reconciliation with
men, are distinctly enjoined.

(3) Ecclesiastical (chs xi-xiti, 2v)—Of church
office-bearers, two classes are mentioned, ordinary
and extraordinary. Of the former (essential to con-
gregational organization) only bishops and deacons
are mentioned, i.e. those intrusted with rule and over-
sight, with their assistants. Presbyter and bishop
appear to be still identical, as the former is not
specified (cf Phil 11). Popular election of these
functionaries is indicated: ‘Elect for yourselves’;
without denial, however, of those already in office
having a share in the settlement. In the second
class, apostles, prophets and teachers are included.
“Apostle” is used, not in the narrower sense of men
called to the office personally by Christ, but in the
wider sense which embraces all whose call to be His
ambassadors has been signalized by Divine gifts—
specially accredited evangelists unconnected with
any particular community. (Among Jewish Chris-
tians the designation survived to the 4th cent., for
the Theodosian Code of that period refers to Jew-
ish presbyters and to those ‘“‘quos ipsi apostolos
vocant.”) These apostles were to be received “as
the Lord,” and hospitably entertained; but, unlike
apostles in the special sense, they were not to
remain anywhere longer than “one or two days.”
Their function was to scatter the seed widely, and
any expression of desire to remain longer was to be
discouraged, while a demand for salary from a par-
ticular community would be, evidence of false
apostleship. The special function of prophets and
teachers, on the other hand, was_the instruction
and comfort of church members. They accordingly
might be encouraged to settle in a community and
receive “first-fruits” for their support. ‘These
prophets and teachers, however, were not to super-
sede the “bishops” or presbyters in ruling, but were
to undertake only those functions for which they
were specially qualified. On the other hand,
bishops and deacons were not to_be excluded from
preaching and teaching by the settlement of prophets
and official teachers in particular communities; and
in the Did. may be traced the transition, then being
gradually accomplished, of the preaching, and
teaching functions from extraordinary to ordinary
office-bearers. ‘‘They also [the bishops and dea-
cons] minister to you the ministry of prophets
and teachers: therefore despise them not.” Even
before the close of St. Paul’s ministry, the episkopos,
whose essential function was rule and oversight,
was expected, if not required, also to be didaktikés,
“qualified to teach,’ i.e. along with teachers specially


set apart for the purpose (1 Tim 3 2; 5 17). By
the middle of the 2d cent., the prophets had dis-
appeared, and their preaching function had been
vested in the office of bishop or presbyter, assisted
by the diaconate.

(4) Eschatological (ch xvi)—This concluding sec-
tion consists chiefly of exhortations to watchfulness
in view of the Second Advent. The premonitory
signs of that Coming are given, with reminiscences
from Christ’s eschatological discourses, viz. rise of
false prophets, decline of love, persecution, lawless-
ness, and the appearance of Antichrist, who is
designated the World-deceiver. Without definitely
stating chiliastic doctrine, the writer suggests it;
for in referring to the immediate signals of Christ’s
advent (opening in heaven, voice of trumpet, resur-
rection of dead) he is careful to add “Not of all the
dead; but the Lord shall come, and all the saints
with Him’’—implying that the general resurrection
would take place at an after-stage, presumably, as
Millennialists held, after the 1,000 years had expired.
Without dogmatic authority, and with only moder-
ate spiritual value, the Did. is important historically
as a witness to the church’s beliefs, usages and con-
dition during the transition between the Apostolic
and the Post-apostolic Age. During that transi-
tion period, we sce much of the freedom of primi-
tive Christianity. mingled with rudiments of ecclesi-
astical regulations and formularies; and while we
cannot assume that every belief and usage recorded
in the Did. were sanctioned by apostles, we may
reasonably ascribe them to apostolic times, and
regard them as not opposed by those apostles within
whose view they must have come.

Il. Epistles of Ignatius.—Ignatius was_bishop
of Antioch early in the 2d cent. Origen (Hom. vi

on Lk) refers to him as “‘second after
1. Author St. Peter’; Euodius came between
and Date (HE, IVI, 22). As he calls himself
éktréma, “untimely born” (cf 1 Cor
15 8), he was probably converted in mature life:
the legend of his being the “child” of Mt 18 3 rests
on misinterpretation of his designation ‘Theo-
phoros.” Traditions current in the 4th cent. repre-
sent him as a disciple of St. John (Eus., Chron.)
and ordained by St. Paul (Apos Const, vii.46).

The Martyrium of Ignatius (6th cent.) dates his trial
at Anticch in the 9th year of Trajan's reign (107-8 AD)
and represents it as conducted before the emperor. Only
one visit, however, of Trajan to Antioch is known, in
114-15; neither any Ignatian Jetter nor Eusebius, nor
any other early writer refers to so memorahle a circum-
stance as the presidency of an emperor over a Christian's
trial, and Ignatius speaks of a proposed attempt by Rom
friends to secure @ reversal of the sentence, which would
have been impossible had Trajan personally pronounced


it. His alleged presence, therefore, must be rejected as
a later embellishment,


The epp., so far as genuine, were written after
Ignatius’ condemnation, on his way to martyrdom
at Rome.

The epp. are extant in 3 edd: (1) the longer Gr,
of 15 letters now admitted to be largely spurious;

(2) a Syr recension of three letters, now
2. Gen- enerally held to be a mere epitome;
uineness 3) the shorter Gr ed, containing 7
letters of intermediate length, to the
Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians, Philadelphians,
Smyrnaeans, Romans, and Polycarp. Lightfoot,
Zahn, and most recent critics accept the substantial
genuineness of these seven. The chief external
evidence is that of Polycarp (Phil., xiii), who, soon
after Ignatius’ death, writes of a letter addressed
to himself, of another to the Smyrnaeans, and of “all
the rest which we have by us.” Now 2 Ignatian
epp. are addressed to Polycarp and the Christians
of Smyrna, while 4 profess to be written by Ignatius
at Smyrna, harmonizing well with copies of these
being in Polycarp’s possession.


Lit. Sub-apostol. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1900


Further external evidence is supplied by Irenaeus
(v.29) who quotes a saying from Ignat., Rom., iv, as that
of a martyr, and who uses 8 notahle phrases horrowed
apparently from Ignatius. This external testimony (only
got rid of by an arbitrary assumption of Polycarp’s Ep.
being wholly or partly spurious) is supported hy strong
internal and cumulative evidence: -

(1) Frequent grammatical dislocation, natural in letters
written on a journey but unaccountable on the suppo-
sition of a later forgery (Rom.,1; Mag., ii; Eph., i).

(2) Geographical particulars: e.g. Ignatius goes by land
from Antioch to Smyrna—an unusual route which a forger
would hardly invent. :

(3) Historical illustrations: e.g. conveyance of prisoners
from distant_provinces to Rome harmonizes with the
account by Dion Cassius (Ixviii.15) of the magnitude
of amphitheatrical exhibitions under Trajan causing
extensive orders for human victims from all parts.

(4) Theological evidence: e.g. these epp. refer to Juda-
istic error combined with a type of doctrine denying any
real incarnation—a combination which ceased after Ig-
natius’ time, etee ck

(5) Ecclesiastical usage: thus, the Agapé still includes
the Eucharist (Smyr., viii), whereas soon after Ignatius’
deat these were separated (Pliny, Ep. 96; Just., 1 Ap.,

5,67).

&) Personal references.—The writer shows an excess
.and affectation of self-depreciation—"‘last of Antiochene
Christians"' (Trall., xiii) “not worthy to he counted
one of the brotherhood" (Rom., ix)—such as a later
forger would hardly have introduced.


(1) Joy and glory of martyrdom.—Heroic courage
and loyalty to Christ are united with fanatical
craving after a martyr’s death: ‘I
3. Leading would rather die for Christ than reign
Ideas over the whole earth’ (Rom., vi);
“He who is near the sword is near to
God” (Smyr.,iv). This is noble; but when he writes,
“Entice wild beasts to become my _ sepulchre”’
(Rom., iv); ‘‘May I have joy of the wild beasts and
find them prompt’; ‘‘Though they be unwilling I
will force them” (Rom., iv.5), we realize how Aure-
linus (recalling perhaps some such case) was moved
to write that “death was to be encountered, not
as by the Christians like a military display, but
solemnly, and not as if one acted in a tragedy”
(Med. x13).

(2) Evil and peril of heresy and schism.—“ Ab-
stain from heresy”; “These heretics mix up Jesus
Christ with their own poison” (Trail., vi); ‘Flee
those evil outshoots, which produce death-bearing
fruit” (Trall., xi); ‘‘Avoid all divisions as the be-
ginning of evils’; ‘Nothing is better than unity’
(To Polyce.,i; Phil., iii).

(3) Submission to office-bearers, esp. to the bishop.
—“Do nothing without your bishop, and be subject
to the presbyters” (Mag., vii); “Be on your guard
against heresy: and this will be, if ye continue in
intimate union with Christ and with the bishop’;
“He who does anything without the bishop’s knowl-
edge serveth the devil” (Smyr., ix). The bishop
here is higher than ‘‘primus inter pares”; he is a
new and separate office-bearer. Yet, without
going beyond these epp., we discern that such an
episcopate was not an express apostolic institution.
For had Ignatius been able to magnify the office
as apostolically enjoined, so zealous a champion of
episcopal authority would have adduced such in-
junction as the most cogent reason for submission.
His zeal for the episcopate apparently sprang only
from its high ecclesiastical expediency as the most
effective agency for maintaining the church’s unity
against heresy and schism.


(1) The Gospel of Jn is never quoted, but numerous
phrases suggest that it was in the writer's hands. He


speaks of Christ ‘‘proceeding from the

4, Other ae noone owing wethaus ae
aad Father,”’ “in a ings pleasing im
Notabilia Who sent Him.” Christ is the ‘Door of


" the Father" and ‘Living water."’ Satan
is the '' Prince of this world.” ‘The Holy Spirit knoweth
whence He cometh and whither He goeth.”

(2) Doctrine.—Ignatius asserts emphatically Christ's
true Divinity: “Our God" (Zphk., xviii; Trall, vii). The
Trinity is frequently suggested, although not expressly
affirmed. Christians are “established in tho Son, the
Father, and the Spirit"; ‘subject to Christ and the


Father, and the Spirit." With strong support of episco-
pal authority no sacerdotalism is united. ‘' Priest
occurs only once, ‘'The priests are good: hut Christ,
the High Priest, is better." Here, as the context shows,
the imperfect Levitical priesthood is contrasted with the
perfect high-priesthood of Christ.

(83) Ecclesiastical usage—Ignatius contains one of the
latest references to the Agapé as still conjoined with the
Eucharist. The letter to Polycarp (ch iv) contains the
earliest allusion to the practice of redeeming Christian
slaves at the cost of the congregation. Slaves are not
to "long to he set free,” thus implying that such eman-
cipation, while not required as a duty, was often con-
ferred as a privilege.

(4) General characteristics.—Ignatius presents a
striking contrast, as a writer, to Clement. Clement is
calm, cultured, chaste in diction, but somewhat common-
place and deficient in originality; his hest passages are
echoes of Scripture. The diction and style of Ignatius
are impassioned, rugged, turgid, but pithy, fresh and
individualistic.

IV. Epistle of Polycarp.—Polyearp was born
not later, perhaps considerably earlier, than 70 AD;

for at his martyrdom, of which the
1. Date and now accepted date is 155 or _156
Genuine- (Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers, II, i,
ness 629), he declared, when invited to

abjure his faith, that he had ‘served
Christ for 86 years” (Mart. Pol. ix). He was a
disciple of St. John, who ordained him as bishop
or leading presbyter of Smyrna before 100 AD
(Iren., iii.3, 4). Of several letters by Polycarp,
only this ep. remains: it professes (ch xiii) to have
been written soon after the martyrdom of Ignatius.
‘The genuineness of the letter is attested by Irenaeus,
Polycarp’s own disciple (1.c.), whose evidence cannot
be set aside on the ground of its testimony to the
Ignatian letters without an obvious begging of the
question. The supposition that the Ignatian letters
and Polycarp’s Ep. are parts of one great forgery
is otherwise negatived by the very marked differ-
ence of style and standpoint between those writings
(Lightfoot, l.c., 577).

The ep. replies to a letter from the Philippian

church inviting his counsel, and asking for epp. of
_ the recently martyred Ignatius. He
2. Occasion acknowledges their kind ministry to
and Con- that martyr and to others, “entwined
tents with saintly fetters,’”’ who had “set
a pattern of all patience.”’ He sends
what he has of the letters of Ignatins and asks in
return for any information which they might pos-
sess. He commends to their careful study St.
Paul’s ep. to themselves, acknowledging his in-
abihty to attain to the apostle’s wisdom. With
much Scripture language, interwoven with his own
matter, and giving to his letter the semblance of an
apostolic echo, he exhorts his readers to righteous-
ness and godliness, charity and mercy, and warns
them against covetousuess, evil-speaking and
revenge. He dwells on the mutual relations and
obligations of presbyters and deacons, on the one
hand, and of the congregation on the other. He
repeats St. John’s admonition against teachers who
denied the reality of the incarnation: ‘Every
spirit that confesseth not,’ ete (1 Jn 4 3). He
grieves over the lapse of a Philippian presbyter,
Valens, who, along with his wife had flagrantly
sinned; but he bids his readers not count such as
enemies, but seek to recall them from their wander-
ings.

(1) Polycarp mentions only one book of the NT, viz.
Phil, but within the brief compass of 200 lines he aioe

verses or reproduces phrases from 12 NT

3. Notabilia Writings, Mt, 1 Pet, 1 Jn, and 9 Pauline

. Epp., including three whose early date

° has been disputed in modern times (1 and

2 Tim and Eph). The absence of any quotation from

the Gospel of Jn is notable, considering his relation to

the apostle; but the shortness of the letter prevents any

conclusion being drawn against the authenticity of that

Gospel; and he quotes (as we have seen) from i Jn,
which is a kind of appendix to the Gospel (Lightfoot).

(2) At a time when Ignatius had heen emphasizIng


1901


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Lit., Sub-apostol.


the paramount duty of submission to the bishop, Poly-
carp, even when enjoining subjection to presbyters, does
not mention a bishop. ‘These two inferences are irre-
sistible: (a) there was then no episkopos, in the post-NT,
sense, at Phillppi; (b) Polycarp did not consider the
defect (?) sufficient], important to ask the Philippians to
aupaly it. Had St. John instituted the mono-episcopate
as the one proper form of church government, surely his
disciple Po ycarp would have embraced the opportunity,
when the Philippians invited his counsel, to inform them
of the apostolic ordinance, and to enjoin its adoption.


V. Papias Fragments.—Papias is called by his
younger contemporary Irenaeus (v.33) a “disciple
of John and friend of Polycarp.”
1. Author Eusebius writes (HE, III, 36) that he
and Date was episkopos of Hierapolis in Phrygia.
; The Chronicon Paschale (7th cent., but
embodying materials from older documents) states
that he was martyred about the same time as Poly-
carp (155-56). His work, Hxposition of Our Lord's
Sayings, was extant in the 13th cent., but only frag-
ments quoted by Irenaeus, Eusebius, etc, remain.
These bear out the twofold description of Papias by
Eusebius, as a ‘man of little judgment”’ yet “most
learned and well acquainted with the Scriptures”
(HE, III, 39,36). (But the words of praisein ver 36
may be 4 gloss.) Papias states that he subjoins to
his expositions ‘‘whatsoever I learned carefully from
the elders and treasured up in my memory... .
I was wont to put questions regarding the words of
the elders [i.e. presumably men of an earlier gen-
eration], what Andrew or Peter said, or what Philip
or Thomas, or James, or what John or Matthew, or
any other of the Lord’s disciples said, as well as
regarding what Aristion, and the presbyter John,
the disciple of the Lord, have to say.”


It is disputed whether Papias here refers to two Johns,
the apostle and another disciple of the same name; or
to John the apostle in two erent relations, i.e. first
as one about whose testimony Papias heard from others,
and second, as one with whom, also, he held personal
communication. In favor of the first view is, (1) Euse-
bius’ own opinion (1.c.); (2) the alleged unlikelihood of
the same John being twice mentioned in one sentence;
(3) a statement by Eusebius (HF, III, 39) that in his
day two monuments (mnémata) of *’ John" existed at
Ephesus. For the latter view is, (1) no other writer
until Eusebius hints the existence of a presbyter John
distinct from the apostle; (2) the change in the quota-
tion from ‘‘said"’ to ‘’say’’ seems to give a reason for
John being twice mentioned; some things stated by
John having been heard by Papias through ‘'elders,”
others having been told him by the apostle himself. The
fact that John is called presbyter, instead of apostle, is
no insuperable objection, since John so designates him-
self in 2 and 3 Jn; and Jerome denies that_the two
mnémata were both tombs. See Lightfoot, Essay on
Papias, and Nicol, Four Gospels, 187 ff, who come to
divergent conclusions.


On the testimony to St. Matthew


a test and St. Mark see Marraew, GosPeL
St ee atthew OF? Mark, GosPEL or.

; RS (1) According to Eusebius, Papias relates

aud zs the story of ‘‘a woman accused before

ar. Our Lord’’—the story, presumably, which

eventually crept into Jn 8; so that to

him, in part, is due the preservation of a narrative,


which, whether historical or_not, finely illustrates the
union in Our Lord of holy purity and


merciful charity. 3
3. Other (2) Papias is quoted by the Chronicler
Notabilia Georgius Hamartolos (in a MS of the 9th


cent.) as declaring in his Expositen that
St. John ‘was put to death by the Jews,"' and a similar
quotation is made by Philip of Side (Epitome MS of the
7th-8th cent). On the bearing of this upon the question of
the apostle’s residence at Ephesus see Joun, THE APOSTLE.
(3) Irenaeus (v.32) quotes Papias as writing about a
Post-resurrection millennium, and as_reporting, on St.
John's authority, how the Lord said, '‘The days will come
when vines shall grow having each 10,000 branches, and
on each branch 10,000 twigs, and on each twig 10,000
shoots,” etc. This may be an exaggerated record (mis-
understood by Papias) of some parabolic utterance of
Christ, indicating prophetically the wonderful extension
of the church.


VI. Epistle of Barnabas.—This book is first ex-


pressly quoted by Clement of Alexandria (c 190 AD)
as the composition of Barnabas, companion of St.


Paul (Strom., 11.6). Origen concurs, and calls it a
“Catholic ep.”” (Con. Celsum, 1.63), thus suggest-
ing canonical position; Eusebius (7


1. Author- III, 25) testifies to the widesprea
ship ascription of it to this Barnabas,

although he himself regards it as
“spurious.” Cod. Sin places it immediately after


the NT, as being read in churches, and thus sug-
gests its composition by a companion at least of
apostles. Against this external testimony, how-
ever, to authorship by the Barnabas of Acts, is
strong internal evidence: (1) apostolic sinfulness
prior to discipleship is spoken of in exaggerated
terms hardly credible in a writer who knew the
Twelve—‘‘exceedingly lawless beyond all [ordi-
nary] sin’’ (ch v)—an echo apparently of St.
Paul’s “sinners of whom I am chief’’; (2) ignorance
of Jewish rites incomprehensible in a Levite who
had lived in Jerus, e.g. the priests are said to eat
goat’s flesh on the great Day of Atonement; (3)
extreme anti-Judaism (see below), inconsistent with
the representation of Barnabas in Acts and Gal.
The writer may have been some other Barnabas, a
converted Alexandrine Jew, or, more probably, a
converted gentile proselyte, trained in Philo’s
school, but ignorant of Jewish rites as practised
at Jerus, and possessing little real sympathy with
Judaism.
The ep. must be dated after 70 AD, as the de-
struction of Jerus is referred to (ch xvi); also after
the publication of the Gospel of Jn,
2. Date of which there are several reminis-
cences. But the absence of any refer-
ence to the rebuilding of Jerus under Hadrian, in
120 AD, in a passage (ch xvi) where such allusion
might have been expected, suggests a date prior to
that year. We may place the writing between
90 and 120 AD.
The object is to deter both Jewish and gentile
Christians from Judaistic lapse by a bold application
of the allegorizing method to the OT,


8. Object far beyond what Philo would have
and sanctioned. Jewish sacrifices, festi-
Contents vals, Sabbath enactments, temple-


worship, distinction of clean and un-
clean food, are not only not of perpetual obligation,
but never were binding at all, even on Jews. Be-
lief in their obligatoriness rests on a slavishly liberal
exegesis of the OT, which, properly interpreted, is
not a preparation for Christ but Christianity ztself
in allegorical disguise.


Ceremonies are simply allegorical enforcements of
spiritual worship; distinctions of clean and unclean are
merely picerle representations of the necessity of sepa-
ration from vice and vicious men; interdict of swine's
flesh means no more than ‘associate not with swinish
men.’ The only circumcision really commanded by
God is circumcision of the heart. Barnabas ignores what
St. Paul realized, that Jewish laws and rites, even lit.
interpreted, are a Divine discipline of wholesome self-
restraint, neighborly consideration and obedience to God.
Barnabas not only explains away OT enactments, but
finds in trivial OT statements Christian fact and truth.
Thus, in Abraham's circumcision of the 318 men of his
house, the 10 and 8 are significantly denoted by the Gr
letters I and H, the initial letters of Iésous (Jesus); while
the 300 represented by the Gr T, points to the cross.
The writer sclf-complacently intimates that ‘‘no one
has been admitted by me to a more genuine piece of
knowledge than this!” (ch ix).


When Barnabas, however, leaves obscure allegory
for plain exhortation, he writes effectively of the
“two ways” of light and darkness. Among edify-
ing admonitions the following are outstanding:
“Thou shalt not go to prayer with an evil con-
science’; “Thou shalt not let the word of God
issue from lips stained with impurity”; ‘Be not
ready to stretch forth thine hands to take, while
thou contractest them to give’; ‘Thou shalt not
issue orders with bitterness to thy servant, lest


Lit., Sub-apostol.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1902


thou fail in reverence to God who is above you
both”; ‘Thou shalt not make a schism, but shalt
bring together them who contend”; ‘The way of
darkness is crooked”; “In this way are jamong
others mentioned] those who labor not to aid him
who is overdone with toil” (chs xix, xx).


(1) The Divinity of Christ is emphasized: ‘Lord of
all the world’; ‘‘Joint Creator, with the Father, of
mankind’’ (ch v). (2) The writer, while
4, Notabilia following the Alexandrian method of alle-
¢ gorical interpretation, is free from the
Alexandrian doctrine of the essential evil
of matter; the necessity of a real incarnation is af-
firmed (ch vy). (3) In ch xi, he writes, ‘We go down
into the water full of sins and filth, and come up bear-
ing fruit in our heart, having the fear of God and
trust in Jesus in our spirit." This has been interpreted
as involving the doctrine of baptismal regeneration; but
the reference may be rather to the regeneration which
haptism symbolizes. (4) In ch xv, the words, “We
keep the 8th day with joy, the day on which Jesus rose
again,’’ are the earliest express testimony that the ob-
servance of the Lord's Day was a memorial of Our Lord’s
resurrection. This observance is distinguished from
Jewish Sabbath-keeping which is called an error; the
Sahhath really intended to be kept heing a period of
1,000 years after the 6,000 years in which all things will
be finished (ch xv). (5) Testimony to NT Books, (a)
the existence and canonical authority of the Gospel of
Mt are attested (ch iv) by the quotation of Mt 99 14,
‘“Many are called, but few chosen,"’ introduced by the
formula, ‘It is written’’; (b) various passages taken
together testify_to the writer having the Gospel of Jn
in his hands: ‘ Whoso eateth of these shall live for ever”’
(ch_xi and Jn 6 58); ‘‘ Abraham looking before in Spirit
to Jesus” (ch ix and Jn 8 58); ‘‘the new law of. our
Lord Jesus Christ" (ch ii and Jn 18 34); a reference to
the brazen serpent as a type of Christ's suffering, glory
and healing power (ch xii and Jn 3 14); (c) “Thou
shalt not say that anything is thine own" (ch xix)
appears to be a reminiscence of Acts 4 32; (d) the pas-
sage in xv, ‘' The day of the Lord shall be as a thousand
years,"’ seems to be an echo of 2 Pet 3 8, and, if so, is
the earliest testimony to the existence of that writing,
and thus proves its great antiquity, although not its
canonicity.


VH. Pastor (Shepherd) of Hermas.—This work
is the earliest example, on a large scale, of Christian
allegory, and was hardly less popular


1. Author- in the early church than the Pilgrim’s
ship and Progress in later times. It was reck-
Date oned by many almost, by some al-


together, as ‘Scripture.’ Irenaeus
quotes it as “Scripture” (iv.20); Clement of Alex-
andria refers to it as “containing revelations Di-
vinely imparted” (Strom.,i.29); Origen regards it as
“Divinely inspired” (Comm. on Rom 16 14). It
is placed with the Ep. of Barnabas in the Cod. Sin
at the close of the NT, and was read in many
churches down to Jerome’s time (Works, II, 846).
The writer represents himself as a slave sold to a
Rom Christian lady. He afterward obtained free-
dom, lived with his family in Rome, became earnest-
ly religious, and saw visions which he imparted to
the community in this book with a view to repent-
ance and spiritual well-being.

Origen (followed by Eusebius, Jerome, etc)
ascribes the work to the Hermes of Rom 16 14; but
his opinion is pure conjecture (pute). The Canon
Muratori (170 AD) of Italian authorship describes
the work as “recently composed at Rome by the
brother of Pius during the latter’s episcopate” (137-
54). This distinct local testimony has been widely
accepted (Hefele, Lightfoot, Charteris, Cruttwell,
etc). Yet the writer represents himself (Vision,
ii.4) as enjoined to send his book to Clement as a
man in authority in the church, whom it is natural
to identify with the chief presbyter of Rome be-
tween 92 and 101. This reference, along with the
absence of any allusion to Gnosticism or to the
mono-episcopate, has led Schaff, Zahn, and others
to fix the date of the work at about 100 AD. The
external and internal evidence, thus apparently
divergent, may be reconciled by supposing (with
Kriiger and Harmack) that the book was not
“written in a single draft’; that portions were


issued successively during Clement’s episcopate;
and that under Pius (c 140) the separate issues were
gathered into a volume under the title of The Pas-
tor. In Rome, where the author was known, the
Canon Muratori attested at once its religious use-
fulness as a “book to be read” and the absence of

any claim to canonical authority. :
The purpose of the book is not doctrinal but
ethical; it is an allegorical manual of Christian
duty with earnest calls to individual


2. Object repentance and church revival in view

and of the near Advent. :

Contents The book consists of (1) Five
Visions, (2) Twelve Mandates, (3)


Ten Similitudes or Parables. In (1) the church
appears to the writer as a venerable matron, then
as a tower near completion, thereafter as a Holy
Virgin. In the last vision, the Angel of Repent-
ance, in pastoral garb, delivers to him the Man-
dates and Similitudes. The Mandates deal with
chastity, truth, patience, meekness, reverence,
prayer, penitence, and warn against grieving
the Spirit. In the Similitudes the church is again
a tower whose stones are examined for appro-
bation or reprobation. Similitudes are also
drawn from trees. The vine clinging to the elm
signifies union of rich and poor in the church; a
large willow from which a multitude receive
branches or twigs, some of these blossoming or
fruit-bearing, others dry or rotten, symbolizes the
diverse effect of law and gospel on different souls.
The author, although a Gentile, writes from the
standpoint of James rather than of Paul. The
closing words summarize his combined ethical and
eschatological purpose: ‘“Ye who have received
good from the Lord, do good works, lest while ye
delay, the tower be completed, and you be rejected.”


(1) Montanistie afinity—Hermas, indeed, differs

from Montanists in permitting, though not encouraging,

socoue be a a one. pee es ae

s]iq possible repentance after post-baptisma

3. Notabilia flagrant sin; but ho is also ther fore-

runner, through his disallowance of read-

mission after second lapse, through emphatic expecta-

tion of an impending Advent, and through his rigorous

view of fasting: ‘‘On the fast day taste nothing but
bread and water.” h

(2) Fasting, however, is regarded not as an end but
as a means—a discipline toward humility, purity,
charity. Fasting for charity is illustrated by the in-
junction (Sim., v.3) to ‘reckon up the price of what you
meant to eat, and give that to one in want."

(3) Absence of names ‘‘Jesus"’ and “‘ Christ.’—The

names ‘' Jesus” and ‘‘Christ’’ never occur. He is ‘Son
of God” and ‘‘ Lord of His people,” whom ‘God made to
dwell in flesh,’ by whom ‘the whole world is sustained,”
who ‘endured great sufferings that He might do away
with the sins of His people” (Sim., v.6; ix.14).
., (4) Church, organization —Hermas is charged (Vis.,
ii.4) to “read his writings to [or along with] the pres-
byters who preside over the church" in Rome. It is
reasonahle to conclude that no one in that community
could then be called ‘'bishop" in the later sense of the
holder of an office distinct from and superior to the pres-
byterate. Episkopoi (‘‘ bishops’) are mentioned (: 4M.
ix.27) as ‘‘given to hospitality,’ the description of the
episkopos in 1 Tim 3 2, where admittedly bishop =
presbyter.


_ VII. Second Epistle of Clement.—This writing
is doubly miscalled: it is neither an ep. nor a com-
position of Clement. Style, thought,


1. Nature and standpoint differ from those of
of Docu- the accepted Ep., and HE, III, 38,
ment suggests that the Clementine author-


ship was not generally recognized. The
recent recovery by Bryennios of the previously
lost conclusion proves that the writing is a sermon
(ch xix).

Antiquity is indicated by (1) the use, as an
authority, of the lost heretical Gospel of the Egyp-
tians, which by the time of the Canon Muratori
(175 AD) had ceased to be regarded as Scripture
by Catholics; (2) the adoption, without gnostic
intention, of phrases which became notably asso-


1903


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Lit. Sub-apostol.


ciated, after 150 AD with Gnosticism: “God made
male and female: the male is Christ, the female, the
church” (ch xiv). The date usually
2. Date and assigned is 120-50 AD (Lightfoot, Part
Authorship I, vol II, 201). The author is a gen-
tile presbyter; he had ‘worshipped
stocks and stones.’ The sermon was probably
preached at Corinth, for the preacher describes
many arriving by sea for the race-course, without
mentioning a port, which would be appropriate in
a sermon preached to Corinthians.
No text is given, but the sermon starts from
Isa 54 1, without express quotation; this chap-
ter had probably been read at the
3. Contents service. The discourse, without great
‘ literary merit, is earnest and prac-
tical. There are exhortations to repentance and
good works, to purity, charity, prayer and fast-
ing, with special reference to coming judgment.
The standpoint is that of St. James. “Be not
troubled {so the sermon concludes] because we
see the unrighteous with abundance, and God’s
servants in straits. Let us have faith, brethren
and sisterg. Had God recompensed the righteous
speedily, we should have had training not in piety
but in bargaining; and our uprightness would be
a mere semblance, since our pursuit would be not
of godliness but of gain.” ‘
(1) The sermon is the oldest extant in post-NT times,
and appears to have been read (ch xix) to a congregation.
(2) paves oF pei Hoy in our Gop
+1:, are quoted: (a) ‘‘The Lord, being aske
4. Notabilia when His kingdom would come, answered:
When the two shall be one [i.e. when har-
mony shall prevail?], and when the outside shall be as
the inside [i.e. when men shall be as they seem ?]; and
the male with the female, neither male nor female” (in-
terpreted by this preacher ascetically as discountenancing
matriage, presumably because ‘‘the time is short,’’ but
explained mystically by Clement of Alexandria in Sirom.,
iii.13, as indicating the abolition of all distinctions in
God's kingdom). Clement assigns the passage to the
lost Gospel of the Egyptians. rene ord saith, ye
shall be as lambs among wolves. eter answered: What
if the wolves tear the lambs? Jesus said: Let not the
lambs fear the wolves: and ye, also, fear not them which
kill you, and can do nothing more to you.” (3) No
episcopate, apparently, in the post-NT sense, existed in
the church where this sermon was delivered. Unfaithful
men are represented as confessing, ‘‘We obeyed not the
presbyters when they told us of salvation.’’ Had a bishop
in the later sense been head of the community, obedience
to his admonitions would surely have been inculcated.
(4) The Christology is high; ‘‘We ought to think of Christ
as of God”; ‘When we think mean things of Christ, we
expect to receive mean things’’ (ch i).
IX, Apology of Aristides.—Aristides was an
Athenian philosopher, who (according to HE, IV, 3)
presented an Apology to Hadrian, pre-
1. Recovery sumably when the emperor was at
and Date Athens (125 AD). After disappear-
ance in the 17th cent., a fragment in
an Armenian version was discovered in 1878, and
the entire Apology in Syr was found in 1889. It
was then found that almost the whole treatise was
imbedded anonymously in a Gr mediaeval romance,
Barlaam and Josaphat. The Apology in the Syr is
inscribed to Antoninus; it may have been addressed
to both emperors successively, or the real date may
be 137, when they were colleagues in the empire.
The treatise refers to oppression, imprisonment,
and other maltreatment endured by Christians, and
pleads for their protection against
2. Contents persecution, because of their true and
noble creed, and their pure and benevo-
lent lives. The writer compares the Christian
doctrine of Godhead with that of barbarians,
Greeks, Egyptians, Jews, and dwells on the ele-
vating influence of Christian belief in Jesus Christ
and in a future life. He refers to the abstention
of Christians from unchastity, dishonesty and other
vices; to their abounding charity and brotherliness
which are shown particularly to the widow, the


orphan, the poor, the stranger, the oppressed, and
even their oppressors. All who become Christians,
of however low a station, are brethren. This
bright picture has, however, its shadows: “If Chris-
tians see that one of their number has died in his
sins, over him they weep bitterly as over one about
to go into punishment.” This frank acknowledg-
ment of some black sheep gives point to his general
testimony, ‘‘Blessed is the race of Christians above
all men.”
(1) A distinct reference to a collection of Christian
writings, and esp. of Gospels, designated the Gospel, and
a ee ae Quen a eae of ia
‘1 mentary anon. imilar indica-
3. Notabilia tion ‘of a rudimentary Apostles’ Creed.
Christians are said to believe in God, ‘‘the
Maker of Heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ who
was born of a Heb virgin, who was transfixed by the
Jews; he died and was buried; and Christians state that
after three days he rose again and ascended into heaven.”
In this early time the virgin birth was apparently asettled
matter—part of the Creed. (3) Aristides describes a
familiar custom among poor Christians of fasting two
or three days, so as to supply with needful food Chris-
tians poorer still (Comp. Hermas). (4) The Apology
is interesting as the earliest known literary tribute of a
philosopher to Christianity, and probably the earliest
extant defence of the faith, if the Ep. to Diognetus be not
ancient. It is notable also as a treatise on Christian evi-
dence drawn not from miraculous credentials, but from
the self-evidencing excellence and effect of Christianity.
Finally, it is interesting as the earliest detailed record of
harvest reaped at Athens from seed sown by St. Paul
80 or 90 years before. Athens appeared at first a barren
soil; but by and by this church in a university city took
the lead, as this treatise and another lost apology by
Quadratus show, in the literary defence of the Christian
faith. Quadratus is stated in HE, IV, 3, to have pre-
sented his Apology to Hadrian, and is described by Jerome
as ‘‘a disciple of the aposties.””. In a fragment preserved
in HE, he attests the survival (‘‘to our own day’’) of
some whom Christ had healed.


X. Justin Martyr.—Born of pagan parents at
Flavia Neapolis (Nablous), in Samaria about 100
AD—a seeker for truth, who, after
1, Incidents trying Stoic, Peripatetic, Pythagorean
of Life and Platonic philosophies, found in
Christ and Christianity the satisfaction
of philosophic cravings and spiritual needs. He
became a Christian apostle and apologist, wearing
still the philosopher’s mantle in token of continued
quest after wisdom, but making it now his life-
work, not as presbyter, but as itinerating Christian
teacher, to impart to pagan, to Jew and also to
heretic the truth which he himself had found and
prized. After long Christian service, he suffered
martyrdom under Aurelius in 166 AD.
It is addressed to Antoninus and dated 138-48.
He approaches the emperor without flattery, and
asks judgment after searching inquiry.
2. First He answers three charges against
Apology Christians: (1) atheism: Justin replies
that Christians were atheists only as
Socrates was; they disbelieved in so-called gods who
were wicked demons or humanly fashioned images;
but they worshipped the Father of Righteousness;
(2) immorality: Justin admits the existence of pre-
tended Christians who are evil-doers; but Chris-
tianity makes the evil good, the licentious chaste,
the covetous generous, the revengeful forgiving;
(3) disloyalty: this is calumny based on the preach-
ing of Christ’s kingdom which is spiritual, not
temporal. Christians are taught and are wont to
pay tribute promptly and to pray for rulers regu-
larly. Justin then sets forth the credibility and
excellence of Christianity, adducing, (1) its pure
morality as contrasted with vices condoned by
heathens, (2) its noble doctrines—immortality,
resurrection, future judgment, incarnation, (3) OT
prophecy regarding the Divinity and sufferings of
the Christ. His reference to the prediction of a
virgin bringing forth Emmanuel (ch xxxiti) shows
that in his day the virgin birth was accepted, al-
though Jews understood by virgin (in Isa) merely a


Lit., Sub-apostol.
Liver


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1904


young woman, (4) foreshadowings of Christian
truth by philosophy, referring esp. to Plato’s teach-
ing about the Divine Logos and judgment to come.
To refute prevalent calumny Justin describes Sunday
service and administration of sacraments in his time.
On the Lord’s Day Christians assembled for worship;
prophetic Scriptures and ‘‘memoirs”’ by apostles and
their followers were read; prayers and thanksgivings
were offered and an address delivered by the “‘presi-
dent’’; bread and wine were distributed and sent by
deacons to those absent; and an offering for chari-
table purposes was made. “As many as believe what
is taught, and undertake to live accordingly, are,
after prayer and fast, baptized”’ (chs Ixv, lxvti).
This is probably a postscript to the first; Euse-
bius quotes from both as from one work. After
a protest against a recent summary
3. “Second execution of three Christians without
Apology” roper trial,Justin deals with two popu-
artaunts: (1). “If at death they went
to heaven, why did they not commit suicide?’’:
“We do not shrink from death but from opposing
God’s will.” (2) “If God is really on the Christians’
side, why does He allow them to be persecuted?”’:
“The world by Divine decree is meanwhile under
the dominion of angels who have become demons.”
Justin here contrasts Christ with Socrates, whom
yet he describes as a preacher of the ‘‘true but then
unknown God” (ch x): “No one put such faith iu
Socrates as to die for his convictions.” Christ hath
won the faith, “not only of philosophers, but of
simple folk who through faith can despise death.”
Justin, however, testifies clearly and warmly to the
Christian element by anticipation, in the higher
teachings and aspirations of heathen philosophy
through an implanted seed of the Divine Logos;
and he recognizes thus a pre-advent ministry of the
Son of God, not only in the sheltered fold of Juda-
ism, but in the broad open of heathendom.
This Dialogue indicates the attitude of some
cultured Jews of that day to Christianity, and the
mode in which their objections to it
4, Dialogue were met. Trypho argued that Jesus
with Trypho did not fulfil OT prophecy which repre-
the Jew sented the Messiah as establishing
@ glorious and everlasting kingdom;
whereas Jesus was a humble peasant who died an
ignominious death; Justin pleads Isa 53. Trypho
charges Christianity with treason to the theocracy
through exalting Jesus to Godhead, thus trenching
on the Divine unity, and also through repudiating
the perpetual obligation of the Law. Justin, in
reply, quotes Genesis, ‘“‘Let ws make man,”’ and also
Pss 45, 72, 110, with Isa 7 about Emmanuel. The
Mosaic Law was intended to be temporary, and
was now superseded by the Law of Christ; more-
over, the destruction of Jerus rendered complete
fulfilment of the Jewish Law impracticable. The
disputants part on friendly terms, “I have been
particularly pleased with this conference,” says
Trypho. “If we could confer oftener we should be
much helped in reading the Scriptures.” ‘‘For my
part,’’ replies Justin, “I would have wished to repeat
our conference daily; but since I am about to set
sail, I bid you give all diligence in this struggle after
salvation.” Of other works ascribed to Justin, two
(On the Resurrection and Appeal to the Greeks) may
or may not be genuine; the others are spurious.
(1) Bearing of Justin’s quotations from “memoirs’’
on the Age of Our Gospels (see GOSPELS).
se Edanine Cauauin ara duginis. Gist: Back:
5, Notabilia and a strong enikisiudaiate yet he recog-
nizes thoroughly the Twelve as the true
source of Christian teaching, ‘sent by Christ to teach
to all the Word of God" (1 Ap., 39,49; Dial., 42, 109).
(3) From personal knowledge as a traveler, Justin


testifies to the wide diffusion of Christianity: '‘No race
of men exists among whom prayers are not offered up to


the Father through the name of the crucified Jesus
(Dial., 117).

(4) Authorship of Revelation: ‘‘Jobn, one of the apos-
tles, prophesied, hy a revelation made to him, that he-
lievers would dwell 1,000 years in Jerus'’ (Dial., 81)—the
earliest direct witness to Johannine authorship, by one
who had resided at Ephesus. 3

(5) Belief of the primitive church in Our Lord's true
Divinity: Writing in the name of Christians as a body,
he declares, ‘‘Both Him [the Father] and the Son who
came forth from Him we adore” (1 Ap., 5). He speaks
also of some ‘' who held that Jesus was a mere man"' as
a@ small and heretical minority (Dial., 48).. He writes
elsewhere (1 Ap., 13) of the Son as the object of worship
‘‘in the second place’’; but this statement, made long
before the Arian Controversy necessitated precision of
language, does not invalidate his other testimonies.

(6) As to the Holy Spirit, Justin refers to haptism as
administered in ‘'the name of Father, Son, and Spirit"
(1 Ap., 61), implying the Divinity of the Third Person;
although elsewhere he appears to subordinate Him to the
Son, as the Son to the Father. He is to be ‘“ worshipped
in the third order’ (1 Ap., 13).

(7) Millenarianism: ‘‘I and others are assured that
there will be a resurrection of the dead and_1,000 years
in Jerus which will be built, adorned and enlarged”’
(Dial., 80). He admits, however, that many pure and
pious Christians think otherwise. f

(8) Future punishment: On this subject Justin speaks
with two voices. In 1 Ap., 8, he writes of ‘‘condemned
souls suffering eternal punishment, not for a millennial
period only." Butin Dial., 5, he introduces an old man
who was the immediate means of his conversion as say-
ing that “‘the wicked shall be punished as long as God
shall will them to exist.”" ‘ J

(9) Angel-worship: In 1 Ap., 6, Justin, when refuting
the charge of atheism, writes: ‘We reverence and wor-
ship the Father, and the Son, and the host of other good
messengers (or angels), and the Prophetic Spirit." The
context, however, shows that this cultus does not neces-
sarily amount to what is usually meant by worship, but
simply to veneration and homage. The Gr words here,
sébomat and proskunéé, are often used in this lower sense;
and the train of thought seems to be this: ‘‘You call
us atheists; the charge is not true, for we not only he-
lieve in one God and Father of all, but in one who is
Losier enens the Son of God, who was sent by God.

@ believe further in other heavenly messengers from
God, a host of angelic spirits; yea we believe in one who
is preéminently God's Spirit, by whom prophets were
inspired. All these are the object in different degrces
of our veneration and homage.'' Undoubtedly, however,
the statement is at best unguarded_and misleading.

(10) Doetrine of the sacraments: Justin uses ‘‘regener-
ate’ as the synonym of ‘‘baptized”’ (1 Ap., 61), but he
identifies the two, not as essentially sli abel but as
uniformly associated. As regards the Lord's Supper,
while emphasizing the ideas of commemoration, com-
munion, and thanksgiving, he in one place speaks of the
bread and wine heing the flesh and blood of the Incarnate
Jesus, ‘‘from which, by a transmutation, our flesh and
blood are nourished’’ (1 Ap., 66). These words tend
to transubstantiation; but, in the absence of any con-
troversy at the time, may be no more than 2 strongly
figurative representation of a spiritual participation.


XI. Epistle to Diognetus.—This short apologetic
work is mentioned by no ancient writer, and was
unknown until its discovery in 1592
1. Date and by Henry Stephens in a MS which
Authorship perished in the Strassburg fire of 1870.
The MS appears to ascribe it to the
author of another work (To the Greeks); and this,
again, is attributed with some probability on the
authority of a Syr document (600-700 AD) to one
Ambrosius, ‘‘chief among the Greeks,” otherwise
unknown (see Birks in DCB, “Ep. to D.’?). If
genuigely ancient, the ep. probably belongs to the
ub-apostolic Age, for it refers to Christianity as
‘having only now entered the world, not long ago”’;
and in ch xi (written, however, by a different hand
or at a different time) the author calls himself a
“disciple of the apostles.” Diognetus was a very
common Gr name, so that his identification with the
tutor of Marcus Aurelius (130-40 AD) is a mere
conjecture. Donaldson (Chr. Lit., II, 142) in-
clines to the belief that the work was composed by
one of the many Greeks who came westward in the
14th cent. and that the author intended merely to
write a “good declamation in the old style.’ The
smart but superficial way in which heathenism and
Judaism are dealt with is more befitting a mediaeval
rhetorical exercise than the serious treatment, by
a cultured writer, of prevalent religions.


1905


The author, after welcoming the inquiry of Diog-
netus about Christianity, pours contempt on the
pagan worship of gods of wood, stone
2. Con- and metal, without any apparent real-
tents ization that for cultured heathens of
: that time such images were not ob-
jects, but only symbolic media of worship; and he
ridicules Mosaic observances without any recog-
nition of their siguificance as a Divine educative
discipline. But when he proceeds :(chs vii-xii) to
describe Christianity, the work merits Hefele’s des-
ignation, peers Epistola. Into a world,
yea, into human hearts, which had become degen-
erate and wicked, ‘God sent no mere servant or
angel, but His own Son,” and Him, not as a con-
demning Judge, or fear-inspiring Tyrant, but as a
gracious Saviour. To the inquiry, “If Christianity
is sO precious, why was.Christ sent so late?” the
author replies: ‘In order first to bring home to
mankind their unworthiness to attain eternal life
through their own works” and their incapacity for
salvation apart from Him “who is able to save even
what it was impossible (formerly) to save.” But
faith in the Son of God now revealed, would lead
to “knowledge of the Father”; knowledge of God
te “love of Him who hath first so loved us”; and
love of God to “imitation of Him and of His loving-
kindness.” And wherein consists such imitation?
Not in “seeking lordship over those weaker,’’ or
in “showing violence toward those below us’’; but
in ‘taking on oneself the burden of one’s neighbor,”’
even as “God took on Himself the burden of our
iniquities, and gave His own Son as a ransom for
us.”” “He who in whatsoever he may be superior
is ready to benefit another who is deficient; he who,
by distributing to the needy what he has received
from God, becomes a god to those who receive his
benefits: he is an imitator of God.”


Litrrature.—Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers, larger and
smaller edd; in Clark's ‘‘ Ante-Nicene Libary,"' A postalic
Fathers, Justin Martyr, and Recently Discovered Addi-
tions to Early Christian Literature (American ed, The
Ante-Nicene Fathers) ; Eusebius, HE, Pareoulaly. McGif-
fert'’s tr with excellent notes; James Donaldson, Critical
History of Christian Literature; Cruttwell, Leterary His-
tory of Early Christiantty; Kriiger, History of Early
Christian Literature, tr by Gillett; Harnack, Geschichte
der altchr. Litt.; Zahn, Geschichte des NT Kanons; For-
schungen zur Gesch, des NT Kanons und der altchr. Litt.;
Robinson, Texts and_ Studies, Aristides; Schaff, Oldest
Christian Manual; H. D. M. Spence, Teaching of the
Twelve Apostles; Bartlet, art. on ‘Didache'’ in HDB;
Cunningham, Epistle of St. Barnabas; arts. in DCB
(Smith and Wace).

Henry Cowan

LITTER, lit’ér (A¥, ¢abh): (1) Used upon backs


of camels for easy riding, made of a wooden frame


Ce ee _!


Litter.


with light mattress and pillows, also a covering
above, supported by upright pieces, sometimes hav-
ing also side awnings for protection from the sun’s


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA PS Sopearostl


rays. Mule litters were made with pairs of shafts
projecting before and bchind, between which the
animals were yoked (Isa 66 20). Litter-wagons
(az ribay, ‘eghlath cabh) are mentioned in Nu 7
3; the horse litter (¢6pior, phérion) is mentioned in
2 Macc 9 8; cf 3 27. (2) A, mittah, “palan-
quin” or “litter of Solomon” (Cant 3 7; cf ver 9).
See PaLanguin.


LITTLE GENESIS. See Boox or JusBiLEEs.


LIVELY, liv’li, LIVING, living (0, hay; {4e,
245): “Living,” sometimes “lively,” is the tr of
hay (often also tr? “life”’); it denotes all beings
possessed of life (Gen 1 21.24; 2 7.19; Ex 21 35,
‘“Jive’’); we have frequently the phrase, “the land
of the living” (as contrasted with sh°’dl, the abode
of the dead), e.g. Job 28 13; Ps 27 13; 52 5; Isa
38 11; the characteristically Bib. expression, “the
living God,” also frequently occurs (Josh 3 10;
18 17 26.36; 2K 194; Ps 84 2); also fre-
quently in the NT as the tr of zad (Mt 16 16; 26
63; Jn-6 57, “the living Father’; Acts 14 15);
“lively” in Ex 1 19 (ha@yeh) and Ps 38 19 denotes
fulness of life, vigor; hayyah, ‘‘a living being,” is
mostly confined to Ezk, trd “living creatures’
(1 5.13.14, etc), also Gen 1 28; 8 17, “‘living
thing’; “‘living’’ is sometimes applied fig. to that
which is not actually alive; thus we have the phrase
“living waters” (Jer 2 13; 17 13; Zec 14 8, “Liv-
ing waters shall go out from Jerus’’) in contrast with
stagnant waters—waters that can give life; so Jn 4
10.11 (bubbling up from the spring at bottom of the
well); 7 38; Rev 7 17 AV; “living bread” (Jn 6
51); “a new and living way” (He 10 20), perhaps
equivalent to “ever-living’ in Christ; “living
stones’ (1 Pet 2 4.5) are those made alive in
Christ; a ‘living hope” (a hope full of life),
1 Pet 1 35 ‘Jiving”’ (zad) is sometimes also ‘man-
ner of life’ (Lk 15 13; Col 2 20); didga, ‘to lead
or go through,” is also so tr4 (Tit 3 3); dos is
‘means of life,” tr? “living”? (Mk 12 44; Lk 8 43);
“living,” in this sense, occurs in Apoc as the tr of 206,
“Defraud not the poor of his living’ (Ecclus 4 1).

RV bas “living” for ‘alive’ (Lev 14 4), for ‘the


lively ’' (Acts 7 38), for ‘‘quick'' (He 4 12), for “lively”
ad pat f 3; 2.5), for ‘“‘conversation’' (1 Pet 1 15;


2 Pet 11); ‘living creatures’’ for ‘‘ beasts'' (Rev 4 6;
5 6, etc); “every living thing’’ for “all the substance”’
(Dt 11 6); “living things" for ‘‘beasts'’’ (Lev 11 2.47


bis); for “living’' (Ps 58 9), ‘‘the green’’ (thorns under
the pots), m ‘' Wrath shall take them away while living as
with a whirlwind’'; for ‘‘the hook of the living’’ (Ps 69
28), “the hook of life’'; for ‘‘[I am] he that liveth”
(Rev 1 18), ‘‘the Living one'’; for ‘living fountains of
waters" (Rev 7 17), ‘‘fountains of waters of life’; for
“trade”? (Rev 18 17), ‘gain their living,’ m “‘ work the
sea’'; for ‘Son of the living God” (Un 6 69), ‘the Holy
One of God" (emended text).
3 W. L. Wauxer

LIVER, liv’tr (T3232, kabhédh, derived from a
root meaning “‘to_be heavy,” being the heaviest
of the viscera; LXX fap, hépar): The word is
usually joined with the Heb yothereth (see Cau)
(Ex 29 13.22; Lev 9 10.19) as a special portion
set aside for the burnt offering.


This represents the large lobe or flap of the liver,
AoBds Tov yratos, lobés tow hépatos (thus LXX and Jos,
Ant, III, ix, 2, {228]). Others, however, interpret it as
the membrane which covers the upper part of the liver,
sometimes called the ‘lesser omentum.'’ Thus the
Vulg: reticulum ‘tecoris. It extends from the fissures
of the liver to the curve of the stomach. Still others
cansider it to be the ‘‘fatty mass at the opening of the
liver, which reaches to the kidneys and becomes visible
upon the removal of the lesser omentum or membrane”
(Driver and White, Leviticus, 65).


As in the scholastic psychology of the Middle
Ages, the liver played an important part in the
science of Sem peoples. It was the seat of feeling,
and thus became synonymous with temper, dis-


Living Creature [HE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Locust


1906


position, character (cf Assyr kabittu, “liver,”
“temper,” “character,” and Arab. Ou, Kabid,


vulgar kibdi). Thus Jeremiah expresses his pro-
found grief with the words: ‘My liver is poured
upon the earth, because of the destruction of the
daughter of my people” (Lam 2 11). The liver
is also considered one of the most important and
vital parts of the body (cf Virgil, cerebrum, tecur
domicilia vitae). A hurtin it is equivalent to death.
So we find the fate of a man enticed by the flattering
of a loose woman compared to that of the ox that
“goeth to the slaughter .. . . till an arrow strike
through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare,
and knoweth not that it is for his life’ (Prov 7 22.
a the rest of the verse is obscure as to its mean-
ing).

In a few passages of the OT, kabhédh (‘liver’)
and kabhodh (“glory’’) have been confounded, and
we are in uncertainty as to the right tr. Several
authors, to give but one example, would read ka-
bhédhin Ps 16 9, for reasons of Heb poetical paral-
lelism: ‘Therefore my heart is glad and my liver
(EV “glory’] rejoiceth.”’ While this is quite
possible, it is not easy to decide, as according to
Jewish interpretation “my glory” is synonymous
with ‘‘my soul,” which would present as proper a
parallelism.

The liver has always played an important réle
in heathen divination, of which we have many ex-
amples in old and modern times among the Greeks,
Etrurians, Romans and now among African tribes.
The prophet Ezekiel gives us a Bib. instance. The
king of Babylon, who had been seeking to find out
whether he should attack Jerus, inquired by shaking
“arrows to and fro, he consulted the teraphim, he
looked in the liver” (Ezk 21 21 [Heb ver 26]; ef
Tob 6 4ff; 8 2). See Asrrotoay, 3; Divina-
TION. H. L. E. Luerine


LIVING CREATURE, liv’ing kré’tir: (1) (wy
TI, ncphesh hayyak, or SIT WHI, nephesh ha-
hayyah [nephesh, ‘‘breath” or “living things’;
hayyah, “living”; cf Arab. ued, nefs, “breath,”
cs , hatiy, “‘living’’]): In the account of the crea-


tion this term is used of aquatic animals (Gen 1 21),
of mammals (Gen 1 24) and of any animals what-
soever (Gen 2 19).


(2) (MAMT, Rayyoth, pl. of TD, ayyah): The name
of the ‘‘living creatures" of Ezk 1 5-25, which had wings
and the faces of a man, a lion, an ox, and an eagle; cf
Ezk 10 1-22. (3) (S¢ov, zéon, ‘‘living thing,'’ ‘‘animal"’):
The four ‘living creatures"' (AV ‘‘beasts’') of Rev 4 6,
etc, the first like a lion, the second like a calf, the third
having a face as of a man, and the fourth like an eagle,
having each six wings. See Creatures, Livine.

: _ ALFRED Evy Day

LIZARD, liz’ard: The list of unclean “creeping
things” in Lev 11 29.30 contains eight names, as
follows:

(1) “bi, péledh, EV “weasel” (a.v.); @) NADY,
‘akhbar, EV ‘‘mouse” (q.v.); (3) 32, cabh, AV “tor-
toise,"" RV ‘great lizard’ (q.v.); (4
pels , dnakéh, AV “‘ferret,”’ RV “ gecko"
(a.v.); (5) TD, &o%p, AV “chameleon,”
RV ‘land-crocodile"’ (a-¥.); (6) sr, icta'ah, EV


1. Names


“lizard"*; ef Arab. Lb) » lata’, ‘to cling to the ground";
(7) DAN. homet, AV “snail,” RV “sand-lizard” (q.v.);
(8) nawcn, tinshemeth, AV ‘‘mole,’’ RV ‘‘chameleon"
(a.v.). In Prov 30 28, we find (9) PAY, semamith,
AV “spider,” RV “lizard.”

Since (1), (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) occur as names
of animals only in this passage, and as the philo-
logical evidence available is in most cases not very


convincing, their determination is difficult and
uncertain. RVm to ‘‘gecko” (Lev 11 30) has
“Words of uncertain meaning, but probably de-
noting four kinds of lizards.”

Among the many lizards of Pal, the monitor and


thorny-tailed lizard are remarkable for their size, and
the chameleon for its striking appearance


. and hahits. On etymological grounds,

2. Lizards ko"h, AV_‘‘chameleon,”’ Ree Sassen
of Palestine dile.” LXX chamailéén, has heen taken
es to_be the monitor; cabh, AV ‘'tortoise,”’


RV “great lizard,”’ LXX krokédeilos
chersatos, to he the thorny-tailed lizard; and tinshe-
meth, AV ‘‘mole,"”” RV “chameleon,” LXX aspdlaz, to
be the chameleon. On the same grounds, héledh,
EV ‘‘weasel,"” LXX galé, might be the mole-rat. See
CHAMELEON; Tortoise; WHASEL. :

The commonest lizard of Pal is the rough-tailed agama,
Agama stellio, Arab, hirdhaun or hirdaun, which is every-
where in evidence, running ahout on the ground, rocks
or walls, frequently lying still hasking in the sun, or
hobbing its head up and down in the peculiar manner
that it has.


+ el ota


Gecko (Ptyodactylus lobatus).


The gecko, Ptyodactylus lobatus, is common in houses.
By means of adhesive disks on the under sides of its toes,
it clings with ease to smooth walls which other lizards
cannot scale. Althongh podecily harmless, it is he-
lieved to be poisonous, and is much feared. It is called
abu-brais, ‘‘father of leprosy,”' either on account of its
supposed poisonous quaiuce or hecause it has a semi-
transparent and sickly appearance, being of a whitish-
yellow color with darker spots. It utters a little cry,
which may be the reason why RV has ‘“‘gecko” for
"énakah, AV ‘‘ferret.”

Various species of the genus Lacerta and its allies, the
true lizards, may always be found searching for insects
on trees and walls. They are scaly, like all lizards, hut
are relatively smooth and are prettily colored, and are
the most attractive members of the group which are
found in the country. They are called hy the Arabs
sakkatyeh or shammiseh.

The skinks include Scincus officinalis, and allied species.
Arah. sakankér = Gr oxtyxos, skigkos (sktnkos). They are
smooth, light-colored lizards, and are found in sandy
places. They cannot climb, but they run and burrow in
the sand with remarkable rapidity.’ The dried hody of
Scincus officinalis is an important feature of the primitive
oriental materia medica, and may he found in the shops
(oficinae) of the old-style apothecaries.


Semdmith (Prov 30 28, AV “spider,” RV “liz-
ard’’) is one of the “four things which are little
.. but... . exceeding wise.’’ RV reads:


“ The lizard taketh hold with her hands,
Yet is she in kings’ palaces."


LXX has cadaBdrns, kalabétés, which according to
Liddell and Scott=dexadraPdrys, askalabétés, “a

spotted lizard.’ There is no other
8. Identifi- lizard which fits this passage as docs
cations the gecko. If Gesenius is correct in

deriving s*mamith from the 7/ sémam
(cf Arab. samma, “to poison”), we have another
reason for making this identification, in which case
we must rule out the rendering of RVm, ‘Thou
canst seize with thy hands.”


1907


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Fiving Creature


For none of the names in Lev 11 29.30 have. we as
many data for identification as for semamith. For
Leta ah, EV “‘lizard,’’ LXX has yadaBwrys, chalabétés,
which is another variant of askalabéies. If we follow
the LXX, therefore, we should render leta'ah ‘ gecko."
Tristram quotes Bochart as drawing an argument that
leta'ah is “gecko” from the Arab. y lata’, ‘‘to cling
to the ground."' This view is at least in accordance with
LXX. It is of course untenable if ‘dnakah is ‘' gecko,"
but (see Ferret) the writer thinks it quite possible that

dnakah may mean the shrew or field-mouse, which is
also in agreement with LXX. It will not do to follow
LXX in all cases, but it is certainly safe to do so in the
absence of a clear indication to the contrary.

There seems to be little evidence available for deciding
the identity of homet, AV ‘‘snail,"" RV ‘sand-lizard.”
LXX has cadpa, sadra, and Vulg lacerta, both words for
lizard. Gesenius refers the word to an obsolete 7/
hamat, ‘to bow down,"’ ‘‘to lie upon the ground."’ Tris-
tram, NHB, cites Bochart as referring to a word mean-
ing ‘‘sand."’ Hence perhaps the RV ‘‘sand-lizard.”
It by this is meant the skink, there is no inherent im-
probability in the identification.


We have thus more or less tentatively assigned
various words of the list to the monitor, the thorny-
tailed lizard, the chameleon, the gecko and the
skink, but we have done nothing with the rough-
tailed agama and the Lacertae, or true lizards,
which are the commonest lizards of Pal, and this
fact must be reckoned against the correctness of
the assignment. The tr of RV has this to commend
it, that it gives two small mammals followed by
six lizards, and is therefore to that extent system-
atic. It is, however, neither guided in all cases by
etymological considerations, nor does it follow LXX.

As none of the etymological arguments is very cogent,
the writer can see no harm in consistently following
LXX, understanding for (1), galé, weasel or pole-cat; for
(2), mus, mouse; for (3), krokodeilos chersaios, some large
lizard, either the monitor or the thorny-tailed lizard;
for (4), migalé, shrew or field-mouse; for (5), chamatledn,
chameleon; for (6), chalabotés, gecko; for (7), saura, a
Laceria or true lizard: for (8), aspalaz, mole-rat. On
the other band, if etymological considerations are to be
taken into account and LXX abandoned when it con-
flicts with them we might have (1) holedh, mole-rat;
(2) ‘akhbar, mouse; (3) ¢abh, thorny-tailed lizard; (4)
‘dnakah, field-mouse; (5) k6%h, monitor; oO leta’ ah,
gecko; (7) homet, skink; (8) tinshemeth, chameleon.

Neither of these lists has the systematic arrange-
ment of that of RV, but we must remember that
the Bib. writers were not zodlogists, as is seen in
the inclusion of the bat among birds (Lev 11 19;
Dt 14 18), and of the hare and coney among
ruminants (Lev 11 5.6; Dt 14 7).

AtFRED Eiy Day

LOAF, lof.


LO-AMMI, lé-am’i ("OI7N>, 1d’-‘ammi, “not
my people’): The 2d son and 3d child of Gomer
bath-Diblaim, wife of the prophet Hosea (Hos 1
9). An earlier child, a daughter, had been named
Lo-ruhamah (rary, 1a’-ruhamah, “uncompas-
sionated”). The names, like those given by Isaiah
to his children, are symbolic, and set forth Hosea’s
conviction that Israel has, through sin, forfeited
Jeh’s compassion, and can no longer claim His pro-
tection. Of the bearers of these names nothing
further is known; but their symbolism is alluded
to in Hos 2 1.23. This latter passage is quoted
by Paul (Rom 9 25f). See Hosea; JEZREEL.

Joun A. LEers

LOCKS, loks ({i] ME", ¢iith, [2] F728, pera’,
[3] MSTA, maklaphah, [4] MBP, brwiccah): See
in general the article on Harr. (1) The first word,
gicith, means really a tassel, such as is worn by the
‘ews on the four corners of the prayer-shaw! or
iallith and on the ’arba‘ kan’photh (Dt 22 12), tré
in the NT by xpdowedor, krdspedon (Mt 9 20; 14
36; 23 5; Mk 6 56; Lk 8 44). Once it is applied
to a forelock of hair. The prophet Ezckiel, de-
scribing his sensations_ which accompanied his
vision of Jerus, says; “He put forth the form of a


Sce Breab.


hand, and took me by a lock of my head; and the
Spirit lifted me up between earth and heaven, and
brought me in the visions of God to Jerus” (Hzk 8
3), (2) The word pera‘ signifies the unshorn and
disheveled locks of the Nazirite (Nu 6 5) or of the
priests, the sons of Zadok (Ezk 44 20). (3) The
Book of Jgs employs the word mahlaphah when
speaking of the “seven locks” of Samson (Jgs 16
13.19), which really represent the plaited (ety-
mologically, “interwoven”) strands of hair still
worn in our days by youthful Bedouin warriors.
(4) Kewiticcah (Cant 5 2.11) means the luxuriant
hair of the Heb youth, who was careful of his ex-
terior. It is called bushy (RVm “‘curling’’) and
black as a raven. AV tr® also the word cammah
with “locks” (Cant 4 1; 6 7; Isa 47 2), but RV
has corrected this into “veil,’’ leaving the word
“Jocks” in Cant 4 1m. H. L. E. Lurerine


LOCUST, 1d’kust: The tr of a large number of
Heb and Gr words:

(1) may ‘arbeh, from v4 ma: rabhah, ''to increase"
(cf Arab. G » raba’,’** to increase’’). (2) pybo. sal'am,
from ohsolete 7/ py gal'am, "to swallow
down,’ “to consume.” (3) San. har-


“ow
gal (ct Arab. de>) harjal, ‘'to run to the right or


ore


> ae harjalat, *‘a company of horses” or


1. Names


left,” X
an


“a swarm of locusts,” Cea


» harjawan, a kind of
locust). (4) DIM. haghabh (cf Arab. YS, hajab, ‘to


ow
hide,"’ ‘‘to cover’'). (5) DY. gazam (cf Arab. Cy
jazam, “to cut off"). (6) Pd, yelek, trom / PPd,
ae


lakak, ‘‘to lick" (ct Arab. aha! laklak, “‘to dart
out the tongue" {used of a serpent]). (7) Son, hasil,


“wer
from 7/ Son, basal, ‘to devour" (cf Arab. hey;
hausal, ‘‘crop” [of a bird]). (8) aaa. gobh, from obso-
lete 1/ TUBA, gabhah (cf Arab. gil> jabt, “locust,”


Be
from f cle, jaba’, ‘to come out of a hole”). (9)
Ay. 92bh, from same y/. (10) DYby, eetacal, trom 7/
boy, ¢alal (onomatopoetic), “to tinkle,”’ “to ring’ (cf


Arab. he, sall, ‘‘to give a ringing sound” {used of a
ww


horse’s bit]; cf also Arab. urbe , fann, used of the sound


of a drum or piece of metal, also of the humming of flies).
(11) dxpis, akris (gen. axpidos, akridos; dim, axpidiov, ak-
ridion, wheuce Acridium, a genus of locusts).

(1), (2), (3) and (4) constitute the list of clean
insects in Lev 11 21f, characterized as “winged

creeping things that go upon all fours,
2. Identi- which have legs above their feet,
fications wherewith to leap upon the earth.”
This manifestly refers to jumping
insects of the order Orthoptera, such as locusts, grass-
hoppers and crickets, and is in contrast to the un-
clean “winged creeping things that go upon all
fours,’ which may be taken to denote running
Orthoptera, such as cockroaches, mole-crickets and
ear-wigs, as well as insects of other orders.

? Arbeh (1) is uniformly tr4 “locust” in RV. AV
has usually “locust,” but “grasshopper” in Jgs
6 5; 7 12; Job 39 20; Jer 46 23. LXX has
usually dxpls, akris, “locust”; but has potxos,
brotichos, ‘‘wingless locust,” in Lev 11 22; 1 K 8
37 (akris in the || passage, 2 Ch 6 28); Nah 3 15;
and arrédefos, aitélebos, ‘wingless locust,” in Nah


Locust
Lo-debar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1908


. the tihiae of the front legs, and the females have long


317. ’Arbeh occurs (Ex 10 4-19) in the account


of the plague of locusts; in the phrase “‘as locusts
for multitude” (Jgs 6 5; 7 12); “more than the
locusts . . . . innumerable” (Jer 46 23);

“The locusts have no king,

Yet go they forth all of them hy bands’ (Prov 30 27).
’Arbeh is referred to as a plague in Dt 28 38; 1 K
8 37; 2 Ch 6 28; Ps 78 46; in Joel and in Nah.
These references, together with the fact that it is


Locust: (1) rae (2) Acridium peregrinum;


the most used word, occurring 24 t, warrant us in
assuming it to be one of the swarming species, i.e.
Pachtylus migratorius or Schistacerca peregrina,
which from time to time devastate large regions in
the countries bordering on the Mediterranean.

Sal'am (2), EV “bald locust,” occurs only in Lev
1i 22. According to Tristram, NBH, the name
“bald locust”? was given’ because it is said in the
Talm to have a smooth head. It has been thought
to be one of the genns Tryzalis (T. unguiculata or
T. nasuta), in which the head is greatly elongated.

Hargal (3), AV “beetle,” RV “cricket,” being
one of the leaping insects, cannot be a beetle. It
might be a cricket, but comparison with the Arab.
(see supra) favors a locust of some sort. The word
occurs only in Lev 11 22. See BEETLE.

Haghabh (4) is one of the clean leaping insects
of Lev 11 22 (EV “grasshopper”’). The word
occurs in four other places, nowhere coupled with
the name of another insect. In the report of the
spies (Nu 18 33), we bave the expression, ‘‘We were
in our own, sight as grasshoppers’; in Eccl 12 5,
“The grasshopper shall be a burden”; in lsa 40 22,
“It is he that sitteth above the circle of the earth,
and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers.”
These three passages distinctly favor the rendering
“grasshopper” of EV. In the remaining passage
(2 Ch 7 13), “.... if I command the locust
[EV] to devour the land,” the migratory locust
seems to be referred to. Doubtless this as well as
other words was loosely used. In Eng. there is no
sharp distinction between the words “grasshopper”
and “locust.” .

The migratory locusts belong to the family Acridiidae,
distinguished by short, thick antennae, and hy having
the organs of hearing at the hase of the ahdomen. The
insects of the family Locustidae are commonly called
“grasshoppers,"’ but the same name is applied to thase


Acridiidae which are not found In swarms. The Lo-
custidae have long, thin antennae, organs of hearing on


ovipositors. It may be noted that the insect known in
America as the seventeen-year locust, which occasion-
ally does extensive damage to trees by laying its eggs
in the twigs, is a totally different insect, heing a Cicada
of the order Rhynchota. Species of Cicada are found in
Pal, but are not considered harmful.


The Book of Joel is largely occupied with the
description of a plague of locusts. Commentators
differ as to whether it should be interpreted liter-
ally or allegorically (see JonL). Four names ’arbeh
(1), ga@zam (5), yelek (6) and hastl (7), are found
in Joel 1 4 and again in 2 25.


For the etymology of these names, see 1 above.
; 2 25) is in RV uniformly


LXX has indifferently akris and brouchos. ‘' Palmer-
worm”’ and ‘‘canker-worm"’ are hoth Old Eng. terms for
caterpillars, which are strictly the larvae of lepidop-
terous insects, i.e. butterflies and moths.

While these four words occur in Joel 1 4 and
2 25, a consideration of the book as a whole does
not show that the ravages of four different insect
pests are referred to, but rather a single one, and
that the locust. These words may therefore be
regarded as different names of the locust, referring
to different stages of development of the insect.
It is true that the words do not occur in quite the
same order in 1 4 and in 2 25, but while the former
verse indicates a definite succession, the latter does
not. If, therefore, all four words refer to the locust,
‘palmer-worm,” “canker-worm,” “caterpillar” and
the LXX erusibé, “rust,” are obviously inappro-


riate.
2 Gobh (8) is found in the difficult passage (Am 7
1), “. . . . He formed locusts [AV “grasshoppers,’”’
AVm “green worms,” LXX akris] in the beginning
of the shooting up of the latter
growth”; and (Nah 317) in“. ...
thy marshals [are] as the swarms of
grasshoppers [Heb gabh gabhay; AV
“great grasshoppers’), which encamp
in the hedges in the cold day, but
when the sun ariseth they flee away,
and their place is not known where
they are.” The related gébh (9)
occurs but once, in Isa 33 4, also a
disputed passage, “And your spoil
shall be gathered as the caterpillar
{hds2l] gathereth: as locusts [gébhim]
leap shall men leap upon it.” It is
impossible to determine what species
is meant, but some kind of locust or
grasshopper fits any of these passages.

In Dt 28 42, “All thy trees and
the fruit of thy ground shall the
locust [EV] possess,” we have (10)
elagal (LXX erusibé). The same
word is tr? in 28 65 and Ps 150
5 bis “cymbals,” in Job 41 7 “‘fish-
spears,” and in Isa 18 1 “rustling.”
As stated in 1, above, it is an ono-


matopoetic word, and in Dt 28 42 Sticksof Dried
may well refer to the noise of the the Sculp-
wings of a flight of locusts. tures from

In the NT we have (11) akris, Kouyunilk


“locust,’’ the food of John the Bap-
tist (Mt 3 4; Mk 1 6); the same word is used
fig. in Rev 9 3.7; and_also in Apoc (Jth 2 20;
Wisd 16 9; and see 2 Esd 4 24),

_ The swarms of locusts are composed of countless
individuals. The statements sometimes made that
they darken the sky must not be taken too literally.


1909


They do not produce darkness; but their effect may
be like that of a thick cloud. Their movements

are largely determined by the wind,
3. Habits and while fields that are in their path
may be laid waste, others at one side
may not be affected. It is possible by vigorous
waving to keep a given tract clear of them, but
usually enough men cannot be found to protect the
fields from their ravages.


Large birds have been known to pass through a flight

of locusts with open mouths,-filllng their crops with the
insects. Tristram, NHB, relates how he saw the fishes
in the Jordan enjoying a similar feast, as the locusts fell
Into the stream. The female locust, by means of the
ovipositor at the end of her abdomen, digs a hole in the
ground, and deposits in it a mass of eggs, which are
cemeuted together with a glandular secretion. An
effective way of dealing with the locusts is to gather and
destroy these egg-masses, and it Is customary for the
local governments to offer a substantial reward for a
measure of eggs. The young before they can fly are
frequently event into pits or ditches dug for the purpose
and are burned.
_. The young are of the same general shape as the adult
insects, differing in being small, black and wingless.
The three distinct stages in the metamorphosis of butter-
flies and others of the higher insects are not to be dis-
tinguished in locusts. They molt about six times,
emerging from each molt larger than before. At first
there are no wings. After several molts, small and use-
less wings are found, but it is only after the last molt
that the insects are able to fly. In the early molts the
tiny black nymphs are found in patches on the ground,
hoppiug out of the way when disturbed. Later they
run, until they are able to fly.


In all stages they are destructive to vegetation.
Some remarkable pictures of their ravages are found
in Joel 1 6.7, “For a nation is come up upon my
land, strong, and without number; his teeth are the
teeth of a lion, and he hath the jaw-teeth of a lioness.
He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig-
tree: he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away;
the branches thereof are made white” (see also
2 2-9.20).

Locusts are instruments of the wrath of God


(Ex 10 4-19; Dt 28 38.42; 2 Ch 713; Ps 78

46; 105 34; Nah 3 15-17; Wisd
4, Figura- 169; Rev 93); they typify an
tive invading army (Jer 51 14.27); they


are compared with horses (Joel 2 4;
Rev 9 7); in Job 39 20, Jeh says of the horse:
“Hast thou made him to leap as a locust?” AV
“Canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper?”
Locusts are among the “four things which are little
upon the earth, but... . are exceeding wise”’
(Prov 30 27). Like the stars and sands of the sea,
locusts are a type of that which cannot be numbered
(Jgs 65; 7 12; Jer 46 23; Jth 2 20). Grass-
hoppers are a symbol of insignificance (Nu 13 33;
Eccl 12 5; Isa 40 22; 2 Esd 4 24).

The Arabs prepare for food the thorax of the locust,
which contains the great wing muscles. They pull off
the head, which as it comes away brings
with it a mass of the viscera, and they
remove the abdomen (or ‘‘tail’’), the legs
and the wings. The thoraxes, if not at
once eaten, are dried and put away as a
store of food for a lean season. The idea of feeding upon
locusts when prepared in this way should not be so
repellent as the thought of eating the whole iusect. In
the light of this it is not incredible that the food of John
the Baptist should have been “locusts and wild honey


(Mt 3 4). See Insects.
a Aurrep E1y Day

LOD, LYDDA (79, lédh; At88a, Lridda): Ono
and Lod and the towns thereof are said to have
been built by Shemed, a Benjamite
1. Scriptural (1 Ch 8 12). The children of Lod,
Notices Hadid and Ono, to the number of 725,
returned from Babylon with Zerub-
babel (Ezr 2 33; Neh 7 37 [721]). The town
lay in the Shephelah, perhaps in gé ha-hdrashim,
“the valley of craftsmen” (Neh 11 35). In the
NT it appears as Lydda. Here the apostle Peter
visited the saints and healed the palsied Aeneas


6. Locusts
as Food


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Locust
Lo-debar


(Acts 9 32). Hence he was summoned by mes-

sengers from Joppa on the death of Dorcas.
The three governments of Aphaerema, Lydda
and Ramathaim were added to Judaea from the
country of Samaria by King Deme-


2. History trius II (1 Macc 11 34). Lydda pre-
from Mac-_ sided over one of the toparchies under
cabean Jerus, into which Judaea was divided
Times (BJ, TI, iii, 5). After the death of


_ Julius Caesar the mhabitants of Lydda
and certain other towns, having failed to pay the
contributions Cassius demanded, were by him sold
into slavery. They were freed by Antony (Ant,
XIV, xi, 2; xii, 2). Lydda suffered severely under
Cestius Gallus (BJ, U1, xix, 1). Along with Jam-
nia it surrendered to Vespasian (BJ, IV, vili, 1).
After the fall of Jerus it was noted as a seat of rab-
binical learning. The classical name of the city
was Diospolis. In the 4th cent. it was connected
with the trade in purple. It became the seat of a
bishopric, and the bishop of Lydda was present
at the Council of Nicaea. At Lydda, in 415 AD,
took place the trial of Pelagius for heresy.

Under the Moslems it became capital of the province
of Filastin, but later it was superseded by er-Ramileh,
founded by Khalif Suleiman, whither its inhabitants
were removed (Ya'kabi,c 891 AD). Mukaddasi (c 985)
says that in Lydda “there is a great mosque in which
are wont to assemble large numbers of people from the
capital [er-Ramleh] and from the villages around. In
Lydda, too, is that wouderful church [of St. George] at
the gate of which Christ will slay the antichrist’ (quoted
by Guy le Strange, Pal under the Moslems, 493). It was
rebuilt by the Crusaders; but was destroyed by Saladin
after the battle of Hattin, 1191 AD. It was againrestored;
but in 1271 it was sacked by the Mongols, and from this
blow it has never recovered.

The ancient Lod or Lydda is represented by the modern
village of Ludd, on the road to Jerus, about 11 miles

8.E. of Yafa. Itis a station on the Jaffa-

3. Identifi- Jerus Railway. It occupies a picturesque

ti a hollow in the plain of Sharon, and is sur-

cauon 4nG founded by gardens and orchards, the

Description beauty of ‘which intensifies by contrast

the squalor of the village. It was the re-

uted birthplace of St. George, and here he is said to have

Been buried. The one ruin of importance in the place is
that of the church which perpetuates his name.


The town stood on the great caravan road be-
tween Babylon and Egypt, near its intersection
with that from Joppa tp Jerus and the East. Its
position on these great arteries of commerce meant
trade for the inhabitants. ‘‘The manufacture
and repair of such requisites for the journey as
sacks, saddles and strappings would create the
skilled labor in cloth, leather, wood and metal that
made the neighborhood once the valley of crafts-
men’ (Mackie, HDB, s.v.). Like many other
once prosperous cities on these and similar caravan
routes, Lydda suffered from diversion of traffic to
the sea; and it may be that for none of them is any
great revival now possible. Ewine


LODDEUS, lod-é’us (Ao8Sets, Loddetis; Swete
reads Laadatos with Doldaios as variant in A; AV
Daddeus, Saddeus): The captain, who was in the
place of the treasury. Ezra sent to him for men
who “might execute the priests’ office’ (1 Esd 8
46); called ‘Iddo” in Ezr 8 17.


LO-DEBAR, ld’débar, 1é-dé’bar CDT 5,
la dhebha@r'y: A place in Gilead where dwelt Machir,


‘son of Ammiel, who sheltered Mephibosheth, son of


Saul, after that monarch’s death (2 8 9 4), until
he was sent for by David. This same Machir
met David with supplies when he fled to Gilead
from Absalom (17 27f). Possibly it is the same
place as Lidebir in Josh 13 26 (RVm). No cer-
tain identification is possible; but Schumacher
(Northern ‘Ajlan, 101) found a site with the name
Ibdar about 64 miles E. of Umm Keis, N. of the
great aqueduct, which may possibly represent the


Lodge
Logos


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1910


ancient city. Lidebir, at least, seems to be placed
on the northern boundary of Gilead. The modern
village stands on the southern shoulder of Wady
Samar. There is a good spring to the E., a little
lower down, while ancient remains are found in the
neighborhood. W. Ewine


LODGE, loj (77>, lin; xarackyvéw, kataskends,
etc): To stay or dwell, temporarily, as for the night
(Gen 32 13.21; Nu 228; Josh21AV; 43;
Lk 13 19; Mt 21 17, aulizomai), or permanently
(Ruth 1 16). In Isa 1 8, “a lodge {mlanah] in a
garden of cucumbers,” the meaning is “hut,” ‘“‘cot-
tage.” “Evil thoughts” are said to “lodge” in the
wicked (Jer 4 14).


LOFT: In 1 K 17 23,
“chamber.”


LOFTILY, lof’ti-li, LOFTINESS, _lof’ti-nes,
LOFTY: The first form is only in Ps 73 8, where
it means “haughtily,” as if from on high. The
second is found only in Jer 48 29, where the
loftiness of Moab also means his haughtiness, his
groundless self-conceit.

Lofty likewise means “haughty,” “lifted up’’ (cf
Ps 131 1; Isa 2 11; Prov 30 13). In Isa 26 5 it
refers to a self-secure and boastful city. In 57 15
it is used in a good sense of God who really is high
and supreme. Isaiah uses the word more than all
the other sacred writers put together.


changed in RV to


" LOG, log, 16g (19, légh, “deepened,” “hollowed
out” [Lev 14 10-24]): The smallest liquid or dry
measure of the Hebrews, equal to about 1 pint.
See WEIGHTS AND M@ASURES.


LOGIA, log’i-a, THE (Asya, Ldgia): The
word ldgion, which is a dimin. of légos, was regu-
larly used of Divine utterances. There
1. The are examples in the classics, the LXX,
Word the writings of Josephus and Philo and
“Logia” and in four passages in the NT (Acts 7 38;
Its History Rom 32; He 612; 1 Pet 4 11)
where it is uniformly rendered both
in AV and RV “oracles.” It is not, therefore, sur-
prising that early Christian writers, who thought of
Christ as Divine, applied this term to His sayings
also. We find this use, according to the usual inter-
pretation, in the title of the lost work of Papias as
preserved by Eusebins, Logidn kuriakén exégésis,
“Exposition of the Lord’s Logia” (HE, ITI, 39), in
that writer’s obscure reference to a Heb or Aram.
writing by the apostle Matthew (ib), and in Poly-
carp’s Ep. (§7), “the logia of the Lord.” The
modern use of the word is twofold: (a) as the name
of the document referred to by Papias which may
or may not be the Q of recent inquirers; (b) as the
name of recently discovered sayings ascribed to
Jesus. For the former cf Gospets. The latter is
the theme of this article.
About 9% miles from the railway station of
Beni Mazar, 121 miles from Cairo, a place now
called Behnesa marks the site of an
2. The Dis- ancient city named by the Greeks
covery of | Oxyrhynchus, from the name of a
the Logia sacred fish, the modern binni, which
had long been known as a great Chris-
tian center in early times and was therefore selected
by Messrs. Grenfell and Hunt for exploration in
behalf of the Egyp Exploration Fund. They
began work on the rnins of the town, January 11,
1897, and on the following day discovered a papyrus
leaf inscribed with a number of sayings introduced
by the formula légei Fésous, “saith Jesus,’’ some of
which were at once seen to be quite new. When
excavation was resumed in February, 1903, a


second fragment was discovered, which must have
belonged to the same or a similar collection, as the
formula “saith Jesus’ is employed in exactly the
same way, and the sayings exhibit the same mixed
character. The first of these two fragments was
named by the discoverers logia, but the short preface
to the second fragment suggests that the word used
in the original title may have been logoi, which is
found in Acts 20 35 as the title perhaps of a col-
lection of sayings of Jesus used by the apostle Paul.
It is convenient, however, to retain logia, at any
rate for the present. Other remains of early Chris-
tian texts have been found on the same site (cf
Aarapua) but none of precisely the same character.

The first fragment, found and published in 1897, after-


ward referred to as A, is a leaf from a papyrus book
measuring in its present state 5} X3%


. Descrip- inches and having 42 lines on the two
z n Pike pages. As it is broken at the bottom it
ion of the is impossible, in the absence of another
Texts leaf, to ascertain or even conjecture how


mouch has been lost. At the top right-
hand corner of one page are the letters idia, dlpha, used
as numerals, that is 11, and it has been suggested that
this, with other characteristics, marks the page as the
first of the two. The uncial writing is assigned to the
3d cent., perhaps to the early part of it. The text is
fairly complete except at the end of the third logion, for
the five following lines, and at the bottom. The second
fragment, henceforth referred to as B, found in 1903 and
published in 1904, has also 42 lines, or rather parts of
lines, but on only one pase or column, the Christian text
being written on the back of a roll the recto of which
contained a survey list. The characters of this, too, are
uncial, and the date, like that of A, seems to be also the
3d cent., but perhaps a little later. B_is unfortunately
very defective, the bit of papyrus being broken vertically
throughout, so that several letters are lost at the end of
each line, and also horizontally for parts of several lines
at the bottom.


Seven of these sayings, or logia, inclusive of the
preface of B, have or-contain canonical parallels,
namely:


(1) Al, which coincides with the usual text of Lk 6 42;
(2) Ada (according to the editio princeps, 6a), which comes
very close to Lk 4 24; (3) A6 (or 7), a
4. Logia variant of Mt § 14; (4) the saying cou-
with Canoni- &ined_in the preface of B which resembles
Jn 8 52; (5) B2, ll. 7t, ‘The kingdom of
cal Parallels heaven ‘is within you,” which reminds
us of Lk 17 21; (6) B3, ll. 4f, ‘Many
that are first shall be last; and_ the last first," which
corresponds to Mk 10 31; cf Mt 19 30; Lk 13 30;
(7) B4, ll. 2-5, ‘‘ That which is hidden from thee shall be
revealed to thee: for there is nothing hidden that shall
not be made manjifest,’’ which is ike Mk 4 22 (cf Mt
10 26; Lk 12 2). These parallels or partial parallels—
for some of them exhibit interesting variations—are,
with one exception, of synoptic character.


The other seven or eight logia, although not
without possible echoes of the canonical Gospels
in thought and diction, are all non-canonical and
with one exception new.

Three of them, namely B2 and 3 (apart from the


canonical sayings given above) and 5, may be set aside
as too uncertain to be of any value. What


5. New is preserved of the first (‘‘Who are they
Savi that draw you [MS, us] to the kingdom ?”
ayings etc) is indeed very tempting, but the


J restoration of the lost matter is too pre-
carious for any suggestion to be more than an ingenious
conjecture. This is seen by comparing the restoration
of this logion by the discoverers, Dr. Swete and Dr. C.
Taylor, with that proposed by Deissmann (Licht vom
Osten!, 329). While the Eng. scholars take hélké in the
sense of ‘‘draw,”’ the German takes it in the sense which
it has in the NT, “‘drag,”’ with the result of utter diver-

ence as _to the meaning and even the subject of the
logion. The logia which remain are undeniably of great
interest, although the significance of at least one is ex-
ceedingly obscure. The number of the sayings is not
certaia. Dr. Taylor has shown that in A2f‘‘and” may
couple two distinct utterances brought together by the
compiler. If this suggestion is adopted, and if the words
after A3 in the editio princeps are regarded as belonging
to it and not as the remains of a separate logion, we get
the following eight sayings:


(1) “Except ye fast to the world [or “from the
world”), ye shall in no wise find the kingdom of
God” (A2a); (2) ‘Except ye keep the sabbath


1911


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lodge
Logos


[Taylor “sabbatize the sabbath”, ye shall not see
the Father” (A2b); (3) “I stood in the midst of the
world, and in flesh was I seen of them, and I found
all men drunken, and none found I athirst among
them” (Aa); (4) “My soul grieveth over the sons
of men, because they are blind in their heart and
see not their wretchedness and their poverty” (the
last clause restored by conjecture) (A3b); (5)
‘Wherever there are two they are not without God,
and where there is one alone J say I am with him
[after Blass]. Raise the stone and [there] thou shalt
find me: cleave the wood [Taylor, ‘‘the tree”’] and
there am I” (A4); (6) “A physician does not work
cures on them that know him” (A5b); (7) ‘Thou
hearest with one ear but the other thou hast closed”
(largely conjectural but almost certain) (A6);
(8) “[There is nothing] buried which shall not be
raised” (or “‘known’’) (B4, 1. 5).

_Attempts have been made to trace the collec-

tion represented by these fragments (assuming

that they belong to the same work) to
6. Origin some lost gospel—the Gospel accord-
and Char- ing to the Egyptians (Harnack, Van
acter of the Manen), the Gospel of the Ebionites
Logia or the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles

(Zahn), or the Gospel according to
the Hebrews (Batiffol), but without decisive re-
sult. That there is a connection of some kind
with the last-mentioned apocryphal work is evi-
dent from the fact that B1 (“Jesus saith, Let
not him who seeks . . . . cease until he find Him;
and having found Him, let him be amazed; and
being amazed he shall reign, and reigning shall
rest’) is ascribed by Clement of Alexandria to
this writing, but that cannot have been the only
source. It was probably one of a number drawn
on by the compiler. The latter, so far as B is
concerned, represents the sayings as spoken by
Jesus to . . . . and Thomas.” In whatever way
the gap is supplied—whether by “Philip,” or
“Judas” or “‘the other disciples’’—one of the Twelve
known as Thomas is clearly referred to as the me-
dium or one of the media of transmission. It is
possible that the short preface in which this state-
ment is made belongs not to the whole collection
but to a part of it. The whole work may, as Swete
suggests (Expos T, XV, 494), have been entitled
‘Words of Jesus to the Twelve,” and this may have
been the portion addressed to Thomas. The other
fragment, A, might belong to a section associated
with the name of another apostle. In any case
the Logia must have formed part of a collection of
considerable extent, as we know of material for 24
pages or columns of about 21 or 22 lines each.
So far as can be judged the writing was not a gospel
in the ordinary sense of that term, but a collection
of sayings perhaps bearing considerable resemblance
as to the form to the Logia of Matthew mentioned
by Papias.

The remains of B5, however, show that a saying might
be prefaced with introductory matter. Perhaps a short
narrative was sometimes appended. The relation to
the canonical Gospels cannot he determined Rptenne
evidence. The sayings preserved generally exhibit the
synoptic type, perhaps more specifically the Lukan type,
but Johannine echoes, that is, possible traces of the
thought and diction ae prceon eed in the Fourth Gospel,
are not absent (cf A, logia 2f, and preface to B). It
seems not improhable that the compiler had our four
Gospels before him, hut nothing can he proved. There
is no distinct sign of heretical influence. The much-
debated saying about the wood and the stone (A4b)
nndoubtedly lends itself to pantheistic teaching, but can
be otherwise understood.

Under these circumstances the date of the com-
pilation cannot at present be fixed except in a very
general way. If our papyri which represent two
copies were written, as the discoverers think, in the
8d cent., that fact and the induhitably archaic
character of the sayings make it all hut certain that


the text as arranged is not later than the 2d cent.
To what part of the cent. it is to be assigned is at
present undiscoverable. Sanday inclines to about
120 AD, the finders suggest about 140 AD as the
terminus ad quem, Zahn dates 160-70 AD, and Dr.
Taylor 150-200 AD. Further rescarch may solve
these problems, but, with the resources now avail-
able, all that can be said is that we have in the
Logia of Oxyrhynchus a few glimpses of an early
collection of sayings ascribed to Jesus which cir-
culated in Egypt in the 3d cent. of great interest
and possibly of considerable value, but of com-
pletely unknown origin.

Lirerators.—Of the extensive literature which has
gathered round the Logia—as many as fifty publications
relating to A only in the first few months—only a tew
can be mentioned here. A was first published in 1897
as a pamphlet and afterward as No. 1 of Oxzyrhynchus
Papyrt. aluable articles by Cross and Harnack ap-
peared in Expos, ser. V, vol VI, 257 ff, 321 ff, 401 ff, an
important lecture by Swete in Expos T, VIII, 544 ff,
568, and a very useful pamphlet by Sanday and Lock in
the same year. B appeared In 1904 in pamphlet form
and as No. 654 of the Ozyrhynchus Papyri, with a
fwiler comm. Dr. OC. Taylor's pamphlets on A and
B issued respectively in 1899 and 1905, and Swete's
lecture on B, Expos T, XV, 488ff, are of exceptional
significance for the study of the subject. Cf also Griffin-
hoofe, The Unwritten Sayings of Christ (A only), 55-67;
Kilecstermann, Kleine Texte, Nos. 8, pp. 11 f and 11, pp.
17 ff; Resch, Agrapha?, 68-73, 3531; HDB, art.
‘“‘Agrapha,”’ extra vol; also arts. on ‘‘ Unwritten Say-
ings’’ in HDB, 1909, and DCG.

Witiram Tayitor SmrrH

LOGOS, log’os (Adyos, légos):

I. Greex SpecoLtation
- Heraclitus
. Anaxagoras
Plato
. Aristotle
Stoics
EBREW ANTICIPATION OF DocTRINE
. Word as Revelation of God
. Suggestions of Personal Distlnctlons In Delty
. Theophanies
. Wisdom

5. Targums
TIT. ALEXANDRIAN SYNTHESIS
Philo
IV. Curistian ReaizaTIon
1. Pauline Doctrine
2. Doctrine in Hebrews
3. Doctrine in Fourth Gospel
(1) Content of Doctrine
(a) Relation of Logos to God
(b) Relation of Logos to World
(2) Origin of Terminology
{a) Hebrew Sonrce
{b) Hellenic Source
{c) Contrast hetween Philo and John

V. Patristic DEVELOPMENT
LireRaTURE

The doctrine of the Logos has exerted a decisive
and far-reaching influence upon speculative and
Christian thought. The word has a long history,
and the evolution of the idea it embodies is really
the unfolding of man’s conception of God. To
comprehend the relation of the Deity to the world
has been the aim of all religious philosophy. While
widely divergent views as to the Divine manifesta-
tion have been conceived, from the dawn of West-
ern speculation, the Gr word logos has been em-
ployed with a certain degree of uniformity by a
series of thinkers to express and define the nature
and mode of God’s revelation.

Logos signifies in classical Gr both ‘“‘reason” and
“word.” Though in Bib. Gr the term is mostly
employed in the sense of “‘word,”’ we cannot proper-
ly dissociate the two significations. Every word
implies a thought. It is impossible to imagine a
time when God was without thought. Hence
thought must be eternal as the Deity. The tr
“thought” is probably the best equivalent for the
Gr term, since it denotes, on the one hand, the
faculty of reason, or the thought inwardly con-
ceived in the mind; and, on the other hand, the
thought outwardly expressed through the vehicle
of language. The two ideas, thought and speech,


mobo


ms


II.


PWN


Logos


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1912


are indubitably blended in the term logos; and in
every employment of the word, in philosophy and
Scripture, both notions of thought and its outward
expression are intimately connected.

In this art. it will be our aim to trace the evo-
lution of the doctrine from its earliest appearance
in Gr philosophy through its Heb and Alexandrian
phases till it attained its richest expression in the
writings of the NT, and esp. in the Fourth Gospel.

The doctrine may be said to have two stages:
a Hellenistic and a Heb; or, more correctly, a pre-
Christian and a Christian. The theory of Philo
and of the Alexandrian thinkers generally may be
regarded as the connecting link between the Gr and
the Christian forms of the doctrine. The Gr or
pre-Christian speculation on the subject is marked
by the names of Heraclitus, Plato and the Stoics.
Philo paves the way for the Christian doctrine of
Paul, Hebrews and the Johannine Gospel.

I. Greek Speculation.—The earliest speculations
of the Greeks were occupied with the world of
Nature, and the first attempts at philosophy take
the shape of a search for some unitary principle to
explain the diversity of the universe.


Heraclitus was practically the first who sought to
account for the order which existed in a world of change
. hy a law or ruling principle. This pro-
1.Heraclitus foundest of Gr philosophers saw every-~
thing in a condition of flux. Everything

is forever pacing into something else and has an existence
only in relation to this process. We cannot say things
are: they come into being and pass away. To account
for this state of perpetual becoming, Heraclitus was led
to seek out a new and primary element from which all
things take their rise. This substance he conceived to
be, not water or air as previous thinkers had conjectured,
but something more subtle, mysterious and potent—
fire. This restless, all-consuming and yet all-transform-
ing activity—now darting upward as a flame, now sink-
ing to an ember and now vanishing as smoke—is for
him at once the symbol and essence of life. But it is no
arbitrary or lawlesselement. If there is flux everywhere,
all change must take place according to ‘‘measure.”’
Reality is an ‘‘attunement’’ of opposites, a tension or
harmony of conflicting elements. Heraclitus saw all
the mutations of being governed by a rational and un-
alterable law. This law he calls sometimes ‘‘Justice,”’
sometimes ‘‘Harmony’’; more frequently “Logos” or
“Reason,” and in two passages at least, ‘'God.”’ | Fire,
Logos, God are fundamentally the same. It is the
eternal energy of the universe pervading all its substance
and preserving in unity and harmony the perpetual
drift and evolution of phenomenal existence. Though
Heraclitus sometimes calls this rational principle God,
it is not probable that he attached to it any definite idea
of consciousness. The Logos is not above the world or
even prior to it. It is im it, its inner pervasive energy
sustaining, relating and harmonizing its endless variety.
Little was done by the immediate successors of Her-
aclitus to develop the doctrine of the Logos, and as the
distinction between mind and matter


9. Anax- became more defined, the term nous
‘ superseded that of Logos as the rational
agoras force of the world. Anaxagoras was the


first thinker who introduced the idea of a
supreme intellectual principle which, while independent
of the world, governed it. His conception of the nous
or ‘mind " is, however, vague and confused, hardly dis-
tinguishable from corporeal matter. By the artificial
introduction of a power acting externally upon the
world, a dualism, which continued throughout Gr phi-
losophy, was created. At the same time it is to the
merit of Anaxagoras that he was the first to perceive
some kind of distinction between mind and matter and
to suggest a teleological explanation of the universe.

In Plato the idea of a regulative principle reappears.
But though the word is frequently used, it is nous and
not Logos which determines his concep-

3. Plato tion of the relation of God and the world.
: The special doctrine of the Logos does not
find definite expression, except perhaps.
in the Timaeus, where the word is employed as descrip-
tive of the Divine force from which the world has arisen.
But if the word does not frequently occur In the dialogues,
there is not wanting a basis upon which a Logos-doctrine
might be framed; and the conception of archetypal
ideas affords a philosophical expression of the relation of
God and the world. The idea of a dominating principle
of reason was lifted to a higher plane by the distinction
which Plato made between the world of sense and the
world of thought, to the latter of which God belonged.
According to Plato, true reality or absolute being con-
sisted of the ‘‘Ideas’’ which he conceived as thoughts
residing In the Divine mind before the creation of the


world. To these abstract concepts was ascrihed the
character of supersensible realities of which in some way
the concrete visible things of the world were copies or
images. Compared with the ‘‘Ideas,’’ the world of
things was a world of shadows. This was the aspect of
the Platonic doctrine of ideas which, as we shall see,
Philo afterward seized upon, because it best fitted in
with his general conception of the transcendence of God
and_ His relation to the visible world. Three features
of Plato's view ought to be remembered _as having a
special significance for our subject: (1) While God is
regarded by Plato as the intelligent power by which the
world is formed, matter itself is conceived by him as in
some sense eternal and partly, intractable. (2) While
in the Philebus Plato employs the expression, ‘'the regal
principle of intelligence in the nature of God” (vois Ba-
gidicas ev TH Tov Atos voc, nous basilikés en té tort
Diés phisei), it is doubtful if reason was endowed with
personality or was anything more than an attribute of
the Divine mind. (3) The ideas are merely models or
archetypes after which creation is fashioned.
The doctrine of the Logos cannot be said to occupy
a distinctive place in the teaching of Aristotle, though
the hae does Peer in a oy of
* senses (6.2. adpfds Adyos, orthds légos,
4. Aristotle “right insight,”’ the faculty by which the
will is trained to proper action). Aristotle
sought to solve the fundamental problem of Gr phi-
losophy as to how behind the changing multiplicity of
appearances an abiding Being is to be thought by means
of the concept of development. Plato had regarded the
“ideas” as the causes of phenomena—causes different
from the objects themselves. Aristotle endeavored to
overcome the duality of Plato by representing reality
as the essence which contains within itself potentially
the phenomena, and unfolds into the particular mani-
festations of the sensihle world. This conception has
exerted a powerful influence upon subsequent thought,
and particularly upon the monotheistic view of the world.
At the same time in working it out, the ultimate ‘‘ prime-
mover” of Aristotle was not materially different from
the idea of ‘‘the Good" of Plato. And inasmuch as
God was conceived as pure thought existing apart from
the world in eternal blessedness, Aristotle did not suc-
ceed in resolving the duality of God and the universe
which exercised the Gr mind.
It is to the Stoics we must look for thefirst system.
atic exposition of the doctrine of the Logos. It is
the key to their interpretation of life,
5. Stoics both in the realms of Nature and of
f duty. Interested more in ethical than
physical problems, they were compelled to seek a
eneral metaphysical basis for a rational moral life.
ome unitary idea must be found which will over-
come the duality between God and the world and
remove the opposition between the sensuous and
supersensuous which Plato and Aristotle had failed
to reconcile. For this end the Logos-doctrine of
Heraclitus seemed to present itself as the most
satisfactory solution of the problem. The funda-
mental thought of the Stoics consequently is that
the entire universe forms a single living connected
whole and that. all particulars are the determinate
forms assumed by the primitive power which they
conceived as never-resting, all-pervading fire.
This eternal activity or Divine world-power which
contains within itself the conditions and processes
of all things, they call Logos or God. More par-
ticularly as the productive power, the Deity is
named the éyos omepparikts, légos spermatrkés,
the Seminal Logos or generative principle of the
world. This vital energy not only pervades the
universe, but unfolds itself into innumerable logot
spermatikot or formative forces which energize the
manifold phenomena of Nature and life. This
subordination of all particulars to the Logos not
only constitutes the rational order of the universe
but supplies a norm of duty for the regulation of the
activities of life. Hence in the moral sphere “to
live according to Nature’ is the all-determining
jaw of conduct.

Il. Hebrew Anticipation of Doctrine.—So far we
have traced the development of the Logos-doctrine
in Gr philosophy. We have now to note a parallel
movement in Heb thought. Though strictly
speaking it is incorrect to separate the inner Reason
from the outer expression in the term Logos, still
in the Hellenistic usage the doctrine was sub-


1913


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Logos


stantially a doctrine of Reason, while in Jewish lit.
it was more esp. the outward expression or word
that was emphasized.
The sources of this conception are to be found in
the OT and in the post-canonical literature. The
God who is made known in Scripture
1. Word as is regarded as one who actively reveals
Revelation Himself. He is exhibited therefore
of God as making His will known in and by
His spoken utterances. The “Word
of God” is presented as the creative principle (Gen
13; Ps 33 6); as instrument of judgment (Hos
6 5); as agent of healing (Ps 107 20); and gen-
erally as possessor of personal qualities (Isa 55 2;
Ps 147 15). Revelation is frequently called the
“Word of the Lord,” signifying the spoken as dis-
tinct from the written word.
_In particular, we may note certain adumbra-
tions of distinction of oreens within the Being
of God. It is contended that the
2. Sugges- phrase ‘‘Let us make” in Gen points
tions of to a plurality of persons in the God-
Personal head. This indefinite language of
Distinctions Gen is more fully elaned by the
in Deity _ priestly ritual in Nu (6 23-26) and
in the Psalter. In Jer, Ezr and the
vision of Isa (6 2-8) the same idea of Divine
plurality is implied, showing that the OT presents
a doctrine of God far removed from the sterile
monotheism of the Koran (cf Liddon, Divinity of
Our Lord, and Kénig).


Passing from these indefinite intimations of personal
distinction in the inner life of God, we may mention first
that series of remarkable apparitions

3. Theopha- commonly known as the theophanies of
nies the OT. These representations are de-
scribed as the “ Angel of Jeh” or of ‘‘the

Covenant”; or as the “Angel of his presence.'’ This
angelic appearance is sometimes identified with Jeh (Gen
16 11.13; 32 29-31; Ex 3 2; 13 21), sometimes dis-
tinguished from Him (Gen 22 15; 24 7; 28 12); some-
times presented in both aspects (Ex 3 6; Zec I 11).
We find God revealing Himself in this way to Abraham,
Sarah, Lot, Hagar, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Manoah,
Who was this angel? The earliest Fathers reply with
general unanimity that He was the “ Word”’ or ‘‘Son of
God.” But while the earlier church teachers distin-
guished between the ‘Angel of the Lord” and the
Father, the Arians sought to widen the distinction into
a difference of natures, since an invisible Being must be
higher than one cognizable by the senses. Augustine
insists upon the Scriptural truth of the invisihility of
God as God, the Son not less than the Father. He will
not presume, however, to say which of the Divine persons
manifested Himself in this or that instance; and his
general doctrine, in which he has been followed by most
of the later teachers of the church, is that the theophanies
were not direct appearances of a Person of the Godhead,
but self-manifestations of God through a created heing.
A further development of the conception of a personal
Medium of revelation is discernible in the description of
Wisdom as given in some of the later

4, Wisdom books of the OT. The wisdom of Jewish
Scripture is more than a buman endow-

ment or even an attribute of God, and may he said to
attain almost to a personal reflex of the Deity, remind-
ing us of the archetypal ideas of Plato. In Job, wisdom
is represented as existent in God and as communicated
in its highest form to man. It is the eternal thought in
which the Divine Architect ever heholds His future
creation (Job 28 23-27). If in Job wisdom is revealed.
only as underlying the laws of the_ universe and not
as wholly personal, in the Book of Prov it is coeternal
with Jeh and assists Him in creation (Prov 8 22-31).
It may be doubtful whether this is the language of a real
person or only of a poetic per eo ven: But some-
thing more than a personified idea may he inferred from
the contents of the sapiential hooks outside the Canon.
Sir represents Wisdom as existing from all eternity with


God. In Bar and still more in Wisd the Sophia is dis-
tinctly personal—‘the very image of the goodness of
God.”


n this pseudo-Solomonic book, Supe to be
the work ofan ‘Alexandrian writer before Philo, the influ-
ence of Gr thoughtis traceable. The writer speaks ot God's
Word (m2’mera’) as His agent in creation and judgment.
Finally in the Tgs, which were popular interpretations
or paraphrases of the OT Scripture, there was a tendency
to avoid anthropomorphic terms or such

6. Targums expressions as involved a too internal con-
ception of God's nature and manifestation.

Here the three doctrines of the Word, the Angel, and


Wisdom are Introduced as mediating factors between
God_and the world. In particular the chasm between
the Divine and human is bridged over by the use of such
terms as mée'merd’ (‘‘word"’) and shekhindh (‘‘glory'’).
The mé’merd’ proceeds from God, and is His messenger
In Nature and history. Butit is significant that though
the use of this expression implied the felt need of a Me-
diator, the Word does not seem to have been actually
identified wlth the Messiah.

WW, Alexandrian Synthesis.—We have seen that
according to Gr thought the Logos was conceived
as a rational principle or impersonal energy by
means of which the world was fashioned and ordered,
while according to Heb thought the Logos was
regarded rather as a mediating agent or personal
organ of the Divine Being. The Hellenistic doc-
trine, in other words, was chiefly a doctrine of the
Logos as Reason; the Jewish, a doctrine of the
Logos as Word.

In the philosophy of Alexandria, of which Philo
was an illustrious exponent, the two phases were

combined, and Hellenistic speculation
Philo was united with Heb tradition for
the purpose of showing that the OT
taught the true philosophy and embodied all that
was highest in Gr reflection. In Philo the two
streams meet and flow henceforth in a common bed.
The all-pervading Energy of Heraclitus, the arche-
typal Ideas of Plato, the purposive Reason of
Aristotle, the immanent Order of the Stoics are
taken up and fused with the Jewish conception of
Jeh who, while transcending all finite existences,
is revealed through His intermediatory Word. As
the result of this Philonic synthesis, an entirely
new idea of God is formulated. While Philo ad-
mits the eternity of matter, he rejects the Gr view
that the world is eternal, since it denies the creative
activity and providence of God. At the same time
he separates Divine energy from its manifestations
in the world, and is therefore compelled to connect
the one with the other by the interposition of sub-
ordinate Powers. These Divine forces are the
embodiment of the é5éa:, idéai, of Plato and the
&yyedot, dggeloi, of the OT. The double meaning
of Logos—thought and speech—is made use of by
Philo to explain the relation subsisting between the
ideal world existing only in the mind of God and
the sensible universe which is its visible embodi-
ment. He distinguishes, therefore, between_ the
Logos inherent in God (Adyos évéideros, Légos
endidthetos), corresponding to reason in man, and
the Logos which emanates from God (Aéyos mpo-
goptxds, légos prophorikés), corresponding to the
spoken Word as the revelation of thought. Though
in His inner essence God is incomprehensible by
any but Himself, He has created the intelligible
cosmos by His self-activity. The Word is therefore
in Philo the rational order manifested in the visible
world.

Some special features of the Philonic Logos may
be noted: (1) It is distinguished from God as the
instrument from the Cause. (2) As instrument by
which God makes the world, it isin its nature inter-
mediate between God and man. (8) As the ex-
pressed thought of God and the rational principle
of the visible world, the Logos is “the Eldest or First-
born Son of God.” It is the “bond’’ (deopuds, des-
més) holding together all things (De Mundi, 1.592),
the law which determines the order of the universe
and guides the destinies of men and nations (ib).
Sometimes Philo calls it the ““Man of God”: or
the “Heavenly man,” the immortal father of all
noble men; sometimes he calls it ‘‘the Second God,”
“the Image of God.” (4) From this it follows that
the Logos must be the Mediator between God and
man, the “Intercessor” (ixérys, hikétés) or “High
Priest,”” who is the ambassador from heaven and
interprets God to man. Philo almost exhausts the
vocabulary of Heb metaphor in describing the


Logos


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1914


Logos. It is ‘manna,’ “bread from heaven,”
“the living stream,” the “sword” of Paradise,
the guiding “‘cloud,” the “rock” in the wilderness.

These various expressions, closely resembling
the NT descriptions of Christ, lead us to ask: Is
Philo’s Logos a personal being or a pure abstrac-
tion? Philo himself seems to waver in his answer,
and the Greek and the Jew in him are hopelessly at
issue. That he personifies the Logos is implied
in the figures he uses; but to maintain its person-
ality would have been inconsistent with Philo’s
whole view of God and the world. His Jewish
faith inclines him to speak of the Logos as personal,
while his Gr culture disposes him to an impersonal
interpretation. Confronted with this alternative,
the Alexandrian wavers in indecision. After all
has been said, his Logos really resolves itself into
a group of Divine ideas, and is conceived, not as a
distinct person, but as the thought of God which is
expressed in the rational order of the visible uni-
verse.

In the speculations of Philo, whose thought is so
frequently couched in Bib. language, we have the
gropings of a sincere mind after a truth which was
disclosed in its fulness only by the revelation of
Pentecost. In Philo, Gr philosophy, as has been
said, ‘‘stood almost at the door of the Christian
church.” Butif the Alexandrian thinker could not
create the Christian doctrine, he unconsciously
prepared the soil for its acceptance. In this sense
his Logos-doctrine has a real value in the evolution
of Christian thought. Philo was not, indeed, the
master of the apostles, but even if be did nothing
more than call forth their antagonism, he helped
indirectly to determine the doctrine of Christendom.

IV. Christian Realization.—We pass now to
consider the import of the term in the NT. Here
it signifies usually “utterance,” ‘‘speech” or ‘nar-
rative.”’ In reference to God it is used sometimes
for a special utterance, or for revelation in general,
and even for the medium of revelation—Holy
Scripture. In the prologue of the Fourth Gospel
it is identified with the personal Christ; and it is
this employment of the term in the light of its past
history which creates the interest of the problem
of the NT doctrine.

The author of the Fourth Gospel is not, however,
the first NT writer who represents Jesus as the

Logos. Though Paul does not actu-
1. Pauline ally use the word in this connection,
Doctrine _he has anticipated the Johannine con-

ception. Christ is represented by St.
Paul as before His advent living a life with God in
heaven (Gal 4 4; Rom 10 6). He is conceived
as one in whose image earthly beings, and esp. men,
were made (1 Cor 117; 15 45-49); and even
as participating in the creation (1 Cor 8 6J. In
virtue of His distinct being He is called God’s “own
Son” (Rom 8 32).

Whether Paul was actually conversant with the
writings of Philo is disputed (cf Pfleiderer, Urchris-
tentum), but already when he wrote to the Colos-
sians and Ephesians the influence of Alexandrian
speculation was being felt in the church. Incipient
Gnosticism, which was an attempt to correlate
Christianity with the order of the universe as a
whole, was current. Most noticeable are the
pointed allusions to gnostic watchwords in Eph 3
19 (“fulness of God’) and in Col 2 3 (‘‘Christ,
in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowl-
edge hidden’’), where Paul shows that everything
gonght for in the doctrine of the Pleroma is really
given in Christ. The chief object of these epp. 1s
to assert the unique dignity and absolute power of
the Person of Christ. He is not merely one of the
Aeons which make up the Pleroma, as gnostic
teachers affirm, but a real and personal Being in


whom all the fulness of the Godhead dwells. He
is not merely an inferior workman creating glory
for a higher Master. He creates for Himself.
He is the end as well as the source of all created
things (Col 1 15-20). Though throughout this
ep. the word “Logos” is never introduced, it is plain
that the edxdév, eikén, of Paul is equivalent in
rank and function to the Logos of John. Each
exists prior to creation, each is equal to God, shares
His life and codperates in His work.
In the Ep. to the He we have an equally ex-
plicit, if not fuller, declaration of the eternal Deity
of Christ. Whatever may be said of
2. Doctrine Paul there can be little doubt that the
in He- author of He was familiar with the
brews Philonic writings. Who this writer
was we do not know; but his Philon-
ism suggests that he may have been an Alexandrian
Jew, possibly even a disciple of Philo. In language
seemingly adapted from that source (‘‘Son of God,”
“Firstborn,” “above angels,’ “Image of God,”
‘Agent in Creation,” ‘Mediator,’ “Great High
Priest,”’ ‘‘Melchizedek’’) the author of He speaks
of Christ as a reflection of the majesty and imprint
of the nature of God, just as in a seal the impression
resembles the stamp. The dignity of His title
indicates His essential rank. He is expressly ad-
dressed as God; and the expression ‘‘the effulgence
of his glory’ (RV dratyacua, apatigasma) implies
that He is one with God (He 1 3). By Him the
worlds have been made, and all things are upheld
by the fiat of His word (ver 3). In the name
He bears, in the honors ascribed to Him, in His
superiority to angels, in His relationship as Creator
both to heaven and earth (ver 10), we recognize
(in language which in the letter of it strongly re-
minds us of Philo, yet in its spirit is so different)
the description of one who though clothed with
human nature is no mere subordinate being, but
the possessor of all Divine prerogatives and the
sharer of the very nature of God Himself. .
In the Fourth Gospel the teaching of Paul an
the author of He finds its completest expression.
“The letter to the He stands in a sense
3. Doctrine half-way between Pauline and Jo-


in the hannine teaching’”’ (Weizsacker, A pos-
Fourth tolic Age, V,11). It is, however, too
Gospel much to say that these three writers


represent the successive stages of a
single line of development. While all agree in em-
phasizing the fact of Christ’s Divine personality
and eternal being, Paul represents rather the reli-
gious interest, the Ep. to the He the philosophi-
cal. In the Johannine Christology the two ele-
ments are united.

Tn discussing the Johannine doctrine of the Logos
we shall speak first of its content and secondly of its
terminology.

(1) Content of doctrine—The evangelist uses
“Logos” 6 t as a designation of the Divine preéxist-
ent person of Christ (Jn 1 1.14; 1 Jn 11; Rev
19 13), but he never puts it into the mouth of
Christ. The idea which John sought to convey
by this term was not essentially different from the
conception of Christ as presented by Paul. But
the use of the word gave a precision and emphasis
to the being of Christ which the writer must have
felt was esp. needed by the class of readers for
whom his Gospel was intended. The Logos with
whom the Fourth Gospel starts isa Person. Read-
ers of the Synoptics had long been familiar with the
term “Word of God” as equivalent to the Gospel;
but the essential purport of John’s Word is Jesus
Himself, His Person. We have here an essential
change of ening The two applications are
indeed connected; but the conception of the per-
fect revelation of God in the Gospel passes into


1915


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Logos


that of the perfect revelation af the Divine nature
He eer (cf Weizsiicker, Apostolic Age, V, ii,


In the prologue (which, however, must not be
regarded as independent of, or having no integral
connection with, the rest of the book) there is stated:
(a) the relation of the Logos to God; and (6) the
relation of the Logos to the world.

(a) Relation of Logos to God: Here the author
makes three distinct affirmations: (i) “In the be-
ginning was the Word.” The evangelist carries
back his history of Our Lord to a point prior to all
temporal things. Nothing is said of the origin of
the world. As in Gen 1 1, so here there is only
implied that the Logos was existent when the world
began to be. When as yet nothing was, the Logos
was. Though the eternal preéxistence of the Word
is not actually stated, it isimplied. (ii) “The Word
was with God.” Here His personal existence is
more specifically defined. He stands distinct from,
yet in eternal fellowship with, God. The preposi-
tion prés (bei, Luther) expresses beyond the fact
of coexistence that of perpetual intercommunion.
John would guard against the idea of mere self-
contemplation on the one hand, and entire inde-
pendence on the other. It is union, not fusion.
(iii) “The Word was God.’”’ He is not merely re-
lated eternally, but actually identical in essence
with God. The notion of inferiority is emphatically
excluded and the true Deity of the Word affirmed.
In these three propositions we ascend from His
eternal existence to His distinct personality and
thence to His substantial Godhead. All that God
is the Logos is. Identity, difference, communion
are the three phases of the Divine relationship.

(b) Relation of Logos to the warld: The Logos is
word as well as thought, and therefore there is sug-
gested the further idea of communicativeness. Of
this self-communication the evangelist_mentions
two phases—creation and revelation. The Word
unveils Himself through the mediation of objects
of sense and also manifests Himself directly. Hence
in this section of the prologue (vs 3-5) a threefold
division also occurs. (i) He is the Creator of the
visible universe. ‘All things were made through
him”—a phrase which describes the Logos as the
organ of the entire creative activity of God and ex-
cludes the idea favored by Plato and Philo that God
was only the architect who molded into cosmos
previously existing matter. The term ¢yévero,
egéneto (‘‘becomes,” werden), implies the successive
evolution of the world, a statement not inconsistent
with the modern theory of development. (Gi) The
Logos is also the source of the intellectual, moral
and spiritual fe of man. “In him was life; and
the life was the light of men.” He is the light
ag well as the life—the fountain of all the manifold
forms of being and thought in and by whom all
created things subsist, and from whom all derive
illumination (cf 1 Jn 1 1-3; also Col 1.17). But
inasmuch as the higher phases of intelligent life
involve freedom, the Divine Light, though perfect
and undiminished in itself, was not comprehended
by a world which chose darkness rather than light
(vs 5.11). (iii) The climax of Divine revelation is
expressed in the statement, “The Word became
flesh,” which implies on the one hand the reality
of Christ’s humanity, and, on the other, the volun-
tariness of His incarnation, but excludes the notion
that in becoming man the Logos ceased to be God.
Though clothed m flesh, the Logos continues to be
the self-manifesting God, and retains, even in human
form, the character of the Eternal One. In this
third phase is embodied the highest manifestation
of the Godhead. In physical creation the power
of God is revealed. In the bestowal of light to
mankind His wisdom is chiefly manifested. But


in the third esp. is His love unveiled. All the per-
fections of the Deity are focused and made visible
in Christ—the “glory as of the only begotten from
the Father, full of grace and truth” (Jn 1 14).
Thus the Word reveals the Divine essence. The
incarnation makes the life, the light and the love
which are eternally present in God manifest to
men, As they meet in God, so they meet in Christ.
This is the glory which the disciples beheld; the
truth to which the Baptist bore witness (ver 7);
the fulness whereof His apostles received (ver 16);
the entire body of grace and truth by which the
werd gives to men the power to become the sons of
od.


There is Implied throughout that the Word ¢s the Son.
Each of these expressions taken separately have led
and may lead to error. But combined they correct
possible misuse. On the one hand, their union protects
us from considering the Logos as a mere abstract imper-
sonal quality; and, on the other, saves us from imparting
to the Son a lower state or more recent origin than the
Father, Each term supplements and protects the
other. Taken together they present Christ before His
incarnation as at once personally distinct from, yet
equal with, the Father—as the eternal life which was
with God and was manifested to us.


(2) Origin of en TOO have now to ask
whence the author of the Fourth Gospel derived the
phraseology employed to set forth his Christology. It
will be well, however, to distinguish hetween the source
of the doctrine itself and the source of the language. For
it is possible that Alexandrian philosophy might have
suggested the linguistic medium, while the doctrine
itself had another origin. Writers like Reuss, Keim,
Holtzmann, Weizsicker, Schmiedel, etc, who contend
for the Alexandrian derivation of the prologue, are apt
to overlook two considerations regarding the Johannine
doctrine: (1) There is no essential difference hetween
the teaching of John and that of the other apostolic
writers; and even when the word ‘‘Logos”’ is not used,
as in Paul's case, the. view of Christ's person is virtually
that which we find in the Fourth Gospel. (2) The
writer himself affirms that his knowledge of Christ was
not borrowed from others, hut was derived from personal
fellowship with Jesus Himself. ‘‘We heheld his glory,
glory as of the only begotten.” This is John's summary
and witness upon which he proceeds to hase the vivid
memories of Jesus which follow. 'The Johannine doc-
trine is not to be regarded merely_as a philosophical
account of the nature of God and His creation of the
world, but rather as the statement of a helief which
already existed in the Christian church and which re-
ceived fresh testimony and assurance from the evangel-
ist’s own personal experience, ms

But the question may still be asked: Even if it was
no novel doctrine which John declared, what led him to
adopt the Jankuage of the Logos, a word which had not
heen employed in this connection by previous Christian
writers, but which was prevalent in the philosophical
vocahulary of the age? It would he inconceivable that
the apostle lighted upon this word by chance or that he
selected it without any previous knowledge of its his-
tory and value. It may he assumed that waen he speaks
of the ‘‘ Word”’ in relation to God and the world, he em-
ploys a mode of speech which was already familiar to

hose for whom he wrote and of whose general import
he himself was well aware.

The truth that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ was
borne in upon St. John. The prohlem which confronted
him was how he could make that truth reai to his con-
temporaries. This he sought to do hy using the language
of the highest religious thought of his day.


We have seen that the term “Logos” had under-
one a twofold and to some extent parallel evolution.
On the one hand, it had a Heb and, on the other, a
Hellenic history. In which direction are we to
look for the immediate source of the Johannine
terminology?

(a) Hebrew source: As a Palestinian Jew familiar
with current Jewish ideas and forms of devout
expression, it would be natural for him to adopt
a word, or its Gr equivalent, which played so
important a part in shaping and expressing the
religious beliefs of the OT people. Many scholars
consider that we have here the probable source of
Johannine language. In the OT, and particularly
in the Targums or Jewish paraphrases, the ‘‘Word” .
is constantly spoken of as the efficient instrument
of Divine action; and the “Word of God” had come
to be used in a personal way as almost identical


Logos
Longevity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1916


with God Himself. In Rev 19 13, we have ob-
viously an adoption of this Heb use of the phrase.
Throughout the Gospel there is evinced a decided
familiarity and sympathy with the OT teaching,
and some expressions would seem to indicate the
evangelist’s desire to show that Jesus is the fulfil-
ment of Jewish expectation (e.g. 1 14.29.31; 2 19;
3 14; 6 32.48-50), and the living embodiment of
Israelitish truth (1 16; 8 12; 11 25; 14 6). But
as against this it has been pointed out by Weiz-
sicker (Apostolisches Zeitalter) that the Word of
God is not conceived in the OT as an independent
Being, still less as equivalent for the Messiah, and
that the rabbinical doctrine which identifies the
memra with God is of much later date.

At the same time the Heb cast of thought of the
Johannine Gospel and its affinities with Jewish rather
than Hellenic modes of expression can hardly be
gainsaid. Though John’s knowledgeof andsympathy
with Palestinian religion may not actually account
for his use of the term ‘‘Logos,” it may have largely
colored and directed his special application of it.
For, as Neander observes, that name may have
been put forward at Ephesus in order to lead those
Jews, who were busying themselves with specula-
tions on the Logos as the center of all theophanies,
to recognize in Christ the Supreme Revelation of
God and the fulfilment of their Messianic hopes.

(b) Hellenic source: Other writers trace the
Johannine ideas and terms to Hellenic philosophy and
particularly to Alexandrian influence as represented
in Philo. No one can compare the Fourth Gospel
with the writings of Philo without noting a remark-
able similarity In diction, esp. in the use of the word
“Logos.” Jt would be hazardous, however, on this
ground alone to impute conscious borrowing to the
evangelist. It is more probable that both the
Alexandrian thinker and the NT writer were sub-
ject to common influences of thought and expression.
Hellenism largely colors the views and diction of the
early church. St. Paul takes over many words
from Gr philosophy. “There is not a single NT
writing,” says Harnack (Dogmen-Geschichte, I, 47,
n.), ‘“‘which does not betray the influence of the mode
of thought and general culture which resulted from
the Hellenizing of the Fast.” But, while that is
true, it must not be forgotten, as Harnack himself
points out, ‘“‘that while the writers of the NT breathe
an atmosphere created by Gr culture, the religious
ideas in which they live and move come to them
from the OT.”

It is hardly probable that St. John was directly
acquainted with the writings of Philo. But it is
more than likely that he was cognizant of the general
tenor of his teaching and may have discovered in
the language which had floated over from Alexan-
dria to Ephesus a suitable vehicle for the utterance
of his own beliefs, esp. welcome and intelligible to
those who were familiar with Alexandrian modes of
thought.

But whatever superficial resemblances there may
be between Philo and St. John (and they are not
few or vague), it must be at once evident that the
whole spirit and view of life is fundamentally
different. So far from the apostle being a disciple
of the Alexandrian or a borrower of his ideas, it
would be more correct to say that there is clearly
a conscious rejection of the Philonic conception, and
that the Logos of John is a deliberate protest
against what he must have regarded as the inade-
quate and misleading philosophy of Greece.

(c) Contrast between Philo and John: The eon-
trast between the two writers is much more striking
than the resemblance. The distinction is not due
merely to the acceptance by the Christian writer
of Jesus as the Word, but extends to the whole con-
ception of God and His relation to the world which


has made Christianity a new power among men.
The Logos of Philo is metaphysical, that of John,
religious. Philo moves entirely in the region of
abstract thought, his idea of God is pure being;
John’s thought is concrete and active, moving in a
region of life and history. Philo’s Logos is inter-
mediate, the instrument which God employs in
fashioning the world; John’s Logos is not subsidiary
but is Himself God, and as such is not a mere instru-
ment, but the prime Agent in creation. According
to Philo the Deity is conceived as an architect who
forms the world out of already existent matter.
According to John the Logos is absolute Creator of
all that is, the Source of all being, life and intelli-
gence. In Philo the Logos hovers between person-
ality and impersonality, and if it is sometimes per-
sonified it can hardly be said to have the value of
an actual person; in John the personality of the
Logos is affirmed from the first and it is of the very
essence of his doctrine, the ground of His entire
creative energy. The idea of an incarnation is
alien to the thought of Philo and impossible in his
scheme of the universe; the “Word that has be-
come flesh” is the pivot and crown of Johannine
teaching. Philo affirms the absolute incompre-
hensibility of God; but it is the prime object of
the evangelist to declare that God is revealed in
Christ and that the Logos is the unveiling through
the flesh of man of the self-manifesting Deity. Not-
withstanding the personal epithets employed by
Philo, his Logos remains a pure abstraction or
attribute of God, and it is never brought into rela-
tion with human history. John’s Logos, on the
other hand, is instinct with life and energy from the
beginning, and it is the very heart of his Gospel to
declare as the very center of life and history the
great historical event of the incarnation which is
to recreate the world and reunite God and man.

From whatever point of view we compare them,
we find that Philo and St. John, while using the same
language, give an entirely different value to it. The
essential purport of the Johannine Logos is Jesus
Christ. The adoption of the term involves its
complete transformation. It is baptized with a
new spirit and henceforth stands for a new concep-
tion. From whatsoever source it was originally
derived—from Heb tradition or Hellenic specula-
tion—on Christian soil it is a new product. It is
neither Gr nor Jewish, it is Christian. The philo-
sophical abstraction has become a religious con-
ception. Hellenism and Hebrewism have been
taken up and fused into a higher unity, and Christ
as the emhodiment of the Logos has become the
creative power and the world-wide possession of
mankind.

The most probable view is that Philo and John
found the same term eurrent in Jewish and gentile
circles and used it to set forth their respective ideas;
Philo, following his predilections for Gr philosophy,
to give a Hellenic complexion to his theory of the
relation of Divine Reason to the universe; John,
true to his Heb instincts, seeing in the Logos the
climax of that revelation of God to man of which the
earlier Jewish theophanies were but partial ex-
pressions.

There is nothing improbable in ¢ i
teaching of Philo gave a reat irguise eto ation ie
Logos as Divine Reason which was already shadowed
forth in the Bib. doctrine of Wisdom (Westcott). Nor
need we tako offence that such an important idea should
have come to the Bib. author from an extra-Bib. writer
(cf Schmiedel, Johannine Writings), remembering only
that the author of the Johannine Gospel was no mechani-
cal borrower, but an entirely independent and original
thinker who gave to the Logos and the ideas associated
Pea bee SAD quotation. ee
tributory to the full unfolding of the Gospel’ eos


V. Potristic, Development.—The Johannine Logos
became the fruitful source of much speculation in gnostic


1917


4
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Logos
Longevity


circles and among the early Fathers regarding the
nature of Christ. The positive truth presented by the
Fourth Gospel was once more broken up, and the various
elements of which it was the synthesis became the seeds
of a number of partial and one-sided theories respecting
the relation of the Father and the Son. Tho influence of
Gr ideas, which had already begun in the aostone Age,
became more pronounced and largely shaped the current
of ante-Nicene theology (ses Hatch, Hibbert Lectures).
Gnosticism in particular was an attempt to reconcile
Christianity with philosophy; but in gnostic systems the
term ‘‘Logos"’ ls only sparingly employed. According
to Basilides the ‘‘Logos’' was an emanation from the nous
as personified Wisdom, which again was directly derived
from the Father. Valentinus, in whose teaching Gnos-
ticism culminated, taught that Wisdom was the last of a
series of Aeons which emanated from the Primal Being,
and the Logos was an emanation of the first two princi-
les which issued from God—Reason, Faith. ustin
artyr, the first of the sub-apostolic Fathers, sought to
unite the Scriptural idea of the Logos as Word with the
Hellenic idea of Reason. According to him God pro-
duced in His own nature a ratlonal power which was His
agent in creation and took the form in history of the
Divine Man. Christ is the organ of all revelatiuns, and
as the Adyos oweppatixds, légos spermatikés, He sows
the seeds of virtue and truth among the heathen. All
that is true and beautiful in the pagau world ls to be
traced to the activity of the Logos before His incarna-


tion. Tatian and Theophilus taught essentially the same .


doctrine; though m Tatian there is a marked leaning
toward Gnosticism, and consequently a tendency to
separate the ideal from the historical Christ.
oras, who ascribes to the Logos the creation of all things,
regarding it in the doubie sense of the Reason of God and
the creative energy of the world, has a firm grasp of the
Bib. doctrine, which was still mure clearly expressed b
Irenaeus, who held that the Son was the essential Word,
eternally begotten of the Father and at pnce the inter-
preter of God and the Creator of the world.
_ The Alexandrian school was shaped hy the threefold
influence of Plato, Philo and the Johannine Gospel.
Clement of Alexandria views the Son as the Logos of
the Father, the Fountain of all intelligence, the Revealer
of the Divine Being and the Creator and Mluminator of
mankind. He repudiates the idea of the inferiority of
the Son, and regards the Logos not as the spoken but
as the creative word. Origen seeks to reconcile the two
ideas of the eternity and the subordination of the Logos,
and is in this sense a mediator between the Arian and
more orthodox parties and was appealed to by hoth.
According to him the Son is equal in substance with the
Father, but there is a difference in essence. While the
Father is ‘the Gud" (6 es, ho theés) and “God Him-
self’ (avrd8eos, autétheos), the Logos_is “a second
God” (Sevrepos Oeés, detiteros theds). In the Nicene
Age, under the shaping influence of the powerful mind of
Athanasius, and, to a lesser degree, of Basil and the two
Gregories, the Logos-doctrine attained its final form in
the TEP naDe statement of the Nicene Creed which
declared the essential unity, but, at the same time, the

rsonal distinction of the Father and Son. The
Bouncit of Nicaea practically gathered up the divergent
views of the past and established the teaching of the
Fourth Gospel as the doctrine of the church.

Lrreraturs.—(1) On Gr Logos: Schlelermacher,
Herakleitos der Dunkle; Histories of Philosophy, Zeller,
Ueberweg, Ritter; Heinze, Die Lehre vom Logos in der
Gr Phil. s72); Aall, Gesch. d. Logosidee in d. Gr Phil.
1896). (2 m Jewish doctrine: Oehler, OT Theol.
f ' Schiirer, Lehrbuch d. NT Zeitgesch; Schultz,
OT Theol. (3) On Alexandrian doctrine: Gfrirer, Philo
uw. die alez. Theosophie (1831); Dahne, Gesch, Darstell.
der jad.-alez. Religions-Philosophie (1843); Keferstein,
Philos Lehre von den géttlichen Mittelwesen (1846); Dor-
ner, Entwicklungsgesch. der Lehre_v. d. Person Christi;
Siegfried, Philo v, Alex. (1875); Drummond, Philo Ju-
daeus (1888); Réville, La doctrine du Logos; Huber,
Die Philosophie der Kirchenvdter; Grossmann, Questiones
Philoneae (1841); Watson, Philos. Basis of Religion
(1907). (4) On Johannine Gospel: Relative comms. of
Meyer, Godet, Westcott, Luthardt, E. Scott (1907); Lid-
don, Divinity of Our Lord (‘Bampton Lectures,’’ 1866);
Watkins, Modern Criticism on_the Fourth Gospel (‘'Bamp-
ton Lectures,’’ 1890); Gloag, Intro to Johannine Writings
(1891); Stevens, Johannine Theol. (1894); Drummond,
Gospel of St, John; Bertling, Der Johan. Logos (1907);
Schmiedel, The Johannine Writings (1908); Weizsicker,
Apostolic Age, V, ii; Beyschlag and Weiss, Bib. Theol.
of NT; Drummond, Via, Veritas, Vita (1894); Hatch,
Gr Ideas and Usages, Their Influence upon the Christian
Church (Hibbert Lectures, 1888). (5) Patristic_period:
Harnack, Dogmen-Gesch.; Baur, Kirchen-Gesch.; Dorner,
System d. chr. Glaubenslehre; Lovfs, Lettfaden fir
seine Vorlesungen wber Dogmengeschichte; Atzbergen,
Die Logoslehre d. heiligen Athanasius (1880).

Arcu. B. D. ALEXANDER


LOINS, loinz (72%, hala, Aram. PV, harac,
n'a, mothen, 20D, kegel, 172, yarékh; orbits, ospiuis):
This variety of Heb synonyms seems to be used


Athenag- |


rather


pesmigmously for the loins, though there is
no little difference in the secondary meanings of
these words. They represent various modes of
expressing the loins as the seat of strength and vigor
(Job 40 16, Heb méthen, here used of Behemoth),
the center of procreative power, the portion of the
body which is girded about, and is considered as
specially needful of covering, even under primitive
conditions of life (Job 31 20), and where painful
disease most effectually unfits a man for work and
warfare.

Jacob receives the Divine promise that “kings
shall come out of [his] loins” (hdldc, Gen 36 11),
and we read of 66 souls “that came out of his loins’
(yG@rékh) which went into Egypt (46 26). The Ep.
to the He speaks of the Levites as having come out.
of the loins of Abraham (He 7 5).

As the seat of strength (cf Lea; TuicH), the
loins are girded with belts of leather (2 K 1 8;
Mt 3 4), or cloth, often beautifully embroidered
(Ex 28 39), or of costly material (89 29; Jer 13 1f).
Girded loins are a sign of readiness for service or
endeavor (Ex 1211; 1K 1846; 2 K 4 29;
Job 38 3; Prov 3117; Lk 12 35; 1 Pet 1 13)”
Of God it is said that. ‘“‘he looseth the bond of kings,
and bindeth their Joins with a girdle,” i.e. strength-
ens them (Job 12 18). On the loins the sword is
worn (2 8 20 8). It is a sign of mourning to gird
the loins with sackcloth (1 K 20 32; Isa 32 11;
Jer 48 37; Am 8 10; see also the First Papyrus
of Elephantine, 1.20). A man whose strength is in
his attachment to truth, in other words is faithful,
is spoken of as having his loins girt about with
truth (Eph 6 14). Thus the Messiah is described:
“Righteousness shall be the girdle of his waist, and
faithfulness the girdle of his loins” (Isa 11 5).
One of the most primitive modes of clothing con-
sisted of a fleece tied around the loins (Job 31 20).

The condition of unfitness for service is described
in that the loins (kesel) are filled with a burning
(Ps 38 7, AV “loathsome disease”), or that “a
sore burden” is Jaid upon the “loins” (mdthen, 66
11). Thus the loins are made “continually to shake”
(69 23), “the joints of [the] loins’ (Adrac) are
loosed (Dnl 6 6), the “Joins are filled with anguish”
(Isa 21 3). It is very likely that originally a disa-
bling lumbago or the painful affections of the gall or
the bladder (calculus, etc) are meant, but. very soon
the expression becomes merely metaphorical to
express personal helplessness, esp. that which can
but rely upon assistance and help from God.

‘ H. L. E. Lusrine

LOIS, ld’is (Awts, Lois [2 Tim 1 5]): The grand-
mother of Timothy, and evidently the mother of
Eunice, Timothy’s mother. The family lived at
Lystra (Acts 16 1). It was on the occasion of
Paul’s first missionary journey (Acts 14) that
Eunice and Timothy were converted to Christ, and
it was, in all likelihood, on the same occasion that
Lois also became a Christian. Paul speaks of the
unfeigned faith that there was in Timothy, and he
adds that this faith dwelt at the first in ‘thy grand-
mother Lois, and thy mother Eunice.” This is the
only passage where Lois is mentioned; but by com-
paring 2 Tim 1 5 with 2 Tim 3 15 (AV), where
Paul refers to Timothy’s having “from a child
known the holy scriptures,” it would appear that
Lois was associated with Eunice, both in a reverent
faith in God and in the careful instruction in the
OT which was given to Timothy. See Eunice;
TIMoTHY. Joun RuTHERFURD


LONGEVITY, lon-jev’i-ti: In the part of Gen
ascribed to P, the names and genealogies of the
patriarchs are given (Gen 6,11). In the three V8S
which are our chief sources, MT, LXX and Sam,
the age-numbers given for these patriarchs are hope-


Longsuffering
Lord’s Day


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1918


lessly at variance. It is in accord with what we
find in the earliest legend of most races that in these
chapters a great length of life is ascribed to these;
thus Berosus attributes to the first 10 kings of
Babylonia a span of 430,000 years, and Hesiod
(Works and Days, 129) says that in the Silver Age
childhood lasted 100 years, during which a boy
was reared and grew up beside his mother. On the
other hand the evidence of prehistoric archaeology
shows that the rate of development of the individual
in the early Stone Age differed very little from that
of humanity at the present day. It is possible that,
in the case of the Heb record, the names of certain
pre-Abrahamic patriarchs were derived from an
ancient tradition, and that in the desire to fill up
the chronology of the period before the call of
Abraham, these names were inserted and the time
which was supposed to have elapsed was divided
among them, on the basis of some such hypothesis
as that which is said to have existed among the
Jews, that the Messiah should come 4,000 years
after Adam. ;

We know from the archaeological evidence that
the antiquity of primitive man extends to a date
very much farther back than 4,000 years. Indeed,
we can prove that before 4000 BC there were settled
nationalities both in the valley of the Nile and that
of the Euphrates, and that among these the duration
of individual life was much the same as at the present
day. The first three dynasties in Egypt, starting
at or about 4400 BC, consisted of 25 consecutive
kings, the average length of whose several reigns
was about 30 years. The biographic sketches of
Bib. persons other than those in Gen showed that
their longevity did not exceed that of our con-
temporaries. +o was at 98 blind and feeble.
David at 70 was bedridden and frail. Manasseh,
the king of Judah whose reign was longest,
died at 67; Uzziah at 68. The statement in
Ps 90 10 attributed to Moses is a correct esti-
mate of what has been the expectation of life at
all time.

At the present day among Palestinian fellahin
very old men are uncommon. I have never seen
anyone among them who could prove that he was
80 years of age; the rate of infant mortality is
appallingly high. Maturity is earlier, and signs of
senility appear among them sooner than among
the same class in Great Britain.

Atex. MAcALIsTER

LONGSUFFERING, long-suf’ér-ing (D7BN JUN,
erekh ’appayim; poxpobvpla, makrothumia): The
words ’erekh ’appayim, tr? longsuffermg, mean lit.
“long of nose” (or ‘‘breathing’’), and, as anger was
indicated by rapid, violent breathing through the
nostrils, ‘long of anger,” or “slow to wrath.” The
adj. is applied to God (Ex 34 6 AV, in the name of
Jeh as proclaimed to Moses; Nu 14 18 AV; Ps
86 15 AV; RV “slow to anger,” which is also the
tr in other places; AV and RV Neh 9 17; Ps
103 8; 145 8; Prov 16 18; 16 32; Joel 2 13;
Jon 4 2; Nah 1 3); it is associated with “great
kindness” and ‘‘plenteous in mercy.”” The subst.
occurs in Jer 16 15: “Take me not away in thy
longsuffering.” In Eccl 7 8, we have ’erekh riith,
AV and RV “patient in spirit.”

The word in the NT rendered “longsuffering,”
makrothumia (once makrothumés, “to be long-
suffering’’), which is therendering of ’erekh 'appayim
in the LXX, is lit. “long of mind or soul’ (regarded
as the seat of the emotions), opposed to shortness of
mind or soul, irascibility, impatience, intolerance.
It is attributed to God (Rom 2 4; 9 22; 2 Pet
3 9), of His bearing long with sinners and slowness
to execute judgment on them. It is, therefore,
one of “the fruits of the Spirit”’ in man (Gal 5 22)
which Christians are frequently exhorted to cherish


|
and show one toward the other (Eph 4 2; Col 1


11; 3 12, etc); it belongs, Paul says, to the love,
without which all else is nothing: ‘Love suffereth
long [makrothumef], and is kind’ (1 Cor 13 4).
The vb. makrothumed is sometimes tr¢ by “patience”
(Mt 18 26.29, ‘Have patience with me”). Lk 18
7 has been variously rendered; AV has “And shall
not God avenge his own elect . . . . though he bear
long with them’; RV “and yet he is longsuffering
over them,”? ARVm “and is he slow to punish on
their behalf?” Weymouth (NT in Modern Speech)
has “although he seems slow in taking action on
their behalf,” which most probably gives the sense
of the passage; in Jas 5 7.8 the vb. occurs thrice,
AV “be patient,” “hath long patience”; RV also tr®
by ‘‘patient’’; this, however, as in Mt 18 26.29,
seems to lose the full force of the Gr word. Ac-
cording to Trench (Synonyms of the NT, 189),
the difference between hupomoné (“patience”) and
makrothumia is that the latter word expresses pa-
tience in respect to persons, and the former in re-
spect to things; hence hupomoné is never ascribed
to God; where He is called ‘‘the God of patience,”
itis as He gives it to His servants and saints. But
cin Jas & 7 it is used with reference to things, and
in Col 1 11 it ig associated with patience (cf He
6 12.15), suggesting patient endurance of trials and
sufferings. In Col 1 11 it is also associated with
‘Foy,’ indicating that it is not a mere submissive-
ness, but a joyful acceptance of the will of God,
whatever it may be. In Wisd 15 1; Ecclus 5 4,
we have “longsuffering” (makréthumos) ascribed to
God; also in Ecclus 2 11, RV “mercy.”
W. L. WALKER

LOOK, Id6k: (1) The uses of the simple vb. in
EV are nearly all good modern Eng. In Isa 5 2,
however, ‘‘He looked that it should bring forth
grapes’’—‘look’”’ is used in the sense of “expect.”
Cf AV of Sir 20 14; Acts 28 6, “They looked
when he should have swollen” (RV ‘‘They expected
that he would have swollen’). In 1 Macc 4 54,
AV has inserted “look” (omitted in RV) as a simple
interjection, without a corresponding word in the
Gr. (2) “Look upon” means “‘fix one’s attention
on,” and is often so used in EV without further
significance (Eccl 2 11; Lk 22 56, etc); but in 2
Ch 24 22 AV and RV, ‘“Jeh look upon it’? means
“remember.” However, continual attention given
to an object usually denotes that pleasure is found
in it, and from this fact such uses as those of Prov
23 31, “Look not thou upon the wine when it is red,”
are derived. In particular, God’s ‘looking upon” a
person becomes a synonym for “showing favor unto,”
asin Dt 26 7 AV; Ps 84 9 AV and RV; 119 132
AV; Lk 1 48 RV only, ete (RV usually re-words
in such passages). On the other hand, “look on”
may be weakened, as in such phrases as “fair to
look upon” (Gen 12 11, etc), where it means only
“fair to the sight.” Or, asin modern Eng., “look on”
may describe the attitude of the passive spectator,
even when applied to God. So Ps 36 17, ‘Lord,
how long wiltthoulookon?” (3) “Look to” usually
means “‘pay attention to,” asin Prov 14 15; Jer 39
12; 2 Jn ver 8, etc, and RV occasionally uses this
phrase in place of AV’s “look upon” (Phil 2 4).
The reverse change is made in AV’s 1 8 16 12,
“goodly to look to”; Ezk 23 15, “all of them
princes to look to,” but in the latter verse a more
drastic revision was needed, for the meaning is “all
of them in appearance as princes.” ‘Look out”
may mean “‘search for’ (Gen 41 33; Acts 6 3),
but may also be used lit. (Gen 26 8, etc). AV’s
‘looking after those things’ in Lk 21 26 has been
changed by RV into “expectation of the things.”
“Look one another in the face’ in 2 K 14 8.11
means ‘meet in battle.”

Burron Scorr Easton


1919


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Longsuffering
Lord’s Day


LOOKING-GLASS, 106k’ing-glas (Ex 38 8 AV,
m “brasen glasses”). See Guass; Mirror.


LOOM, loom. See Weavina.


LOOP, loop (in pl. MDS, lula’oth [Ex 26 41.
10f; 36 11f.17]): A ring or fold made of blue
thread to fasten into the corresponding golden
clasps, or taches upon the curtains of the tabernacle,
joining them in sets, or pairs. See TABERNACLE.


LORD, lérd, THE LORD: This Eng. word in
our Bible represents one Aram.,3 Gr and 9 Heb
words, two of them in two forms. It thus expresses
all grades of dignity, honor, and majesty. It is not
always possible to be sure of the sense in which the
term is to be taken. In Gen 18 3; 19 18, the
translators waver between interpreting of the Di-
vine Person and a finite angel (cf marginal readings).
It represents the most sacred Heb name for God,
as their covenant God, Yah, Yahweh, and the more
usual designation of Deity, "Adhdndy, ’Adhan, a
term which they adopted to avoid pronouncing the
most holy designation. They had placed on Lev
24 16 an interpretation that aroused such a dread
that they seldom dared use the name at all. When
two of the words usually tr? ‘‘Lord,” both referring
to God, occur together, AV renders ‘‘Lord God,’
and ARV “Lord Jehovah.” ARV has adopted
the rule of using the covenant name transliter-
ated, instead of the term ‘Lord,” in which AV
adopts the rule of the Hebrews to avoid the holy
name.

The Aram. designation, Mdr@, occurs only in
Dnl (e.g. 2 47; 6 23), and the same word refers to
aman (4 24),

Of the Gr words, Kiirios is freely used of both the
Deity and men. Despétes, of men in classic usage,
occurs only of God, including the ascended Jesus,
and is employed only 5 t. Megistdnes (pl.) is
found once, of men (Mk 6 21). Rabboni (Heb
in Gr letters) is applied only to the Christ, and is
simply transliterated in RV, but rendered “Lord”
in AV (cf Mk 10 51).

Our Eng. VSS distinguish the 3 main uses of the
term thus: (1) ‘“‘Lorp”’ represents the Heb Yahweh,
LXX Kurios, except where ’Adhdndy or ’Adhon is
combined with Yahweh (=‘Lord God’); ARV. has
in these examples employed the name as it is found
in the Heb, simply transliterated. (2) ‘“Lord”’ cor-
responds to ’Adhénay, ’Adhén, Maré’, also Gr Kurios
(see [1]), and Despotés, for which ARV has always
“Master” in either the text or the margin. (8)
“Lord” (“lord’’) translates all the remaining 8 Heb
words and the Gr words except Despotés. Itis thus
seen that Kurios corresponds to all three forms of
writing the Eng. term. See JEHOVAH.

WittiaM Owen CarvER

LORD OF HOSTS: A name or title of God fre-

quently used in the OT, always tra “Jeh of Hosts”
(MANZE MT, YVehdwah gebha’sth) in ARV, since
Yehdwah, never ’Adhdndy, is used in this phrase.
Evidently the meaning of the title is that all created
agencies and forces are under the leadership or
dominion of Jeh, who made and maintains them
(Gen 2 1; Isa 45 12). It is used to express Jeh’s
great power. See Gop, Names or, II, 8.


LORD’S DAY (h xvptaxh hepa, he Ituriaké
himéra): Formerly it was supposed that the adj.
kuriakos (tr4 “the Lord’s’”) was &

1. Linguis- purely Christian word, but recent dis-
tic coveries have proved that it was in
fairly common use in the Rom Empire

before Christian influence had been felt. In secular
use it signified “imperial,” “belonging to the lord” —


the emperor—and so its adoption by Christianity
in the sense “belonging to the Lord’’—to Christ—
was perfectly easy. Indeed, there is reason to
suppose that in the days of Domitian, when the
issue had been sharply defined as “Who is Lord?
Caesar or Christ?” the use of the adj. by the church
was a part of the protest against Caesar-worship
(see Lorp). And it is even possible that the full
phrase, ‘‘the Lord’s day,” was coined as a contrast
to the phrase, “the Augustean day” (4 ceBaor}
tyuépa, hé sebasté héméra), a term that seems to have
been used in some parts of the Empire to denote

days esp. dedicated in honor of Caesar-worship.
“Lord’s day’’ in the NT occurs only in Rev 1 10,
but in the post-apostolic literature we have the
following references: Ignatius, Ad


2. Post- Mag., ix.1, “No longer keeping the
Apostolic Sabbath but living according to the

Lord’s day, on which also our Light
arose”; Hv. Pet., ver 35, ‘‘The Lord’s day began


to dawn” (ef M¢ 28 1); ver 50, “early on the
Lord’s day’’ (cf Lk 24 1); Barn 15 9, “We keep
the eighth day with gladness,’’ on which Jesus arose
from the dead.” I.e. Sunday, as the day of Christ’s
resurrection, was kept as a Christian feast and called
“the Lord’s day,” @ title fixed so definitely as to be
introduced by the author of Ev. Pet. into phrases
from the canonical Gospels. Its appropriateness
in Rev 1 10 is obvious, as St. John received his
vision of the exalted Lord when all Christians had
their minds directed toward His entrance into glory
through the resurrection.
This “first day of the week” appears again in
Acts 20 7 as the day on which the worship of the
“breaking of bread” took place, and
8. Inthe the impression given by the context
NT is that St. Paul and his companions
prolonged their visit to Troas so as
to join in the service. Again, 1 Cor 16 2 contains
the command, “Upon the first day of the week let
each one of you lay by him in store,’’ where the
force of the form of the imperative used (the present
for repeated action) would be better represented
in Eng. by “lay by on the successive Sundays.”
Worship is here not explicitly mentioned (the Gr
of “by him’’ is the usual phrase for ‘‘at, home’’), but
that the appropriateness of the day for Christian
acts involves an appropriateness for Christian wor-
ship is not to be doubted. Indeed, since the seven-
day week was unknown to Gr thought, some regu-
lar observance of a hebdomadal cycle must have
been settled at Corinth before St. Paul could write
his command. Finally, the phrase, ‘first day in
the week” is found elsewhere in the NT only in Mt
28 1; Mk 162; Lk 24 1; Jn 20 1.19. The word
in all passages for “first’’ is poor Gr (ula, mia, ‘‘one,”
for rodéry, prété, a Hebraism), and the coincidence of
the form of the phrase in Acts 20 7 and 1 Cor 16 2
with the form used by all four evangelists for the
Resurrection Day is certainly not accidental; it
was the fixed Christian base, just as ‘“‘Lord’s day”
was to the writer of Hv. Pet.
The hebdomadal observance of Sunday points
back of Corinth to Jewish-Christian soil, but it is
impossible to say when the custom
4. Origin first began. Not, apparently, in the
earliest days, for Acts 2 46 represents
the special worship as daily. But this could not
have continued very long, for waning of the first
enthusiasm, necessity of pursuing ordinary avoca-
tions, and increasing numbers of converts must
soon have made general daily gatherings impracti-
cable. <A choice of a special day must have become
necessary, and this day would, of course, have been
Sunday. Doubtless, however, certain individuals
and coromunities continued the daily gatherings
to a much later date, and the appearance of Sunday


Lord’s Day
Lord’s Supper


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1920


as the one distinctive day for worship was almost

certainly gradual.
Sunday, however, was sharply distinguished from
the Sabbath. One was the day on which worship
was offered in a specifically Christian


5. Sunday form, the other was a day of ritual
and the rest to be observed by all who were
Sabbath subject to the Law of Moses through


circumcision (Gal 5 3; cf Acts 21
20). Uncircumcised Gentiles, however, were free
from any obligation of Sabbath observance, and
it is quite certain that in apostolic times no renewal
of any Sabbath rules or transfer of them to Sunday
was made for gentile converts. No observance of
a particular ‘day of rest’’ is contained among the
“necessary things” of Acts 15 28.29, noris any such
precept found among all the varied moral directions
given in the whole epistolary literature. Quite
on the contrary, the observance of a given day as
a matter of Divine obligation is denounced by St.
Paul as a forsaking of Christ (Gal 4 10), and
Sabbath-keeping is condemned explicitly in Col 2
16. Asa matter of individual devotion, to be sure,
aman might do as he pleased (Rom 14 5.6), but
no general rule as necessary for salvation could be
compatible with the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free. Evidently, then, the fact that the
Christian worship was held on Sunday did not
sanctify Sunday any more than (say) a regular
Wednesday service among us sanctifies Wednes-
day, noting esp. that the apostolic service was held
in the evening. For it was felt that Christian en-
thusiasm would raise every day to the highest reli-
gious plane, the decay of that enthusiasm through
the long delay of the Parousia not being contem-
plated.

The delay occurred, however, and for human
beings in the ordinary routine of life there are neces-
sary, not only set periods of worship, but
set periods of relaxation from routine
to make worship profitable. And the
Christian fundamental doctrine of
mercy demands that Christianity, where she has
the power, shall give to men relief from the drain
of continuous toil.


The formulation of general rules to carry these prin-
ciples into effect, however, belongs to a period outside
T times, and so does not come within the scope of this
Encyclopaedia. It is enough to say that the ecclesias-
tical rules for Sunday were felt to he quite distinct from
the laws for Sabbath observance, and that Alcuin (733 ?—
804) is the first to hold that the church had transferred
the Sabbath rules as a whole to Sunday. This principle
is still maintained in Roman Catholic theology, but at
the Reformation was rejected uncompromisingly hy
both Lutherans (Augsb. Conf., II, if and Calvinists
(Helvet. Conf., XXIV, 1-2) in favor of a literally apostolic
freedom (Calvin even proposed to adopt Thursday in
place of Sunday). The appearance of the opposite ex-
treme of a genuinely ‘‘legalistic’’ Sabhatarianism in the
thoroughly Evangelical Scotch and English Puritanism
is an anomaly that is explained by reaction from the
extreme laxity of the surroundings.
Suuday was fixed as the day for Christian worship
by general apostolic Pree: and the academic possi-
bility of an alteration hardly seems worth
discussing. If a literal apostolicity is to
he insisted upon, however, the ‘‘ breaking
of hread"' must be made part of the Sun-
day service. Rest from labor for the sake of worship,
public and private, is intensely desirable, since the
Tegaining of the general apostolic enthusiasm seems
unattainable, hut the NT leaves us quite free as to de-
tails. Rest from labor to secure physical and mental
renewal rests on a still different basis, and the workin:
out of details involves a knowledge of sociological an
industrial conditions, as well as a knowledge of re-
ligious principles. It is the task of the pastor to com-
bine the various principles and to apply them to the
particular conditions of his people in their locality, in
accordance with the rules that his own church has indv-
hitahly the right to lay down—very_ special attention
heing given, however, to the highly important matter
of the peculiar problem offered hy children. In all cases
the geueral principles underlying the rules should be
made clear, so that they will not appear as arbitrary
legalism, and it is prohably hest not to use the term


6. Later
History


7. Practical


“Sabbath” for Sunday. Under certain conditions great
freedom may be desirable, and such is certainly not in-
consistent with our liberty in Christ. But experience,
and not least of all the experience of the first churches
of the Reformation, has abundantly shown that much
general laxness in Sunday rules invariably results dis-
astrously. See further, Eruics or Jesus, I, 3, (1).


LiTERATURE.—For the linguistic matters, Deissmann,
Light from the Ancient East, 1910, 361-66. Hessey's
Sunday (ed 1880) (‘Bampton Lectures,'' 1860) contains a
good summary of the history of the problems. Ziéckler's
“Sonntagsfeier,"' PRE, ed 3, XVIII, 1906, 521-29 is the
hest generalsurvey. In Sch-Herz this article (‘Sunday’)
is harmed hy abbreviation, but an exhaustive bibliography
is added.

Burton Scotr Easton

LORD’S PRAYER, THE (Mt 6 9-13; Lk 11
2-4): Prayer occupied an important place in the
life and the teachings of Jesus. He was emphati-
cally a man of prayer, praying frequently in private
and in public, and occasionally spending whole
nights in communion with His heavenly Father.
He often spoke to His disciples on the subject of
prayer, cautioning them against ostentation, or
urging perseverance, faith and large expectation,
and He gave them a model of devotion in the Lord’s
prayer. rae yes

This prayer is given by the evangelists in two
different forms and in two entirely different con-

nections. In Mt’s account the prayer
1. Twofold is given as a part of the Sermon on the
Form Mount and in connection with a criti-

cism of the ostentation usual in the
prayers of the hypocrites and the heathen. Lk
introduces the prayer after the Galilean ministry
and represents it as given in response to a request
from one of His disciples, ‘‘Lord teach us to pray,
as John taught his disciples.” It gives us, however,
no note of time or place, and it is quite possible that
the incident which it records took place much ear-
lier. The later form is much shorter than that of
Mi and the common parts differ materially in lan-
guage.. Epi)
_ In view of the differences, the reader instinctively
inquires whether the prayer was given on two differ-
ent occasions in these different connections, or the
evangelists have presented the same incident in
forms derived from different sources, or modified
the common source to suit their immediate purposes.

If the prayer was given only on one occasion,
there is little doubt that Lk preserves the true his-
torical circumstances, though not necessarily the
accurate point of time or place, or the exact form
of language. Such a request made at the close of
the prayer of Jesus would be natural, and the inci-
dent bears every mark of reality. On the other
hand, it would be reasonable to assume that the
author of Mt’s source, remembering the incident,
incorporated the prayer in the Sermon on the
Mount as an illustration of the injunctions con-
cerning prayer.

There are many reasons for regarding the Sermon as
a collection of sayings spoken on different occasions and
summarized for convenience in teaching and memorizing.
There is, however, no proof that the prayer was given
but once by Jesus. We need not suppose that His dis-
ciples were always the same, and we know that He gave
instruction in prayer on various occasions. He may
have given the model prayer on one occasion sponta-
neously and at another time on the request of a disciple.
It is probable that the two evangelists, using the same
or different sources, presented the prayer in such cou-
nection as hest suited the plan of their narratives. Iu
any case, it is rather remarkable that the prayer is not
quoted or directly mentioned anywhere else in the NT.


In addition to the opening salutation, “Our
Father who art in heaven,” the Lord’s Prayer con-
sists of -six petitions. These are ar-

2. Arrange- ranged in three equal parts. In the
ment first part, the thought is directed
toward God and His great purposes.

In the second part, the attention is directed to our
condition and wants. The two sets of petitions


1921


are closely related, and a line of progress runs
through the whole prayer. The petitions of the
first part are inseparable, as each includes the one
which follows. As the hallowing of God’s name
requires the coming of His kingdom, so the king-
dom comes through the doing of His will. Again,
the first part calls for the second, for if His will is
to be done by us, we must have sustenance, for-
giveness and deliverance from evil. If we seek
first the glory of God, the end requires our good.
While we hallow His name we are sanctified in Him.
The doxology of Mt and our rituals is not found in
the leading MSS and is generally regarded as an
ancient liturgical addition. For this reason it is
omitted by RV.
‘The sources of the two accounts cannot be known
with certainty. It is hardly correct to say that
one account is more original than the
8. Sources other. The original was spoken in
Aram., while both of the reports are
certainly based on Gr sources. The general agrec-
ment in language, esp. in the use of the unique
term éritows, epiotisios, shows that they are not
independent tr’ of the Aram. original.
Three expressions of the prayer deserve special


notice. The words, ‘Our Father,” are new in the
Bible and in the world. When God
4. Special is called Father in the OT, He is re-


Expressions garded as Father of the nation, not

of the individual. Even in the moving
prayer of Isa 63 16 (AV), “Doubtless thou art our
father,” the connection makes clear that the ref-
erence is to God in the capacity of Creator. The
thought of God as the Father of the individual is
first reached in the Apoc: ‘“O Lord, Father and
Master of my life” (Sir 28 1; cf Wisd 2 16; 14 3).
Here algo the notion is veiled in the thought of God
as Creator. It was left for Jesus the Son to give us
the privilege of calling God ‘‘Our Father.”

Of the adj. epiousion, ‘daily’ or “needful,”
neither the origin nor the exact meaning is or is
likely to be known. Whether it is qualitative or
temporal depends on its derivation from éretvau,
epeinai, or ériévar, epiénat. Our translators usually
follow the latter, translating “daily.” ARV gives
‘needful’? as a marginal rendering.

The phrase é1d rod wovnpod, apd tov ponérod, is
equally ambiguous. Since the adj. may be either
masc. or neut., it is impossible to decide whether
“from the evil one” or ‘from the evil’ was intended.
The probability is in favor of the masc. The
Oriental naturally thought of evil in the concrete,
just as we think of it in the abstract. For this
reason the Authorized rendering ‘from evil” is
more real to us. The evil deprecated is moral, not
physical.

The Lord’s Prayer was given as a lesson in prayer.
-As such this simple model surpasses all precepts

about prayer. It suggests to the
5. Purpose child of God the proper objects of

prayer. It supplies suitable forms of
language and illustrates the simple and direct
manner in which we may trustingly address our
heavenly Father. It embraces the elements of all
spiritual desire summed up in a few choice sen-
tences. For those who are not able to bring their
struggling desires to birth in articulate language
it provides an instructive form. To the mature
disciple it ever unfolds with richer depths of
meaning. Though we learn these words at our
mother’s knee, we need a lifetime to fill them with
meaning and all eternity to realize their answer.


TERATURE.—The lit. of this subject is very exten-
a For brief treatment the student will consult the
relative sections in the comms. on the Gospels of Mt
and Lk and in the Lives of Christ and the arts. on the
Lord’s Prayer in the several Bihle dicts. A collection
of patristic comment is given by G. Tillmann in his Das


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lord’s Day
Lord’s Supper


Gebet nach der Lehre der Heiligen dargestellt, 2 vols,
Freihurg, 1876. ‘The original comments may he found
In any of the standard collections of the Church Fathers.

Among historical studles may be mentioned, F. H.
Chase, The Lord's Prayer in the Early Church, Cam-
bridge, 1891, and G. Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, I, Leip-
zig, 1898, ET, Edinburgh, 1902.

Among the numerous interpretative treatments, the
following are some of the more important: N. Hall, The
Lord's Prayer, Edinhurgh, 1889; . J. Van Dyke, The
Lord's Prayer, New York, 1891; J. Ruskin, Letters to
the Clergy on the Lord's Prayer and the Church, late ed,
New York, 1896; E. Wordsworth, Thoughts on the
Lord’s Prayer, New York, 1898; C. W. Stubbs, Social
Teachings of the Lord's Prayer, London, 1900; A. B.
Bruce, The Training of the Twelve, ch vi, 4th ed, New
York, 1905; L. T. Chamherlain, The True Doctrine of
Prayer, New York, 1906; illiams, Spiritual
Instructions on the Lord's Prayer, New York, 1907.

Russet BunsamMin MILLER


LORD’S SUPPER (EUCHARIST, i’ka-rist):


GENERAL
I. Derinition
II. New Testament Sources
1. Textual Considerations
2. Narratives Compared
(1) ar]
33 Matthew
3) Pauline
& Luke
3. Other Pauline Data
Ill. Preparation ror tee Kucearist
1. Miracles of Loaves and Fishes
2. Discourse at Capernaum
IV. Hisroricay Serrine oF THE Kvucwanrist
1. Other Acts and Words of Christ on Eve of the
Passion
2. Sacrificial Language of the Institution
8. Sacrificial System of Jewish_Dispensation
4, Paschal Background of the Institution of the
Eucharist
V. Szqurnce or THe InstItTUTION
Points to Be Noted
VI. Tue Cuurce’s OBSERVANCE OF THE EUCHARIST
1. Heavenly Background
(1) Christians a Priestly Race
2) Christ the Eternal High Priest
2. Celehrated Each Lord’s Day
3. Names of the Eucharist
(1) Eucharist
{2) Lord's Eup
3) Breaking of Bread
4) Communion
(5) Ohlation
Post-ApostoLtic CHURCH
1, Guidance hy the Holy Spirit
2. Eucharist in 2
(1) Ignatian Epistles
(2) Justin Martyr
(3) Trenaeus
4) Cyprian
LiturcicaL TRADITION
1. Outline of Eucharistic Prayer
2. Significance of This for Unity
LITERATURE


I. Definition.—Eucharist—The distinctive rite
of Christian worship, instituted by Our Lord Jesus
Christ upon the eve of His atoning death, being a
religious partaking of bread and wine, which, having
been presented before God the Father in thankful
memorial of Christ’s inexhaustible sacrifice, have
become (through the sacramental blessing) the
communion of the body and blood of Christ (cf
Jn 6 54; Acts 2 42; 207.11; Rom 16 16; 1
Cor 10 16; 11 23-26).

il. The NT Sources.—The NT sources of our
knowledge of the institution of the Eucharist are
fourfold, a brief account thereof being found in
each of the Synoptic Gospels and in St. Paul’s First
Ep. to the Cor (Mt 26 26-29; Mk 14 22-25;
Lk 22 14-20; 1 Cor 11 23-26; cf 10 16.17).

The text of these narratives has been found to need


little amendment, save the dropping of a word or two,
from each account, that had crept in


VII.


VIII.


1. Textual through the tendency of copyists, con-
Cc id sciously or unconsciously, to assimilate
onsidera- the details of parallel’ passages. The
tions genuineness of Lk 22 198.20 is absolutely


beyond question. Their omission in
whole or part, and the alterations in the order of two or
three verses in the whole section (vs 14-20), character-
istic of a very small numher of MSS, are due to confusion
in the minds of a few scrihes and translators, between
the paschal cup (ver 17) and the eucharistic cup (ver 20),


Lord’s Supper


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


and to their well-meant, but mistaken, attempt to im-
prove upon the text before them. G

The briefest account of the institution of the Eucharist

is found in Mk 14 22-24, In it the Eucharist is not

sharply distinguished from its setting, the


2. Narra- aschal meal: *‘And as they were eating,
ti e took bread, and when he had blessed,
Ives he brake it, and gave to them, and said,


Compared Take ye: thisis my body. And he tooka
cup, and when he had given thanks, he
gave to them: and they all drank of it. And he said
unto them, This is my blood of the covenant, which is
poured out for many.” This represents a tradition
settled within 20 years of the event described. Me

Mt 26-28 gives a few touches by way of revision,
apparently from one then present. He adds the ex-
hortation “‘eat” at the giving of the bread, and puts the
personal command, ‘‘ Drink ye all of it,”’ in place of the
mere statement, ‘‘and they all drank of it.” He adds
also of the blood that, as “poured out for many,’ it is
“unto remission of sins.”’ :

The Pauline account, 1 Cor 11 23-26 (the earliest
written down, ¢ 55 AD), was called forth in rebuke of the
scandalous profanation of the Eucharist at Corinth. It
gives us another tradition tee end ey of, and supple-
mentary to, that of Mk-Mt. It claims the authority
of the Saviour as its source, and had been already made
known to the Corinthians in the apostle’s oral teaching.
The time of the institution is mentioned as the night of
the betrayal. We note of the bread, ‘‘This is my body,
which is for you,”’ of the cup, *‘ This cup is the new cove-
nant in my bloga,” and the redoubled command, ‘‘ This
do in remembrance of me.” .

The narrative given in Lk 22 14-20 is the latest (c
80 AD) of our NT records. St. Luke had taken pains
to follow up everything to its source, and had reédited
the oral tradition in the light of his historical researches
(1 2.3), and thus his account is of the highest value.
Writing for a wider circle of readers, he carefully sepa-
rates and distinguishes the Eucharist from the paschal
meal which preceded it, and puts the statement of
Christ about not drinking ‘‘from henceforth of the fruit
of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come,"’ in its
proper place as referring to the paschal cup (cf Mt 26
29; Mk 14 25; and Lk 22 eh In describing the
actual institution of the Eucharist, he gives us an almost
verbal identity with the account given by St. Paul
(1_Cor 11 23-25).

We should note the statement appended by St. Paul
to his account of the Institution, wherein he empha-

sizes the memorial aspect and evidential


8. Other value of the witness the eucharistic ob-
Paulin servance would give throughout the ages

a € of the Christian dispensation (ver 26).
Data We should also note the fact upon which


the apostle bases his rebuke to the pro-
fane Corinthians, namely, the real, though undefined,
identity of the bread and wine of the Eucharist with the
body and blood of Christ (vs 27-29); an identity estab-
lished through the blessing pronounced upon them, so
that the bread and cup have come to be the ‘‘ communion
of the body of Christ” and the ‘‘ communion of the blood
of Christ,’’ respectively (10 15-17): To receive the
Eucharist, and also to partake of sacrifices offered to
idols, is utterly incompatible with Christian loyalty.
To receive the Eucharist after a gluttonous, winebibhing
agapé, not recognizing the consecrated elements to be
what the Lord Christ called them, is, likewise, a deflance
of God. Both acts alike provoke the judgment of God's
righteous anger (vs 21.22; 11 21.22.27-29).

II. Preparation for the Eucharist.—The insti-
tution of the Eucharist had been prepared for by

Christ through the object-lesson of
1. The the feeding of the five thousand (Mt
Miracles 14 13-21; Mk 6 35-44; Lk 9 12-
17; Jn 6 4-13), which was followed
up by the discourse about Himself as the Bread of
Life, and about eating His Flesh and drinking His
Blood as the nourishment of eternal life. This
again was clinched by the second object-lesson of the
feeding of the four thousand afterward (Mt 15
32-89; Mk 8 1-9). The Lord Christ’s thanks-
giving, and His blessing of the loaves and fishes—
acts not elsewhere recorded of Him, except at the
institution of the Eucharist, and at the self-revealing
meal at Emmaus (Lk 24 30)—deeply impressed
those present, as indicating the source whence came
His power to satisfy the hunger of the multitude (cf
Mt 14 19; 15 36; Mk 6 41; 86.7; Lk 9 16; Jn
6 11.28).

In the discourse at Capernaum (Jn 6 26-58)
Christ led the thought of His hearers from earthly
to heavenly food, from food that perished to the
true bread from heaven. He declared Himself to


1922


be the living bread, and, further, that it is through
eating His flesh and drinking His blood that they
shall possess true life in themselves,
2. The and be raised by Him at the last day.
Diseourse The difficulties raised by this discourse
Christ did not solve at the time. His
ascension would but add to them. He asked of
His disciples acceptance of His words in faith.
Under the administration of the Spirit would these
things be realized (vs 60-69). The institution of the
Eucharist, later, gave the clue to these otherwise
“hard” words. Today the Eucharist remains as
the explanation of this discourse. A hardy moun-
taineer, e.g. who had read Jn 6 many times, could
form no notion of its purport. When first privileged
to be present at the eucharistic service of the Book
of Common Prayer, the meaning of feeding upon
Christ’s flesh and blood forthwith became apparent
to him (see The Spirit of Missions, July, 1911,
572-73).
IV. Historical Setting of the Eucharist.—We
should note the setting in which the institution of
the Eucharist was placed. Though
1. Acts and the Fourth Gospel does not record
Words of this, it gives us many otherwise un-
Christ known data of the words of Christ
spoken upon the eve of His death, in
which historically the institution of the Eucharist
was set. The symbolic washing of the feet of the
disciples (Jn 13 3-10), the “new” commandment
(ver 34), Christ as the means of access to the
Father (14 6), love for Christ to be shown by keep-
ing His commandments (vs 15.21.23.24), the send-
ing of the Paraclete Spirit (vs 16.17.26; 15 26;
16 13.14), the intimate fellowship of Christ and
His disciples, shown in the metaphor of the vine
and its branches (15 1-9.13-16)—all these throw
their illumination upon the commandment, “This
do in remembrance of me” (Lk 22 19; 1 Cor 11
24.25). The efficacy of prayer ‘in Christ’s name’
(Jn 16 23.24.26-28) after His fina] withdrawal from
the midst of His disciples, and His great prayer
of self-oblation and intercession for His church
throughout time (Jn 17, esp. 9-26) must not be
forgotten in considering, ‘““This is my body which
is given for you” (Lk 22 19), and, “This is my
blood of the covenant, which is poured out for
many unto remission of sins’ (Mt 26 28).
The sacrificial connotation of many of the words
used in the narratives of institution should be noted:
eg. “body,” “blood,” “covenant,”


2. Sacrifi- “given,” “poured out,” “for you,” “for
cial many” “unto remission of sins,” ‘‘me-
Language morial”’ (cf Ex 24 6-8; Lev 2 2.9.16;


4 5-7.16-18.34; 17 11.14; 24 7; Nu
10 10; He 9 11-28; 10 4-10.19.20). The very ele-
ments of bread and wine also suggested the idea of
sacrifice to those accustomed to their use in the
older system of worship (cf Ex 29 38-42; Nu 15
4-10; 28 and 29 passim).
The general background, moreover, out of which
the institution of the Eucharist stands forth, is the
sacrificial system of the older dispen-
3. Jewish sation. The chosen people of God, as
System a priestly race, a holy nation (Ex 19
5.6; Dt 7 6), worshipped God with a
sequence of offerings, Divinely molded and in-
spired, which set forth the sovereign majesty and
overlordship of God, His holiness, and the awe and
penitence due from those who would draw nigh
as Him, and their desire for communion with
im.
_ The more immediate background of the Euchar-
ist is the Passover, and that without prejudice as
to whether the Lord Christ ate the paschal meal
with His disciples before He instituted the Euchar-
ist, as seems most probable (cf Lk 22 7-18), or


1923


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  Lord’s Supper


whether He died upon the day of its observance
(see art. ““Preparation,”’ DCG, II, 409). The Pass-


4. The and a covenant-renewing sacrifice, and
Paschal the Eucharist, as corresponding to it,
Background was instituted at the time of its yearly

observance, and of the immolation of
the true paschal lamb, of whose death it inter-
preted the value and significance (Ex 12 3-28;
ef 13 3-10; Dt 16 1-8; 1 Cor 5 7; Jn 6 51; 10
10.11.15.17.18; 15 13; 17 19).

V. Sequence of the Institution — Let us put before
ourselves clearly the sequence of the Lord Christ’s
acts and words at the institution of the Eucharist
ere we proceed to examine the church’s mode of
celebrating this ordinance.


At the close of the pore Supper, (1) the Lord
Christ ‘‘took” the bread and cup, respectively, for use
in His new rite; (2). He ‘gave thanks” over them, con-
stituting them a thank offerlng to God; @) He ‘' blessed’

them to their new and meee Batenet 4) He ‘‘ gave”
them to the apostles (the breaking being

liminary to distribution of the read); (5) He bade
them “‘ Take, eat," and ‘‘ Drink ye all of it,’’ respectively;
(6) He declared, of the bread, *‘ This is my body given
for you,”’ of the cup, ‘‘ This is my blood of the covenant,’

or, “This igs the new covenant in my blood which is
poured out for you,” ‘unto remission of sins”; (7) He
adds the reiterated command, ‘‘This do for my me-
morial."”

It is obvious that we are bldden to follow out the same
series of acts, and statements, as those of Christ Him-
self. We should take bread and wine, set them apart by
rendering thanks to God over them, presenting them to
Him as symbols of Christ’s body and blood, once for all
“given” and ‘‘ poured out”’ for us; bless them by asking
God's blessing upon them (cf Gen 14 19; Nu 6 23-27;
Mk 8 7; Lk 2 34; 9 16; 24 50); and receive and give
them as the body and blood of Christ; for, ‘‘the cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not a communion of the
hlood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not
a communion of the body of Christ?” (1 Cor 10 16).
It is obvious that we shall not forget, in this connection,
the distinction between the natural body of Christ which
He took of the Blessed Virgin, and the bread which He
held in His hand, and blessed and made to function as
His body for our participation and inherence in Him
therehy—His sacramental body. The church with her
many Members united to the Head, and thus to each
other, is also called His body mystical (1 Cor 10 17;
12 27; Eph 1 22.23; Col 1 24).


VI. The Church’s Observance of the Eucharist.—
We should remember the priestly character of the
church of Christ, whose sacrifices are
1. Heavenly made under the dispensation of the
Background Holy Spirit (1 Pet 25.9; Rev 1 6;
ef Acts 1 2.8); and also the eternal
priesthood in the heavens of our risen, ascended
and ever-living Lord Christ. He laid down His
life in order to take it again (Jn 10 17), and now
in the perfection of His glorified human nature, by
His very presence in heaven, He is forever the pro-
pitiation inexhaustible for our sins (He 2 17—
33; 414-5 10; 7 1—87; 9 11-28; 10 1-25;
ef 1 Jn 2 1.2). As the Lamb slain once for all
but alive for evermore, the Lord Christ is the focus
of the worship of angels and the redeemed (Rev
1 17.18; & 6-14; 7 9.10), and the Christian dis-
ciple has the privilege of fecding upon that eternal
Priest and Victim (He 13 10; 1 Cor 10 16).
The celebration of the Eucharist was character-
istic of the pentecostal church (Acts 2 42), esp.
upon the Lord’s, Day (20 7). Its
2. Day of observance was preceded by the agapé
Celebration (1 Cor 11 20.34) on the eve (for the
circumstances of the institution were
closely imitated, and the day was reckoned as begin-
ning at sunset after the Jewish fashion), and thus
the Eucharist proper came late into the night, or
toward morning (Acts 20 11).
It should be noted that the name, ‘Lord's Supper,”


s to the agapé ratier than to the Eucharist; its
Peon use is nd rmisnomer of medlaeval and Reforma-


tlon times. é ook
The name ‘Eucharist’ is derived from the eucharistésas


over was at once a covenant-recalling |


a requisite pre-°


(‘gave thanks’’) of the institutlon and was the most
widely used term in primitive times, as applied to the
whole service, to the consecration of the


3. Names bread and wine or to the consecrated ele-
f the ments themselves (cf 1 Cor 14 16).
Eucharis t The term ‘breaking of bread" (Acts 2


free 20 7.11) had little yogue after NT


mes.
PN (ceeeyoied obviously is derived from 1 Cor
In connection with the early and frequent use of the
word ‘‘oblation’’ (prosphord) and its cognates, we should
note St. Paul’s description of his ministry in terms that
heed eld the rationale of the prayer of consecration, or
eucharistic prayer, as we know it in the earliest liturgical
tradition: ‘that I should be a minister of Christ Jesus
unto the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of Gad, that the
offering up of the Gentiles might be made acceptable, being
sanctified by the Holy Spirit” (Rom 15 16).


VI. Post-apostolic Church.—The same Spirit
who guided the church in the determination of the
Canon of the NT Scriptures, the same


1. Holy Spirit who guided the church in the
Spirit’s working out of her explicit formulation
Guidance of the Christian doctrine of the God-


head, and of the Christ—that self-
same Spirit guided the church in the formation and
fashioning of her great eucharistic prayer into its
norm in the same 4th cent. The historic churches
of the East, by their faithful adherence to this norm,
have been almost undisturbed by the dissensions
and disputes of Western Christendom touching the
Eucharist.
The glimpses given us in the earlier Fathers of
the Eucharist are in entire accord with the more
articulate expression of the church’s


2. The corporate eucharistic worship, which
Early we find in the liturgical documents
Fathers and writings of the Nicene era.


(1) The Ignatian Epp. show us the
Eucharist as the focus of the church’s life and
order, the source of unity and fellowship. The Eu-
charist consecrated by the prayer of the bishop and
church is the Bread of God, the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, the communication of love incorruptible and
life eternal (cf Ephesians, 5.13.20; Trallians, 7.8;
Romans, 7; Philadelphians, 4; Smyrnaeans, 7.8;
Magnesians, 7).

(2) Justin Martyr tells us that the Eucharist
was celebrated on the Lord’s Day, the day asso-
ciated with creation and with Christ’s resurrection.
To the celebrant were brought bread and wine
mixed with water, who then put up to God, over
them, solemn thanksgiving for His lovingkindness
in the gifts of food_and health and for the redemp-
tion wrought by Christ. The oblations of bread
and wine are presented to God in memorial of
Christ’s passion, and become Christ’s body and
blood through prayer. The Eucharist is a spiritual
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving commemorative
of Christ’s death; and the consecrated elements the
communion of Christ’s body and blood, by reason
of the sacramental character bestowed upon them
by the invocation of the Divine blessing (cf 1 A pol.,
13.65, 66,67; Dial. with Trypho, 41.70, 117).

(3) Irenaeus, also, emphasizes the fact that Christ
taught His disciples to offer the new oblation of the
New Covenant, to present in thank offering the
first-fruits of God’s creatures—bread and wine—
the pure sacrifice prophesied before by Malachi.
The Eucharist consecrated by the church, through
the invocation of God’s blessing, is the communion
of the Rody and blood of Christ, just as He pro-
nounced the elements to be at the institution
(cf Against Heresies, 1.13.2; iv.17.5; 18.1-6; 33.2;
v.22.3).

(4) Cyprian, too, gives evidence of the same
eucharistic belief, and alludes very plainly to the
“Lift up your hearts,” to the great thanksgiving,
and to the prayer of consecration. This last in-
cluded the rehearsal of what Christ did and said


Lord’s Supper THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1924


at the institution, the commemoration of His pas-
sion, and the invocation of the Holy Spirit (cf Ep.
to Caecilius, §§1,2, 4,9, 10, 14,17; Ep. to Epictetus,
§§2, 4; On the Unity of the Church, I, 17; On
the Lord’s Prayer, §31; Firmilian to Cyprian,
§§10, 17).


VII. Liturgical Tradition,—When we proceed
to examine the early liturgical remains we find the
articulate expression of the church’s
1. The sacrifice following along these lines.
Eucharistic After an introductory summons to the
Prayer worshippers to “lift up their hearts,”
the great eucharistic prayer goes on
to pour forth sublime praises to God for all the
blessings of creation, and for the fruits of the earth;
aligning the praises of the church with the worship
of the heavenly host around the throne of God.
The love of God in bringing about the redemption of
fallen man through the incarnation, and through
the self-oblation of His only Son upon the cross is
then recalled in deep thankfulness. The institu-
tion of the Eucharist in the night of the betrayal is
next related, and then, taking up, and fufilling the
command of Christ (‘Do this for my memorial’)
therein recited, most solemn memorial is made
before God, with the antitypical elements, of the
death and of the victorious resurrection and ascen-
sion of the Lord Christ. Then, as still further
carrying out this act of obedience, most humble
prayer is made to the Eternal Father for the hallow-
ing of the oblations, through the operation of the
Holy Spirit, to be the body and blood of Christ,
and to be to those who partake of them, for the
imparting of remission of sins, and the bestowal of
life eternal. To this great act of praise and prayer
the solemn ‘‘Amen’”’ of the assembled congregation
assents, and thereafter the sacramental gifts are
received by the faithful present, with another
“Amen” from each recipient to whom they are
administered.

The great eucharistic prayer, as outlined, was the
first part of the liturgy to crystallize into written
form, and of its component parts the invocation of
the Divine blessing upon the elements was probably
the first to be written down.

Around the simplicity and the depth of such a
truly apostolic norm of eucharistic worship, alone,

can be gathered into one the now dis-
2. Its persed and divided followers of the
Unifying Christ, for therein subsist in perfect
Significance harmony the Godward and the man-

ward aspects of the memorial He com-
manded us to make as complementary, not contra-
dictory; and the identity of the consecrated bread
and wine with the body and blood of Christ is
manifested to be in the realm of their spiritual
function and potency.

Lireraturs.—E. F. Willis, The Worship of the Old
Covenant . . . . in Relation to That of the New; Fred-
eric Rendall, Secrificial Language of the NT; Maurice
Goguel, L'eucharistie des origines a Justin Martyr, 105 ff;
W.B. Frankland, The Early Eucharist (excellent); H. B.
Swete, ‘Eucharistic Belief in the 2d and 3d Cents.,”’
Journal of Theological Studies, June, 1902, 161 ff; R.
M. Woolley, The Liturgy of the Primitive Church; M.
Lepin, L'idée du sacrifice dans la religion chrétienne;
W. Milligan, The Ascension and Heavenly Priesthood of
Our Lord; Thomas Brett, A True Scripture Account of
the Nature and benefits of the Holy Eucharist, 1736; id,
A Discourse Concerning the Necessity of Discerning the
Lord's Body in the Holy Communion, 1720; J. R. Milne,
Considerations on Eucharistic Worship; id, The Doctrine
and Practice of the Eucharist; H. R. Gummey, The Con-
secration of the Eucharist; A. J. Macleau, Recent Dis-
caveries Illustrating Early Christian Life and Worship;
id, The Ancient Church Orders; UL. Duchesne, Origines
du eulte chrétien; J.T. Levens, Aspects of the Holy Com-


munition; John Wordsworth, The Holy _ Communion;
¥. E. Brightman, Liturgies, Eastern and Western.


Henry Ritey GumMMey


Historical


. Original Institution

. The Elements :

The Eucharist in the Apostolic Church

. The Eucharist in the Post-apostolic Church
Rome and the Eucharist

. Luther and the Eucharist

. Zwingli and the Eucharist

. Calvin and the Eucharist

This name of the Lord’s Supper is derived from
eucharistia, the prayer of consecration, and this
in turn points back to Mt 26 27, ‘And he took a
cup, and gave thanks” (eucharisiésas). The most
common name is “Lord’s Supper’’ (deipnon kuriou
[1 Cor 11 20]). It is also called ‘‘Lord’s table”
(trépeza kurtou [10 21 AV]); while the cup is called
“the cup of blessing” (potérion tés eulogias [ver
16]) and “the cup of the Lord” (potérion ku-
riou [ver 21]). The word koindnia points both
to the bread and the cup, whence our common term
“communion.”’ In post-apostolic days it became
known as letiourgia, a sacred ministration, whence
our word “liturgy.” It was also named thusia, a
sacrifice, and mustérion, from its mystic character
and perhaps from the fact that it was celebrated
only in the closed circle of believers. The Roman
Catholic church calls it missa or “mass,” from the
words congregatio missa est, whereby in post-apos-
tolic times the first part of worship, called the missa
cathechumenorum, was closed, and whereby the
second part of worship was ushered in, known as
the missa fidelium, the sacramental part of worship,
only destined for believers.

The origin of the Eucharist is described in Mt
26; Mk 14, and Lk 22. Paul introduces _his

simple and comprehensive recital of
1. Original the origin of the institution—the ear-
Institution liest written record of it—with the

words: ‘For I received of the Lord
that which also I delivered unto you” (1 Cor 11
23). A comparison between the Gospels and Ex
12 indicates a considerable modification of the origi-
nal Passover ritual in the days of Jesus (see Smith’s
DB, art. ‘“Lord’s Supper’). The composite
Gospel-picture of the institution of the Eucharist
shows us the Saviour in the deep consciousness of
the catastrophe about to overwhelm Him, surround-
ed by treason on the part of Judas and a strange
and total lack of appreciation of the true situation
on the part of the other disciples. He had greatly
‘desired to eat this passover with them before he
suffered’ (Lk 22 15), and yet they are wholly
unresponsive, the chief question apparently in their
minds being the old contention of rank and pre-
eminence. Whether or not Judas was present at the
eating of the Supper is a moot point, which we will
not discuss here. Neither will we touch the ques-
tion whether or not this Passover-meal was the true
Jewish festive meal or an anticipation of it, called
pascha only, in allusion to the great feast, which
had brought the hundreds of thousands of Jews to
Jerus (cf Mt 26; Mk 14 with Jn 12 1; 13 1.2.
29: 18 28: 19 14.31).

Both Mt and Mk leave the exact place of the in-
stitution of the Supper in the festive meal indefinite,
‘as they were eating’ (Mt 26 26; Mk 14 29);
the words of Lk, “after supper’’ (22 20), may be a
hint in regard to this matter (see Jn 13 1; 1 Cor
11 25). But the custom of the early church of
celebrating the Eucharist after the agapé or “love
feast” appears to be strong evidence that the original
institution was separate from the paschal festival
and followed it.’ The entire subject of the Euchar-
ist has been called in question by the radical Ger-
mau critics, who point to the absence of the whole
matter in Jn and to the omission of the words, “Do
this in remembrance of me,” in Mt and Mk. Its
occurrence in Lk is ascribed to Paul’s influence over


ONO Gp oo boH


1925


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Lord’s Supper


him and to his familiarity with the story of the insti-
tution as described by the apostle. But this posi-
tion is utterly untenable in the light of the un-
questioned fact that the Lord’s Supper as a fixed
part of worship was firmly established from the
earliest days of the Christian church. The doctrine
of Christ's vicarious suffering is nowhere so clearly
enunciated as in the words of the institution of the
Supper, “This is my body which is given for you”
(Lk 22 19); “This is my blood of the covenant,
which is poured out for many unto remission of
sins’ (Mt 26 28). Small wonder that those who
have utterly done away with the doctrine of the
vicarious atonement or of substitution should
attack the historicity of the Eucharist and should
seek by all means to wipeit fromthe record.

Jesus bids His followers to observe the new insti-
tution “in remembrance of” Him. Dr. Bavinck
says, ‘“The Lord’s Supper is instituted by Christ as
a permanent benefit to His church; it is a blessing
added to all other blessings to signify and to seal
them” (Geref. Dogm., IV, 310). ae d

_ As to the elements used in the original institu-
tion of the Supper, they were bread and wine. The
bread of course was the unleavened
2. The bread of the Passover, during which
Elements feast every trace of leaven was removed
(Ex 12 19). The Eastern church,
perhaps influenced by the bitter Ebionite spirit of
the Judaizers, later adopted the use of common
bread (koinéds drtos); the Western church used
unleavened bread. Protestantism left the matter
among the adiaphora. ens

As regards the wine, the matter has been in dis-
pute from the beginning (see Kitto’s Cyclopaedia of
Bib. Lit.). The early church always used mixed
wine, wine and water, following the Jewish custom.
Whether the wine used at the institution of the
Lord’s Supper was fermented or unfermented wine,
must of course be determined by the Jewish Pass-
over-customs prevailing at that time. The matter
ig in dispute and is not easily settled.

Modern Jews quite generally use raisin-wine, made by
steeping raisius over night in water and expressing the
juice the next day for use at the Passover-meal. The
ancient Jews, we are told, used for this purpose a thick
boiled wine, mixed with water (Mish, Terimath, xi).
Whether ofnos, the word used in the NT, stands literally,
as the name indicates, for fermented wine, or figuratively
for the mixed drinks, well known to ancient and modern
Jews, is a debatable matter. As late as the 16th cent.
the Nestorian Christians celehrated communion with
raisin-wine, and the same is said of the Indian Chris-
tians (St. Thomas Christians’). The word ‘new,’
used by Christ in Mt 26 29, is believed by some to indi-
cate the character of the wine used by Christ at the
institution of the Eucharist, viz. the juice of grapes fresh

ressed out (see Clem. Alex., Paed., xi). On the other
Hand the third Council of Braga explicitly forhade this
practice as heretical. It is evident that the whole suh-
ject is shrouded in much mystery. Some ancient sects
substituted an entirely different clement, water and
milk, for instance, heing used (Epiph., Haer., xlix; Aug.,
Haer., xxviii). Such customs were utterly condemned
by the Council of Braga (675 AD). In general, however,
the Christian church, almost from the beginning, seems
to have used fermented red wine, either mixed or pure,
in the administration of the Eucharist, In order to main-
tain the correspondence between the symbol and the
thing symbolized.


Originally the apostolic church celebrated com-


munion at every mecting for worship. They con-
tinued stedfastly in the apostle’s


3. The teaching and fellowship, in the break-
Eucharist ing of bread and the prayers (Acts
in the 2 42.46). Very soon, however, if we
Apostolic may judge from the Acts and the
Church Pauline Epp., its administration was


confined to the meeting on the first
day of the week. The agapé always preceded com-
munion, and at some part of the service the be-
lievers, the sexes after the plan of the synagogue
being separated, would salute each other with


the “holy kiss’ (philéma hdgion) (1 Cor 16 20; 2
Cor 18 12). But the introduction of the sacra-
ment, with all its accessories, had evidently occa-
sioned grave abuses at Corinth (1 Cor 11 34).
Paul corrects these in unmistakable language.
Thus we received our first written record of the
institution of the Supper. In Corinth it seems to
have been restricted from the beginning to the first
day of the week (Acts 20 7; 1 Cor 16 2). Bya
slow transition the detpnon was transferred from the
midnight hour to the morning. At least we find
that Paul kept it after midnight at Troas (Acts 20
11). It would appear as if the apostle had also
partaken of the Lord’s Supper, together with his
Christian companions, on board the ship, toward
the close of his fateful trip on the Adriatic (Acts
27 35).

In the post-apostolic church the Eucharist continued
to be celebrated every Lord’s day. But it separated


itself from the preaching of the Word and
4, The from prayers, as in the previous period.
Eucharist


It was invested with a mystic meaning,
i something too holy for the common eye,
in the Post- and thus the missa catechumenorum, the


* open church-meeting, was separated from
Snore the missa fidelium, the gathering of he-


lievers only, in which the Eucharist was
r celebrated. Bread, wine, oil, milk, honey,
all the ingredients for the agapé, from which the ele-
ments for the Supper were selected, were furnished by
the free-will offerings of the believers. These were
solemnly set apart by the officiating bishop with a con-
secrating prayer, eucharistic, and thus the sacrament
obtained the name ‘‘Eucharist.’’ The gifts themselves
were called prosphorai, ‘‘oblations,” or thusiat, ‘sac-
rifices."”. The sacrificial conception of the Supper was
thus gradually created (Ign., Phil., iv; Smyrna, vii,
viii; Justin, Apol., 1.66; Dial., xii.70; Irenaeus, Adv.
Haer., iv.18.5). The Eucharist once being conceived
as a sacrifice, the conception of the officiating bishop
as @ priest hecame logically inevitable. The Apos
Const, xHii (4) gives us a fair idea of the worship of the
church, toward the close of the 3d cent. Even at that
early day a well-developed ritual had replaced the sim-
plicity of the worship of the apostolic days. In the
African and Eastern churches, baptized children were
allowed to partake of communion, through the fear
engendered by Jn 6 53. The regenerative conception
of haptism largely influenced this custom. The rem-
nants of the consecrated elements were brought by the
deacons to the sick and to imprisoned believers. We
have not the space in a brief article like this to enter
fully into the development of the doctrinal conception
of the Supper as found in the Fathers. Suffice it to say
that the symholical and spiritual concept of the Evchar-
ist, usually defined as the ‘‘dynamic’’ view of the Supper,
was advocated by such men as Origen, Eusehius of
Caesarea, Basil the Great, Gregory of Nazianzen and
others. On the other hand Cyril, Gregory of Nyssa,
Chrysostom and John Damascenus developed the ‘‘real-
istic’? theory ot the Eucharist, and this view again
divided itself into the “ diophysitic’’ theory, later called
‘*consubstantiation,’’ and the ‘‘monophysitic’’ theory,
later known as ‘‘transubstantiation.”’ Augustinus, the
great Lat Father, knew nothing of the theory of tran-
substantiation. He taught that communion carries a
blessing only for believers, while to the unbelieving it is
a curse, and that the true eating of the body of Christ
consists in believing (Serm. Ad Infantes, De Civ., x.6;
xxii10; Tract. 25 in Joann.). Paschasius Radbert (d.
865 AD) was the first fully to formulate the realistic
view as the doctrine of the Romish church, and although
the dynamic view triumphed for a while, the condemna-
tlon of Berengarius of Tours (d. 1088 AD) proved that
by the middle of the 11th cent. the realistic view of the
Supper had become the generally accepted doctrine of
the Eucharist.


The Romish church couches its doctrine of the
Eucharist in the word “transubstantiation,’’ which
means the conversion of the substance


5. Rome of the elements used in the Eucharist.
and the The word was first used by Hildebert
Eucharist of Tours (d. 1184 AD) in a sermon.


The doctrine of the Supper was finally
fixed, together with the new term, by Pope Inno-
cent III, at the Lateran Council 1215 AD. It was
decided that the body and blood of Christ are truly
contained in the sacrament of the altar, under the
species of bread and wine, the bread being tran-
substantiated into the body and the wine into the
blood of Christ, by the Divine power. This has


Lord’s Supper


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1926


been the Romish doctrine of the Supper ever since.
The bread and wine are changed into the veritable
body and blood of Christ, by the words of the insti-
tution. By the institution of the Supper, Christ
made His disciples priests, wherefore the Eucharist
may be administered only by an ordained priest.
In the miracle of the sacrament, the “accidents” of
the elements—bread and wine—remain, but they
are no longer inherent in a subject, the substance
in which they inhered being replaced by another.
This new substance is the body and blood of Christ,
which is hidden from observation under the appear-
ance of the elements. The whole Christ is present
in each of these elements, hence it is not necessary
to commune under both forms (sub uéraque). In
the Romish conception of the Supper communion
with Christ is a secondary idea. The main idea is
that of the transubstantiation itself, for the Supper
is more a sacrifice than a sacrament; thus the mass
becomes a sin offering. While it feeds faith, keeps


us from mortal sin, wards off temporal punishment, '


unites believers, it also has a potency for those who
are not present, and even for the dead in purgatory.
Thus the mass became the very heart and center of
the entire Romish cultus (Conf. Trid., XIII, 21, 22;
Cat. Rom., CXII, c. 4; Bellarm, De Sacr. Euch., I,

iv; Moehler, Symb., § 34).
The Reformers rejected the doctrine of transub-
stantiation, the sacrificial conception of the Euchar-
ist, the adoration of the “‘host,’’ the


6. Luther withholding of the cup, the efficiency
and the of the Eucharist in behalf of the dead,
Eucharist the entire Romish conception of the


sacrament of the Supper. The origi-
nal position of Luther, that the elements in the
Supper were signs and seals of the remission of sins,
was soon replaced by the doctrine of “consub-
stantiation.”? The bitter controversy with Carl-
stadt, and esp. the failure of the Marburg Con-
ference, drove Luther forever into the camp of the
realists.
doctrine against Carlstadt. He placed himself
squarely on the realistic conception of the words of
the institution, and held that “the body of Christ
in accordance with the will and omnipotence of God
and its own ubiquity is really and substantially
present in, with and under the Supper, even as His
Divine nature is in the human as warmth is in the
iron. Wherefore the Supper is physically par-
taken of by those who are unworthy, albeit to their
own destruction’ (Bavinck, Geref. Dogm., IV, 318).
This doctrine has been fully developed by the
Lutheran divines, and is till this day the view of the
Lutheran church.
Zwingli essentially sided with Carlstadt in his
controversy with Luther, whom he thereby greatly
embittered. He interpreted the words


7. Zwingli of the institution—‘“this is’’—as sig-
and the nifying “this stands for,” ‘this signi-
Eucharist fies.’”? This view was fully set forth


in a letter to Matthew Alber at
Reutlingen in 1524 and was given its final form in
his dogmatic tract, Com. de vera et falsa rel. (1525),
where he characterizes Luther’s doctrine as “an
opinion not only rustic but even impious and
frivolons.’” The breach was widened by the Mar-
burg Conference of 1529. Reduced to its last
analysis, the eucharistic concept of Zwingli is that
of a symbolical memorial of the suffering and death
of Christ, although Zwingli does not deny that
Christ is present to the eye of faith. On the con-
trary, He is enjoyed through the word and through
faith, i.e. in a spiritual way. In the Supper we
confess our faith, we express what that faith means
to us, and we do it in memory of Christ’s death
(Oper., ii.1, 426; ii1.239, 326, 459; iv.51, 68). The
Zwinglian view has been consciously or uncon-


As early as 1524 he had outlined his’


sciously adopted by a very large portion of the

Protestant church.
Caivin’s position on the doctrine of the Eucharist
tends rather to the Lutheran than to the Zwinglian
view. With Zwingli the sacrament is


8. Calvin little more than a sign, with Calvin
and the it is both a sign and a seal. The real-
Eucharist ity of communion with Christ and the


benefits of His death, received by a
living faith—all this is common to the Lutheran and
the Calvinistic views. The Lord’s Supper is far
more than a mere memorial service, it is a marvelous
means of grace as well. Calvin sides with Zwingli
in denying all physical, local or substantial presence
of Christ in the Eucharist. But he differs from bim
in making the eucharistic act far more than a con-
fession of faith, and he lays far greater stress than
Zwingli on the meaning of its true participation.
With Luther he holds that Christ is truly present
in the Supper, and he lays stress esp. on the mystic
union of the believer with Christ. In the Supper
both the benefits of Christ’s death and His glorious
person are touched. But Christ does not descend
in the Supper to the believer, but the latter ascends
to Him in heaven. The central thought of the Cal-
vinistic conception of the Supper is this, that the
communicant, through the operation of the Holy
Spirit, comes in spiritual contact with the entire
person of Christ and that he is thus fed unto life
eternal, Every close student of Calvin’s works
will have to admit that his ideas on the subject are
somewhat involved and confusing. This is due
no doubt to the mediating position he occupied
between Luther and Zwingli. But his position as
a whole is quite plain. All his followers agree in
holding that (1) Christ is only spiritually present
in the Supper; (2) that the participation in the
benefits of the Supper must therefore be spiritual,
although it is real, and (3) that only true communi-
cants, by a living faith, can communicate therein,
and that this participation in the atoning death of
the Saviour is sealed to us by the use of the ordained
signs of the sacrament. Henry E. Dosker


LUTHERAN INTERPRETATION


I. Tus Term
1. The Derivation and Meaning
2. Synonyms
II. Tue Orpinance
1. Source and Norm of the Doctrine of the Eu-
charlst
2. Interpretation of the Eucharistic Texts
. 8. Doctrinal Contents of the Eucharistic Passages

III. Dirricuit1es
1. Question of Possibility
2. The Place of Faith in the Sacrament
3. The Words of the Institution


Lf. The Term.—‘Eucharist” is the anglicized
form of the Gr noun eucharistia, which signifies
“gratitude,” “thanks,” or ‘praise
1. The offering.” The noun is derived from
Derivation the vb. eucharistés, which, with the
and Mean- vb. eulogéd of kindred meaning in Mt
ing 26 26.27; Mk 14 22.23, is used to
describe the action of the Lord in
blessing the bread and wine at the institution of
the Lord’s Supper (Lk 22 19; 1 Cor 11 23).
When used absolutely, as in these places, it signi-
fies “‘the offering up of praise that is prompted
by nothing else than God Himself and His revealed
glory” (Cremer). The blessing of the physical
elements was part of the sacramental action at
subsequent celebrations of the ordinance (1 Cor
10 16), and thus eucharistia soon (2d cent.) came
to mean the blessed elements and the entire ordi-
nance in which these were administered.


Other Scriptural terms for the same ordinance are


“Communion” (from koinénta, in the twofold sense
indicated In 1 Cor 10 16.17), ‘‘Lord’s ae (kuria-
kén detpnon [1 Cor 11 20), ‘‘Lord's Table” (trdépeza


1927


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  Lord’s Supper


kurtou [1 Cor 10 21}), ‘Breaking of Bread” (kldésis tou
drtou [Acts 2 42]),. The lit. of the church developed a
great many terms which emphasize one or


2. Syno- the other feature of the ordinance. Luther,
2 in his Small Catechism, adopts the name
nyms “Sacrament of the Altar,’’ because It Is


administered at the altar. The Lutheran
Confessions occasionally employ the term  ‘''mass,”
however, in the original meaning which the early church,
not in that which the Roman church, connects with
the term (‘’mass’’ derlved elther from missa, '‘ things
sent,’’ because the materlals for communion were sent
to the place of celebration, or from missio, ‘‘a sending
[away],’’ because worshippers who were not members, or
minors, were dismissed from the service before the cele-
hration of the Eucharist began; but see McClintock and
Strong, Cyclop. of Bib., Theol., and Eccles. Lit., V, 863).
Il. The Ordinance.—The “seats of doctrine,”
i.e. the Scripture texts which must be employed for
determining every essential part of
1. Source the teaching of Scripture regarding the
and Norm second sacrament of the Christian
of the Doc- church, are the words of institution
trine of the recorded in Mt 26 26-28; Mk 14 22-
Eucharist 24; Lk 22 19.20; 1 Cor 11 23-25.
i Valuable statements, chiefly concern-
ing the proper use of the sacrament, are found in
1 Cor 10 15 ff; 11 20 ff. That these texts are
controverted is no reason why a doctrine should
not be established from them. No doctrine of the
Christian religion could be established, if every text
of Scripture had to be withdrawn from the argument,
so soon as it had become controverted. Jn 6 32-—
59 does not treat of this ordinance, because (1)
the ordinance must be dated from the night of the
betrayal, which was considerably after the Lord’s
discourse at Capernaum; (2) because this passage
speaks of ‘‘eating the flesh,’”’ not the body, of the
Son of man, and of drinking “his blood,’ in such
a manner that a person’s eternal salvation is made
to depend upon this eating and drinking. If this
passage were eucharistic, infants, children, persons
in durance among pagans, or temporarily deprived
of the ministration of the Christian church, hence,
unable to commune, could not be saved.
The exposition of the genuine eucharistic texts
of Scripture is governed by the common law of
Bible exegesis, viz. that every word
2. Interpre- and statement of Scripture must be
tation of the understood in its proper and native
Eucharistic sense, unless a plain and urgent reason
Texts compels the adoption of a figurative
interpretation. The writers who have
recorded the institution of the sacrament have
given no hint that they wish to be understood fig-
uratively. The solemn occasion—the Eucharist
being the expression of the last will or testament
of the Lord—forbids the use of figurative language
(Gal 3 15). The fact that a statement of Scrip-
ture transcends our natural powers of comprehen-
sion does not justify us in giving it a figurative
meaning. If this rationalistic principle were to be
applied in explaining Scripture, we could not retain
a single revealed doctrine. Besides, those who
have adopted a figurative interpretation are not
agreed where to locate the figure in the words of
institution. Some claim that the word totto,
others that estf, others that 16 sémd mou contain a
figure, while still others would take the institutional
words in their proper sense, but understand the
entire ordinance figuratively.
The eucharistic passages contain: (1) astatement
fixing the time and occasion of the institution. It
was “in the night in which he was
3. Doctrinal betrayed,’ immediately before the
Contents of beginning of the passio magna of
the Euchar- Christ, and in connection with the
istic celebration of the Jewish Passover
Passages (Mt 26 17 ff). The ordinance which
Christ instituted was to take the place
of the ancient Passover (1 Cor 5 7, which text


Luther aptly renders: ‘We, too, have a passover,
which is Christ crucified for us’). Jewish custom
at the time of Christ seems to have allowed some
latitude as regards the time for eating the paschal
lamb. Thus the difference between John (18 28;
19 42) and the synoptists is overcome. Our Lord
was deeply stirred with thoughts of love and affec-
a Hs His disciples at the time of the institution

(2) An authoritative declaration of Christ, the
God-man, fixing the constituent parts of the sacra-
ment, and the essential features of the sacramental
act (speciem actus). This declaration names:


(a) The elements of the sacrament, which are of two
kinds: bread and wine (materia terrena), and the body
and blood of the Lord (materia coelestis) (see Irenaeus,
Adv. Haer., iv.34.363, quoted in Form. Cone. Sol.
Decl., Art. VII, no. 14, 649). There is no law laid down
as regards the quality, form, or quantity of the bread
(leavened or unleavened, round or oblong, in large loaves,
cakes, or in wafer form ready for immediate distri-
bution). Likewise the color and quality of the wine is
left undefined. The a esr génnéma tés ampélou,
"fruit of the vine’ (Mt 26 29), sanctions the use of any
substance that has grown on the vine, has been pressed
from grapes, and has the characteristics of the substance
known as wine. That the wine used by the Lord at that
season of the year and in accordance with Jewish custom
was fermented wine, there can be no doubt (Hodge,
Systematic Theol., III, 616). The use of unfermented
wine is apt to introduce an element of uncertalnty into
the sacrament. The heavenly elements are defined
thus: ‘‘My body, which is aon for yon,” ‘my blood,
which is shed for many.”’ hese terms signify the real,
substantial, natural body of Christ, and His real, natural
blood (Luther: ‘the true body and blood of our Lord").
Both the earthly and the heavenly elements are really
present at the same time in every eucharistic act. To
deny either the presence of real bread and wine at any
stage during the eucharistic act, as the Roman doctrine
of transubstantiation does (against 1 Cor 1] 26.28),
or the real presence of the true body and blood of Christ,
as reformed teaching does, is not dolng justice to
Scrlpture.

(b) The relation of the elements to one another: In
offering the physical elements to the disciples the Lord
employs the locutio exhibitiva, common to every lan-
guage of men: He names that which is not seen while
giving that which is seen. (‘Here are your spices,"’
says the grocer delivering the package containing them.)
The locutio exhibitiva, except when used by a jester or
dishonest person, always states a fact. The bread in
the Eucharist is the body of Christ, the wine, likewise,
ts the blood of Christ. The relation is expressed in
1 Cor 10 16.17 by koinénia, ‘'communion.’’ This
term is not the same as metoché, “participation,’”’ which
would refer to the communicants (Plummer, HDB, III,
149). Koindnia declares a communion of the bread
with the body, of the wine with the blood, of Christ.
It is impossible to define the mode and manner of this
communion of the earthiy with the heavenly elements.
Such terms as ‘“consubstantiation,’' ‘‘impanation,"’
‘‘invination,’’ are faulty attempts to define the unde-
finable. we can assert is, that in a manner incom-
prehensible to us the body and hlood of the Lord are
in a sacramental union with the eucharistic bread and
wine.

(ep The action required, viz. ‘‘take, eat'’; ‘take,
drink.’ These words refer to the distribution and
reception of the sacramental elements. These are
essential, the mode is not, unless one wishes to empha-
size, e.g. by the breaking of the hread, the merely sym-
bolical meaning of the entire ordinance. Accordingly,
it is also immaterial whether the administrant place the
elements into the hands of the communicant, who then
conveys them to his mouth, or whether the administrant
conveys the elements directly to the mouth of the com-
municant. The acts of distributing and receiving,
however, extend to the entlre sacramental substance,
J.e. not the bread, or the wine, alone are distributed and
received, but “in, with, and under the bread’’ the body,
‘In, with, and under the wine” the blood, of Christ.
The eating and drinking in the Eucharist is of a peculiar
kind. It differs from mere natural eating and drinking
ot common food, and from spiritual eating and drinking,
which is a figurative expression signifying the believin
appropriation of the Saviour’s atoning work, and whic
can never be “for judgment.” In natural eating and
drinking there would be only bread and wine, not the
body and blood of the Lord; in spiritual eating and drink-
ing there would be only the merits of the Redeemer, not
hread and wine. In sacramental eating and drinkin,
both the bread and the body, the wine and the blood,
of Christ, are sacramentally received, the earthly ele-
ments in a natural, the heavenly in a supernatural,
undefinable manner, both, however, orally, and both by
every communicant. For, according to I Cor 11 29,


‘0


rord’s Supper THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


"1928


also the unworthy communicant receives the Lord's body,
and that for his judgment, ‘not discerning” it (AV).

(d) The end and aim of the ordinance: The Lord

says: ‘This do in remembrance of me.’’ Paul says:
“As often as ye eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye
proclaim the Lord's death till he come.’' These words
make the Eucharist an efficient means for strengthening
the spiritual union of the disciples with the Lord until
His second coming. They are a call for faith on the
part of the communicants, and restrict admission to
communion to the believing followers of the Lord.
Worthy communicants are those who understand the
meaning of Christ's sacrifice and hope for His return in
glory. (Luther: ‘'The sacrament is instituted for us
Christians."") The duty of self-exploration enjoined
upon communicants further emphasizes the purpose of
this ordinance. Self-exploration embraces knowledge
and acknowledgment of our sinful state, confidence in
the ever-present forgiveness of God for Christ's sake, and
@ sincere purpose to forsake sin and grow in holiness.
Accordingly, non-believers, morally irresponsible per-
sons, and persons who lead offensive lives which they
will not amend, cannot be admitted to communion (Mt
7 6). In 1 Cor 10.17 Paul names another puree:
the strengthening of the bonds of brotherly love and
fellowship by means of communion. Hence, unity of
faith and active Christian charity are required in those
who are to commune together (Mt § 23.24), and ‘clase
communion,” not “open, or promiscuous communion’’
is in accord with the teaching of Scripture. In_ the
absence of any fixed rule as to the frequency of a Christ
tian’s communing, the above reasons suffice to induce
him to commune frequently (‘’as often as"’).
_ (8) Anauthoritative statement of Christ concern-
ing the continued use of the sacrament (exercitium
actus): “‘Thisdo.” This means (a) that the action of
Christ is to be repeated, i.e., bread and wine should
be blessed, distributed and received. The blessing
is called the consecration and consists in the reciting
of a prayer and the words of the institution. _Con-
secration has no magical effects, it does not produce
the sacramental union. On the other hand, it is
not a mere meaningless ceremony, but a solemn
declaration that in accordance with the will of the
Lord, bread and wine are now being separated from
their common use, to be devoted to the use which
the Lord commanded. It is also a prayer to the
Lord to be present in the sacrament; (6) that
whenever disciples do as their Lord did, He will
connect His body and blood with the earthly sub-
stances as He did at the first communion; (c) that
besides the blessing of the elements, only the giving,
or distribution, and the taking, or reception, of the
sacramental elements are proper and essential parts
of a. sacramental action. A true sacramental action
is complete only. where these three acts concur:
consecration, distribution, reception, and outside
of these acts nothing that may be done with the ele-
ments possesses the nature of a sacrament or a sac-
ramental action. Offering the consecrated wafer
for adoration is no part of the sacrament, but is a
form of idolatry (artolatry), because there is no
sacramental union except in the act of distributing
and receiving the consecrated elements. The
withdrawal of the cup from the lay communicants
is an unwarranted mutilation of the sacrament
(Mt 26 27; Mk 14 23). But the grossest per-
version of the sacrament, and a standing reproach
to the completeness of the atoning sacrifice of the
Lord is the offering up of the consecrated elements
as an unbloody sacrifice for the sins of the living
and the dead, which is being done in the Rom mass
(He 10 14.18).

Ill. Difficulties.—““How can these things be?”

This question might be raised against every doc-
_  tvine of Scripture. The union of the
1. Question natures in the God-man, the imputa-
of Possi- _ tion of His merit to the believer, the
bility quickening power of the word of Di-
vine grace, the resurrection of the
dead, ete, can all be subjected to the same question-
ing.
“Yas faith no place in this sacrament?” Faith
does not create, nor help to create the sacrament,
neither the administrant’s nor the communicant’s


faith. The sacrament is fully constituted in all its
parts by the institutional act of the Lord and by
His command to continue the observ-
2. Place ance of it. Man’s faith cannot make,
of Faith man’s unbelief cannot unmake, an ordi-
nance of God. But faith is necessary
in order that a communicant may reccive the bless-
ings offered in the Eucharist, and testify to his be-
lieving relation to the Lord and to his Christian
fellowship with the brethren. The sacrament
bestows no blessing ex opere operato, i.e. by the mere
mechanical performance of the physical act.
“Are the words of the institution part of the
sacred text?’ Up tothe age of Paulus, they were
universally regarded so, and the criti-


3. The cal labors of Briggs, P. Gardner,
Words of Grafe, Immer, Jiilicher, etc, which can
the Insti- _ readily be explained by the theological
tution position of these men, lack unity of


result and are offset by the labors

of Scrivener, Schultzen, R. A. Hoffman, Blass,

Beyschlag, etc. Christianity as yet sees no reason

for discarding the words of the institution and for

discontinuing the Eucharist as a Divine Senay;
Ww. AU


ACCORDING To THE BELIEF AND PRACTICE OF THE
CHURCH OF THE BRETHREN (DUNKERS)


I. Tue Last Supper Was Nor tne Jewisn Pass-


3. Tradition
II, Tee PERPETUATION or THE Last SupPER
Ill. Practick or THE CuuRCH OF THE BRETHREN
IV. Tue Meanrine ano SIGNIFICANCE OF THE LOVE
FErast
LITERATURE


The interest of this denomination in the Lord’s
Supper as related to the Passover consists in two
points: (1) that the “Lord’s Supper’? was not the
Jewish Passover, but was eaten the evening before
the Jewish feast; and (2) that this “Last Supper”
was intended to be perpetuated. This is perpetu-
ated by the Church of the Brethren under the
name of ‘Love Feast’? (see AGAPE).


I. The Last Supper Was Not the Jewish Passover. —
John gives five distinct intimations of the date:

(1)) ey before the feast of the Le

over” pb 6& Hs éopras tov tagxa, Pré

1. Date dé tés heortés tow pdéscha; In 193 ts This

shows that the washing of the disciples’

feet, and the discourses at the Last Supper were before
the Passover.

(2) “Buy what things we have need of for the feast’’
(ayépacov av xpelav éxonev cis THY eopTHv, agérason hin
chretan échomen ets tén heortén; 18 29). This shows that
the Supper (Seimvoy, detpnon) was not the Passover feast
(copriv, heortén).

(3) ''They lead Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into
the Praetorium; and it was early; and they themselves
entered not into the Praetorium, that they might not
be defiled, but might eat the passover'' (iva daywouy 7d
wacxa, hina phdgésin té pdscha; Jn 18 28). This was
after the Supper, early on the day of crucifixion, before
the Passover.

(4) "Now it was the Preparation of the passover: it
was abont the sixth hour" (4v 6é mapackevy rod macya,
én dé paraskeué toi pdscha; Jn 19 14). This again
shows conclusively that the Passover was not yet eaten.
Jesus is before Pilate; it is the day of the crucifixion,
and after the Last Supper.

(5) ‘'The Jews therefore, because it was the Prepa-
ration, that the bodies should not remain on the cross
upon the sabbath (for the day of that sabbath was a
high aay) ,”’ ver 31, etc. Here we have again a reference
to the Preparation (rapacxevy tod macxa, paraskeué tov
padscha), and also to the Sabbath which, in this case
was a “high day” (iv ydp peyddn } yudpa éxeivou tod
capBdrov, én gdr megdlé hé héméra eketnou to sabbdtou).
This shows that the Passover was eaten on Friday even-
ing after sunset on the 15th of Nisan at the beginning
of the Jewish Sabbath. Whencver the Passover fell
upon the Sabbath, that Sabbath was a ‘high day.’’


Christ is our Passover: died at the time the
Passover lamb was slain, hence after the Last
Supper. (1) Christ died at the time the Passover


1929


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lord’s Supper
Lot


lamb was slain on Friday afternoon, the 14th of
Nisan, and thus became Our Passover (1 Cor 5 7),
_ __¥or our passover also hath been sacri-
2. Doctrinal ficed, even Christ.’ (2) Jesus, the
“Lamb of God” (Jn 1 29) corresponds
to the Passover lamb (Ex 12 3). ‘Without blem-
ish” (Ex 12 5) =Jesus, “who did no sin” (1 Pet 2
22-24). The blood of a lamb sprinkled upon houses
(Ex 12 7.18) corresponds to salvation by the blood
of Jesus (1 Jn 1 7-9). (3) Jesus arose the third
day and became ‘‘the first-fruits of them that are
asleep” (1 Cor 15 4.20.23). The resurrection was
on the first day of the week. The sheaf, or first-
fruits, was gathered on the 16th of Nisan. There-
fore Jesus must have died on Friday the 14th of
Nisan, when the Passover lamb was slain; hence
after the Last Supper. ; ae

All the early traditions, both Jewish and Christian,
agree that Jesus was crucified on the day of Prepa-

ration of the Passover, and they dis-

3. Tradition tinguish between the Passover and the

? Last Supper which was eaten the
evening before the Jewish feast.

AI. The Perpetuation of the Last Supper.—(1)
Since-the Last Supper was a new institution, there
1s no more reason for perpetuating one part than
another. It is a unit, and each event of that night
has Its meaning and place. (2) Jesus commanded
the disciples to perpetuate feet-washing (see
WasHIne or Fret) (Jn 18 14.15.17), and likewise
He commanded the Eucharist to be perpetuated
as a memorial of Him (1 Cor 11 24.25). Why
not the Agape? (8) The Agape was perpetuated
by the apostles and disciples. They certainly
understood Jesus to mean that the entire services
of the Last Supper should be perpetuated, else
they would not have done so.

TH. Practice of the Church of the Brethren (Dunkers).
—The ‘Love Feast” commemorates Jesus’ Last Supper
with His disciples. These Love Feasts are held once or
twice each year, always in the evening, by each local
church or congregation. Preparatory services on ‘'self-
examination"’ (1 Cor 11 28) precede the ordinances.
The church pews are converted into tables. The
Supper (écimvov, detpnon) is made ready heforehand by
the deacons and deaconesses. The devotional exercises
aim to accomplish special consecration, confession, and
reconciliation. Before the eating of the punDers Jn
13 1-17 is read and explained, whereupon the brethren
proceed to wash one another's feet, and the sisters like-
wise by themselves. All tarry one for another (1 Cor
11 33) until they are ready for the Supper. The offi-
ciating elder then calls upon someone to offer prayer for
the meal, which is then eaten together. Another prayer
of thanksgiving is offered at the close of the meal.
After the meal, the officiating elder calls upon one to
read the story of Christ's sufferings (Isa 53, or Jn 19).
After a short explanation of the meaning of the symbol,
the communicants rise while the officiating elder gives
thanks for the bread. He then turns to his brother at
his right and breaks a piece of the unleavened bread for
him’ with the words, ‘“My beloved brother, the bread
which we break is the communion of the body of Christ
(see 1 Cor 10 16). (The brethren then break the bread
one to the other, with these words. Likewise the sis-
ters in the same manner. Again the congregation rises
while the officiating elder gives thanks for the cup, which
is then passed by one to the other with the words ‘‘Be-
loved brother [or sister], the cup of the NT is the com-
munion of the blood of Christ’’ (1 Cor 10 16). This
is followed hy prayers of praise and thanksgiving, then
a hymn (Mt 26 30) and a henediction.

IV. The Meaning and Significance of the Love
Feast.—All these ordinances or symbols signify
some fundamental virtue in the Christian life. We
are commanded to follow our Master who is the
Way and the Truth. But these symbols have a
real significance, apart from merely “following” or
“obeying” the Lord’s command. (1) Feet-washing
symbolized humility and service, and also the partial
cleansing which all Christians need. (2) The Agape
signifies the bread-and-water covenant of brother-
hood and peace. It is not only the symbol of true
Christian fellowship, but is productive of such fel-
lowship. It is also symbolic of the ‘Marriage


Supper of the Lamb,” which is supremely a symbol
of joy. (3) the Eucharist: (a) The broken bread
represents the “body of Christ”? (1 Cor 10 16)
“which is broken for you” (1 Cor 11 24 AV);
hence the symbol of sacrifice. It is a memorial of
Christ’s sufferings, and a consecration to suffer with
Him. It means also feeding on Christ, whose flesh
we must eat (Jn 6 35.51.53.54). (6) The cup
represents the blood of Christ (1 Cor 10 16; Jn
6 58.54). It is the blood covenant that symbolizes
the unity of man with God (Jn 17 21). Jesus is
the vine, we are the branches (Jn 15). The same
mind, spirit, life and love which are in God and
Christ are to be in us.


Literature.—C. F. Yoder, God's Means of Grace;
R. H. Miller, Doctrine of Brethren Defended; . WwW.
Kurtz, Outline of the Fundamental Doctrines (all of Elgin,
Illinois, U.S.A.).


Daniev Wesstrer Kourrz

LORDS OF THE PHILISTINES (779, seren,
same as Heb word for “axle,’’ probably a native
designation): These “lords” Cesk 13 3; Jgs 3
3; 16 5, etc; 18 5 8.11, etc), elsewhere called
“princes” (sar, 18 18 30; 29 8.4.9), were the
petty rulers or kings of the 5 Phili cities, Gaza,
Ashkelon, Ashdod, Ekron, Gath. See Pxitistines.


LO-RUHAMAH,


16-r66-ha’ma.
See Lo-ammi.


16-r66-ha’ma,


LOSS: NOU, hata’, “to suffer as one erring, or as
a sinner’ (Gen $1 39, where Jacob assures Laban
that be [Jacob] suffered the loss of all animals of
the flock torn by beasts); DD, sh°khol, “‘bereave-
ment” (Isa 47 8f, where the prophet foretells the
humiliation of proud Babylon who shall suffer the
loss of her children, and widowhood); m3y, shik-
kulim, “bereavement” (Isa 49 20, tr’ “bereave-
ment” in RV, where the prophet promises to the
desolate Zion enlargement). In the NT the tr of
three Gr words: drofod}, apobol, “casting away”
(Acts 27 22, where Paul assures the crew and pas-
sengers that there shall be no “loss” of life from the
storm); (aula, z@mia, “loss” (Acts 27 21, referring
to the harm sustained in the storm; Phil 3 7f,
where Paul counts all his natural privileges and
attainments as forfeited for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ); {nmuéw, zémisd, “to suffer
loss’ (1 Cor 3 15, where Paul says the man whose
works are burned shall suffer “loss”; Phil 3 8,
same context as above). CHaries B. WILLIAMS


LOT, lot:

I. Personality.—The man who bore the name Lot
(wD, lat; Adz, Lét) is mentioned for the first time
in Gen 11 27, at the beginning of that section of
Gen which is entitled “the generations of Terah.”
After Terah’s 3 sons arc named, it is added that the
third of these, Haran, begat Lot.

The reason for thus singling out but one of the
grandsons of Terah appears in the next verse, where
we are told that “Haran died before his father
Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chal-
dees.”” For that period in the life of this family,
therefore, which begins with the migration from Ur,
L, represents his father’s branch of the family
(ver 31). It is hardly probable that the relation
between Abraham and L. would have been what
it was, had not Haran died; but be this as it may,
we read this introduction of L. into the genealogy
of Terah as an anticipation of the story to which it
furnishes an introduction, and in which L. is des-
tined to play an important part.

The sections of that story in which L. appears
are: in ch 11, the migration from Ur to Haran; in
ch 12, Abraham’s wanderings; in ch 13, the separa-
tion of Abraham and L.; in ch 14, the campaign


Lot
Love


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1930


of the eastern kings against Sodom and Abraham’s |


recovery of the captives; and in ch 19, the destruc-
tion of Sodom.

In Gen 14 14.16 L. is termed the “brother” of
Abraham; but that this does not represent a var-
iant tradition is proved by reference to ver 12 of the
same chapter (ascribed to ‘‘an independent source’)
and to 13 8 (ascribed to J; cf 11 28 J).

- W. Career.—L.’s life, as the scanty references
to him permit us to reconstruct it, falls into four


periods. Of the first period—that
1. First previous to the migration from Haran
Period —we know nothing save L.’s birth


in Ur, the death of his father there, the
marriage of his sister Milcah to his uncle Nahor
(of another sister, Iscah, we learn only the name),
and the journey to Haran in company with Terah,
Abraham and Sarah. The fact that Sarah’s child-
lessness and Haran’s death are the only two cir-
cumstances related of the family history, may serve
to explain why L. went with Abraham instead of
staying with Nahor. A childless uncle and a
fatherless nephew may well have remained together
with the idea that, even if there was no formal
adoption, the nephew might become his uncle’s
heir. Certainly, the promise of a numberless seed,
so often repeated to the patriarchs, comes first to
Abraham immediately after L. has separated from
him (see Gen 13 6-18).

In the second period of L.’s life, we find him the

companion of Abraham on his journeys from Meso-

potamia to Canaan, through Canaan
2. Second to Egypt, and back again to the neigh-
Period borhood of Beth-el. His position is
subordinate, for his uncle is head of the
family, and oriental custom is uniform and rigorous
in the matter of family rule. Hence the use of the
singular number throughout the narrative. What
Abraham did, his whole “clan” did. Yet L.’s
position was as nearly independent as these pa-
triarchal conditions admit. When the story
reaches the point where it is necessary to mention
this fact, the narrator explains, first, the generosity
with which Abraham treated his nephew, in per-
mitting him to have “flocks, and herds, and
tents” of his own, a quasi-independent economy,
and second, that disproportion between their col-
lective possessions and the land’s resources which
made separation inevitable. Up to this point the
only mention of L. during this period of wandering
is contained in 13 1, in the words ‘and Lot with
him.’”? And even here the words are useless (be-
cause stating a fact perfectly presumable here as
elsewhere), except as they prepare the reader for
ia story of the separation that is immediately to
ollow.

That story introduces the third period of Lot’s
career, that of his residence in the Kikkdr (RV

“Plain,” RVm ‘“‘Circle”) andin Sodom.
3. Third To the fundamental cause of separa-
Period tion, as above stated, the author adds
the two circumstances which contrib-
uted to produce the result, namely, first, the strife
that arose between Abraham’s herdsmen and L.’s
herdsmen, and, second, the presence in the same
country of others—the Canaanites and Perizzites—
thus reminding his readers that it was no vacant
land, through which they might spread themselves
absolutely at will and so counteract the operation
of the principal cause and the contributory cause
already set forth.

With a magnanimity that must have seemed
even greater to minds accustomed to patriarchal
authority than it seems to us, and that was in fact
much more remarkable than it would be here and
now, Abraham offers to his nephew the choice of
the land—from the nomad’s point of view. In the


“we are brethren” (ver 8), the whole force of the
scene is erystallized. L., who believes himself to
have chosen the better part, is thereupon traced
in his nomadic progress as far as Sodom, and the
reader leaves him for a time face to face with a
city whose men ‘were wicked and sinners against
Jeh exceedingly,” while the narrative moves on
with Abraham through that fresh scene of revela-
tion which presented to this man of magnanimity
a Divine deed to all the land, and to this man, now
left without an heir from among his own kindred
(cf 15 2.3), a Divine pledge of innumerable off-
spring.

L. returns for a moment to our view as the main-
spring of Abraham’s motions in the campaign of
ch 14. We are expressly told that it was ‘‘when
Abram heard that his brother was taken captive,”
that he “led forth his trained men... . and
pursued.”? On the one hand we hear that L. now
“dwelt in Sodom,” having abandoned the life in
tents that he had led since Mesopotamian days, and
on the other hand we find in him a foil to the ener-
getic, decisive and successful figure of his uncle—for
L. plays a sorry réle, bracketed always with ‘‘the
women and the goods.”’

This period of his life ends with the annihilation
of his chosen home, his wealth, his companions, and
all that was his save two daughters, who, it would
seem, might better have perished with the rest.

h 19, coming immediately after the intercession
of Abraham for Sodom that poignantly impresses
on the reader’s mind the wickedness of L.’s environ-
ment, exhibits to us the man himself in his sur-
roundings, as they have affected him through well-
nigh a score of years (cf 12 4; 17 1). What we
see is a man who means well (courtesy, ver 1;
hospitality, vs 2.3.6-8; natural shame, ver 7;
loyalty, ver 14; and gratitude, ver 19), but who is
hopelessly bound up with the moral life of the city
through his family connections—alliances that
have pulled him down rather than elevated
others (vs 9.14.26.31-35). The language of 2 Pet
2 7.8 reminds us that L. was, even at this time of
his life, a “righteous” man. Viewed as a part of
his environment (the writer has been speaking of
Sodom, ver 6), L. was certainly entitled to be
called a “righteous”? man, and the term fits the im-
plications of Gen 18 23-32. Moreover, Gen 19
itself shows L. ‘‘vexed .... with their lawless
deeds” and “sore distressed by the lascivious life
of the wicked” (cf vs 3.7.8.14). Yet the contrast
with Abraham is always present in the reader’s
mind, so that the most lasting impressions are made
by L.’s selfishness, worldliness, vacillation and cow-
ardice, not to mention the moral effect made by the
closing scene of his life (vs 30-38).

The fourth period of L.’s career is of uncertain


duration. Upon the destruction of Sodom he

dwelt at first in Zoar, the “‘ittle’’
4. Fourth city, spared as a convenient refuge for
Period him and his; but at some time un-


specified, he “went up out of Zoar,”
for “he feared to dwell in Zoar’’—why, we cannot
say. This fear was greater than even the evi-
dently great fear he entertained of dwelling in
“the mountain” (ver 19). In this mountain-
country of rocks and caves (Driver in HDB, art.
“Lot,” cites Buckingham, Travels in Syria, 61-
63, 87, as authority for the statement that people
still live in caves in this region), L. and his two
remaining daughters dwell; and the biography of
this companion of “the friend of God” ends in a
scene of incest, which supplies the logical epilogue
to a drama of progressive moral deterioration.
This bestial cave-man of Gen 19 is the “brother”
of Abraham, but he has reached this goal because
his path had led down from Beth-el to Sodom.


1931


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lot
Love


The origin of the two neighboring and kindred
nations, Moab and Ammon, Js by the Heb tradition
traced thus to Lot and his daughters.

Hf, Place in Later Literature.—In the Bible,
L. finds mention only as the father of Moab and
Ammon (Dt 2 9.19; Ps 83 8), and in the passage
in 2 Pet already noticed; and, besides these places,
in Lk 17 28-32. Here L. represents the central
figure in the destruction of Sodom, as Noah in the
flood in the preceding context (cf the association of
these two characters in 2 Pet and the Koran).
His deliverance is mentioned, the haste and narrow-
ness of that escape is implied, and his wife’s fate
is recalled. In Jewish and Mohammedan lore (in-
cluding many passages in the Koran itself), L. is
a personage of importance, about whom details are
told which fancy has added to the sober traditions
of old Israel. But particularly for Mohammed
there was point of attachment in L.’s career, offered
in Gen 19 7.14. Like Mohammed to the men of
wicked Mecca, L. becomes a preacher of righteous-
ness and a messenger of judgment to the men of
wicked Sodom. He is one of the line of apostles,
sent to reveal God’s will and purpose to his con-
temporaries. ;


IV. Critical Theories about the Figure of Lot.—The
common view of those who deny the historical reality
of L. is that this name simply stands for the ethnic
group, Moab and Ammou. Wellhausen, e.g., expressly
calls ‘Lot’ a national name (Volksname).. As to what
is told of him in Gen he remarks: ‘‘ Were it not for the
remarkahle depression in which the Dead Sea lies, Sodom
and Gomorrah would not have perished; were it not
for the little flat tongue of land that reaches out into the
swamp from the S.E., Lot _would have fled at once to
the mountains of his sons, Moab and Ammon, and not
have made the détour hy Zoar, which merely serves the
purpose of explaining why this corner is excepted from
‘the overthrow,’ to the territory of which it really
belongs" (Prolegomena *, 323). Meyer confesses that
nothing can he made of L., because “any characteristic
feature that might furnish a point of attachment is
entirely lacking.” The first of the families of the Hor-
ites of Seir was named Lotan (Gen 36 20.22), and this
writer believes it ‘probable that this name is derived
from Lot; but that Lot was ever a tribal name (Stamm-
name) follows neither from this fact. (rather the con-
trary) nor from the designation of Moah and the bené
‘Ammon as ‘Sons of Lot'” (Die Israeliten und thre Nach-
barstamme, 311; cf 261, 339). If ‘\ Horite” was under-
stood as ‘“‘cave-dweller,” the story in Gen 19 30 might
be adduced in support of this combination. But the
most recent line of reasoning concerning these patriarchal
figures makes their names ‘‘neither Divine names nor
tribal names, whether in actual use or regarded _as such,
but rather simple personal names like Tom, Dick and
Harry. .... Typical names they became... .so
that... Israel’s story-tellers would connect the
name of L, with the overthrow of the cities’’ (Gressmann,
art. in ZATW, 1910). These names were chosen just
because ‘they were very common at the time when the
narratives were stamped into types"; later they hecame
unfashionable, but the story-tellers held fast to the old
names. ‘One sees from this at once into how ancient
a time the proper names Abraham and Lot must reach,
and understands therefore the more easily how they
could he changed into tribal ancestors. It does not
require the cautions, uttered by writers of this way of
thinking, against regarding their views as a return to the
old historical view of the eases eae to remind us that,
in spite of all that may be said to the contrary, the
present_trend of thought among the most radical critics
of the Genesis-traditions is much more favorable to that
conservative historical view than were the opinions which
they have overthrown. Sothat it may justly be asserted,
as Gressmarn writes: ‘ Confidence in tradition is in any
case on the rise.”

Lot’s Wife: This woman, unknown by name,
figures in the narrative of Lot that relates his escape
from Sodom. She is mentioned in Gen 19 only
in vs 15-17, where she is commanded to flee from
the doomed city with her husband and daughters,
and is laid hold upon by the angelic visitors in their
effort to hasten the slow departure; and in ver 26,
where she alone of the four fugitives disobeys the
warning, looks back, and becomes a pillar of salt.
This disobedience, with the moral state it implied
and the judgment it entailed, is held up as an ex-
ample by Christ in Lk 17 32. In the Scriptures


this is all that is said of a person and event that
furnished the basis for a great deal of speculation.
Jos (Ant, I, xi, 4) adds to the statement derived from
Gen, “She was changed into a pillar of salt,” the
words, “for I visited it, and it still remains even
now” (see also Wisd 10 7).

Among Christian writers contemporary with and sub-
sequent to Jos, as well as among the Jews themselves
and other Orientals, the same assertion is found, and
down to recent times travelers have reported the per-
sistence of such a * pillar of salt,’’ cither on the testimony
of natives or as eyewitnesses. The question of the
origin and nature of these “‘ pillars’’ is a part of the larger
question of Sodom and its neighborhood (sce Satr;
Sippim;. Suime); for that no one particular “pillar”
has persisted through the centuries may be regarded as
certain; nor If it had, would the identification of Lot's
wife with it and with it alone be ascertainable. This is
just an early, persistent and notable case of that “‘identi-
fication” of Bib. sites which prevails all over the Holy
Land. It is to be classed with the myth- and legend-
building turn of mind in simple peoples, which has e.g.
embroidered upon this OT account of the destruction of
Sodom such marvelous details and embellishments.


The principal thing to observe is the vagueness
and the simplicity of the story in Gen. For it does
not necessarily imply the ‘‘metamorphosis” popu-
larly attributed to it, in the strict sense of that
word. And it lacks, even in a narrative like this,
where the temptation would be greatest, all indica-
tions of that ‘popular archaeology” or curiosity,
which, according to some critics, is alleged to have
furnished the original motive for the invention of
the patriarchal narratives. ‘She became a pillar
of salt,” and “Remember Lot’s wife’’: this is the
extent of the Bib. allusions. All the rest is com-
ment, or legend, or guess, or “‘science.”’

J. Oscar Boyp

LOT. ‘See Divination.


LOTAN, lo’tan (705, lotan): Son of Seir, a
chief (AV “duke’”’) of Edom (Gen 86 20.22.29; 1
Ch 1 38f).


LOTHASUBUS, loth-a-si’bus (AebdcovBos,
Lothdsoubos): One of those who stood by Ezra at
the reading of the law (1 Esd 9 44); called
“Hashum” in Neh 8 4.


LOTS. See Divination.
LOTS, FEAST OF. See Purim.


LOTUS, lo’tus, TREES (D°ONY, ¢e’élim; AV
shady trees): The trees under which beh@moth (the
“hippopotamus’”’) rests; “He lieth under the lotus-
trees,” ‘The lotus-trees cover him with their shade’
(Job 40 21.22). The Arab. equivalent is the dom
tree, Zizyphus lotus, a species of jujube tree (N.O.
Rhamneae); it has many spines and small globular
fruit a little bigger than a pea. It is common in the
Jordan valley. This plant has nothing to do with
the Egyp lotus. See Liny.


LOVE, luv (AMS , ’ahébh, MAIN, ’ahdbhah, noun;
ditto, philéd, dyardo, agapdd, vb.; aydrny, agdpé,
noun): Love to both God and man is fundamental to
trnereligion, whether as expressed in the OT or the
NT. Jesus Himself declared that all the law and the
prophets hang upon love (Mt 22 40; Mk 12 28-
34). Paul, in his matchless ode on love (1 Cor 13),
makes it the greatest of the graces of the Christian
life—greater than speaking with tongues, or the
gift of prophecy, or the possession of a faith of
superior excellence; for without love all these gifts
and graces, desirable and useful as they are in
themselves, are as nothing, certainly of no perma-
nent value in the sight of God. Not that either
Jesus or Paul underestimates the faith from which
all the graces proceed, for this grace is recognized


Love


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1932


as fundamental in all God’s dealings with man and
man’s dealings with God (Jn 6 28f; He 11 6);
but both alike count that faith as but idle and worth-
less belief that does not manifest itself in love to
both God and man. As love is the highest expres-
sion of God and His relation to mankind, so it must
be the highest expression of man’s relation to his
Maker and to his fellow-man.

I. Definition.—While the Heb and Gr words for
“love’’ have various shades and intensities of mean-
ing, they may be summed up in some such defini-
tion as this: Love, whether used of God or man, is
an earnest and anxious desire for, and an active
and beneficent interest in, the well-being of the one
loved. Different degrees and manifestations of
this affection are recognized in the Scriptures accord-
ing to the circumstances and relations of life, e.g.
the expression of love as between husband and wife,
parent and child, brethren according to the flesh,
and according to grace; between friend and enemy,
and, finally, between God and man. It must not
be overlooked, however, that the fundamental idea
of love as expressed in the definition of it is never
absent in any one of these relations of life, even
though the manifestation thereof may differ accord-
ing to the circumstances and relations. Christ’s
interview with the apostle Peter on the shore of the
Sea of Tiberias (Jn 21 15-18) sets before us in a
most beautiful way the different shades of meaning
as found in the NT words ¢:Adw, philéd, and dya-
nwaw, agapédo. In the question of Christ, ‘“Lovest
thou me more than these?” the Gr vb. dyards
agapds, denotes the highest, most perfect kind o
love (Lat diligere), implying a clear determination
of will and judgment, and belonging particularly
to the sphere of Divine revelation. In his answer
Peter substitutes the word ¢6, philé, which means
the natural human affection, with its strong feeling,
or sentiment, and is never used in Scripture lan-
guage to designate man’s love to God. While the
answer of Peter, then, claims only an inferior kind
of love, as compared to the one contained in Christ’s
question, he nevertheless is confident of possessing
at least such love for his Lord.

Il. The Love of God.—First in the consideration
of the subject of ‘“Iove’’ comes the Jove of God—
He who is love, and from whom all love is derived.
The love of God is that part of His nature—indeed
His whole nature, for ‘“‘God is love’’—which leads
Him to express Himself in terms of endearment
toward His creatures, and actively to manifest that
interest and affection in acts of loving care and self-
sacrifice in behalf of the objects of His love. God
is “love” (1 Jn 4 8.16) just as truly as He is
“Hight” (1 5), “truth” (1 6), and “spirit” (In 4 24).
Spirit and light are expressions of His essential
nature; love is the expression of His personality
corresponding to His nature. God not merely
loves, but is love; it is His very nature, and He
imparts this nature to be the sphere in which His
children dwell, for ‘“‘he that abideth in love abideth
in God, and God abideth in him’ (1 Jn 4 16).
Christianity is the only religion that sets forth the
Supreme Being as Love. In heathen rcligions He
is set forth as an angry being and in constant need
of appeasing.

The object of God’s love is first and foremost
His own Son, Jesus Christ (Mt 3.17; 17 5; Lk

20 13; Jn 17 24). The Son shares
1. Objects the love of the Father in a unique
of God’s sense; He is ‘‘my chosen, in whom my
Love soul delighteth’’ (Isa 42 1). There

exists an eternal affection between the
Son and the Father—the Son is the original and
eternal object of the Father’s love (Jn 17 24). If
God’s love is eternal it must have an eternal object,
hence Christ is an eterna! being. :


God loves the believer in His Son with a special
love. Those who are united by faith and love to
Jesus Christ are, in a different sense from those who
are not thus united, the special objects of God’s
love. Said Jesus, thou “lovedst them, even as thou
lovedst me” (Jn 17 23). Christ is referring to
the fact that, just as the disciples had received the
same treatment from the world that He had re-
ceived, so they had received of the Father the same
love that He Himself had received. They were not
on the outskirts of God’s love, but in the very center
of it. “For the father himself loveth you, because
ye have loved me” (Jn 16 27). Here philed is used
for love, indicating the fatherly affection of God for
the believer in Christ, His Son. This is love in a
more intense form than that spoken of for the
world (Jn 3 16). ‘

God loves the world (In 3 16; cf 1 Tim 2 4;
2 Pet 39). This is a wonderful truth when we
realize what a world this is—a world of sin and cor-
ruption. This was a startling truth for Nicodemus
to learn, who conceived of God as loving only the
Jewish nation. To him, in his narrow exclusive-
ism, the announcement of the fact that God loved
the whole world of men was startling. God loves
the world of sinners lost and ruined by the fall.
Yet it is this world, “weak,” “ungodly,” ‘without
strength,” “‘sinners’’ (Rom 5 6-8), ‘dead in tres-
passes and sins’ (Eph 2 1 AV), and unrighteous,
that God so loved that He gave His only begotten
Son in order to redeem it. The genesis of man’s
salvation lies in the love and mercy of God (Eph
2 4f). But loveis more than mercy or compassion;
itis active and identifies itself with its object. The
love of the heavenly Father over the return of His
wandering children is beautifully set forth in the
parable of the Prodigal Son (Lk 15). Nor should
the fact be overlooked that God loves not only the
whole world, but each individual in it; it is a special
as well as a general love (Jn 3 16, “whosoever”;
Gal 2 20, “loved me, and gave himself up for me’’).

God’s love is manifested by providing for the
physical, mental, moral and spiritual needs of

His people (Isa 48 14.20.21; 62 9-12;
2. Manifes- 63 3.12). In these Scriptures God is
tations of | seen manifesting His power in behalf
God’s Love of His people in the time of their wilder-

ness journeying and their captivity.
He led them, fed and clothed them, guided them
and protected them from all their enemies. His
love was again shown in feeling with His people,
their sorrows and afflictions (Isa 68 9); He suffered
in their affliction, their interests were His ; He was
not their adversary but their friend, even though
it might have seemed to them as if He either had
brought on them their suffering or did not care
about it. Nor did He ever forget them for a mo-
ment during all their trials. They thought He
did; they said, “‘God hath forgotten us,” “He hath
forgotten to be gracious’; but no; a mother might
forget her child that she should not have compassion
on it, but God would never forget, His people.
How could He? Had He not graven them upon the
pale of His hands (Isa 49 15f)? Rather than His
ove being absent in the chastisement of His people,
the chastisement itsclf was often a proof of the
presence of the Divine love, “for whom the Lord
loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son
whom he receiveth”’ (He 12 6-11). Loving re-
proof and chastisement are necessary ofttimes for
growth in holiness and righteousness. Our re-
demption from sin is to be attributed to God’s
wondrous love; ‘Thou hast in love to my sou! de-
livered it from the pit of corruption; for thou hast
cast_all my sins behind thy back” (Isa 38 17 3 ef
Ps 50 21; 90 8). Eph 2 4 fsets forth in a wonder-
ful way how our entire salvation springs forth from


1933


the mercy and love of God; ‘But God, being rich
in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead through our trespasses,
made us alive together with Christ,’ ete. It is
because of the love of the Father that we are granted
a place in the heavenly kingdom (Eph 2 6-8).
But the supreme manifestation of the love of God,
as set forth in the Scripture, is that expressed in the
gift of His only-begotten Son to die for the sins of
the world (Jn 3 16; Rom & 6~8; 1 Jn 4 9f), and
through whom the sinful and sinning but repentant
sons of men are taken into the family of God, and
receive the adoption of sons (1 Jn 8 1f; Gal 4
4-6). From this wonderful love of God in Christ
Jesus nothing in heaven or earth or hell, created
or uncreated or to be created, shall be able to sepa-

rate us (Rom 8 371).
HI. The Love of Man.—Whatever love there is in
man, whether it be toward God or toward his fellow-
man, has its source in God—‘‘Love is


1. Source of God; and every one that loveth is be-
of Man’s gotten of God, and knoweth God. He
Love that loveth not knoweth not God; for


God is love’ (1 Jn 4 7f); “We love,
because he first loved us” (1 Jn 4 19). Trench, in
speaking of agapé, says it is a word born within the
bosom of revealed religion. Heathen writers do
not use it at all, their nearest approach to it being
philanthropta or philadelphia—the love between
those of the same blood. Love in the heart of man
is the offspring of the love of God. Only the regen-
erated heart can truly love as God loves; to this
higher form of love the unregenerate can lay no
clam (1 Jn 4 7.19.21; 2 7-11; 310; 4 11f).
The regenerate man is able to see his fellow-man
as God sees him, value him as God values him, not
go much because of what he is by reason of his sin
and unloveliness, but because of what, through
Christ, he may become; he sees man’s intrinsic
worth and possibility in Christ (2 Cor 5 14-17).
This love is also created in the heart of man by the
Holy Ghost (Rom 6 5), and is a fruit of the Spirit
(Gal 5 22). Itis alsostimulated by the example of
the Lord Jesus Christ, who, more than anyone else,
manifested to the world the spirit and nature of
true love (Jn 18 34; 15 12; Gal 2 20; Eph 5
25-27; 1 Jn 4 9f). :

God must be the first and supreme object of
man’s love; He must be loved with all the heart,
mind, soul and strength (Mt 22 37f;
Mk 12 29-34). In this last passage
the exhortation to supreme love to
God is connected with the doctrine
of the unity of God (Dt 6 4 f)—inas-
much as the Divine Being is one and indivisible, so
must our love to Him be undivided. Our love to
God is shown in the keeping of His commandments
(Ex 20 6; 1 Jn 5 3; 2Jnver6). Loveis here set
forth as more than a mere affection or sentiment;
it is something that manifests itself, not only in
obedience to known Divine commands, but also in
a protecting and defence of them, and a seeking to
know more and more of the will of God in order to
express love for God in further obedience (cf Dt
10 12). Those who love God will hate evil and all
forms of worldliness, as expressed in the avoidance
of the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh and the
pride of life (Ps 97 10; 1 Jn 2 15-17), Whatever
there may be in his surroundings that would draw
the soul away from God and righteousness, that the
child of God will avoid. Christ, being God, also
claims the first place in our affections. He is to be
chosen before father or mother, parent or child,
brother or sister, or friend (Mt 10 35-38; Lk 14
26). The word “hate” in these passages does not
mean to hate in the sense in which we use the word
today. Jt is used in the sense in which Jacob is


2. Objects
of Man’s
Love


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Love


said to have “hated’’ Leah (Gen 29 31), that is, he
loved her less than Rachel; ‘He loved also Rachel
more than Leah” (ver 30). To love Christ supreme-
ly is the test of true discipleship (Lk 14 26), and
is an unfailing mark of the elect (1 Pet 1 8). We
rove that we are really God’s children by thus
oving His Son (Jn 8 42). Absence of such love
means, finally, eternal separation (1 Cor 16 22).

Man must love his fellow-man also. Love for
the brotherhood is a natural consequence of the love
of the fatherhood; for ‘In this the children of God
are manifest, and the children of the devil: whoso-
ever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither
he that loveth not his brother” (1 Jn 310). For
aman to say “I love God” and yet hate his fellow-
man is to brand himself as ‘‘a liar’ (4 20); “He
that loveth not hls brother whom he hath seen,
cannot love God whom he hath not seen” (ver 20);
he that loveth God will love his brother also (ver 21).
The degree in which we are to love our fellow-man
is ‘as thyself’? (Mt 22 39), according to the strict
observance of the law. Christ set before His
followers a much higher example than that, however.
According to the teaching of Jesus we are to super-
sede this standard: ‘‘A new commandment J give
unto you, that ye love one another; even as ] have
loved you, that ye also love one another” (Jn 18 34).
The exhibition of love of this character toward our
fellow-man is the badge of true discipleship. It
may be called the sum total of our duty toward our
fellow-man, for ‘‘Love worketh no ill to his neighbor:
love therefore is the fulfilment of the law”; “for
he that loveth his neighbor hath fulfilled the law”
(Rom 13 8.10). The qualities which should char-
acterize the love which we are to manifest toward
our fellow-men are beautifully set forthin 1 Cor 13.
It is patient and without envy; it is not proud or
self-elated, neither does it behave discourteously; it
does not cherish evil, but keeps good account of the
good; it rejoices not at the downfall of an enemy or
competitor, but gladly hails his success; it is hope-
ful, trustful and forbearing—for such there is no law,
for they need none; they have fulfilled the law.

Nor should it be overlooked that Our Lord com-
manded His children to love their enemies, those who
spoke evil of them, and despitefully used them (Mt
65 43-48). They were not to render evil for evil,
but, contrariwise, blessing. The love of the disciple
of Christ must manifest itself in supplying the
necessities, not of our friends only (1 Jn $ 16-18),
but also of our enemies (Rom 12 20 f).

Our love should be “without hypocrisy’ (Rom
12 9); there should be no pretence about it; it
should not be a thing of mere word or tongue, but
a real experience manifesting itself in deed and
truth (1 Jn 3 18). True love will find its expres-
sion in service to man: “Through love be servants
one to another” (Gal & 13). Whatmore wonderful
illustration can be found of ministering love than
that set forth by Our Lord in the ministry of foot-
washing as foundin Jn 13? Love bears the infirmi-
ties of the weak, does not please itself, but seeks the
welfare of others (Rom 15 1-3; Phil 2 21; Gal 6
2; 1 Cor 10 24); it surrenders things which may
be innocent in themselves but which nevertheless
may become 2 stumbling-block to others (Rom 14
15.21); it gladly forgives injuries (Eph 4 32), and
gives the place of honor to another (Rom 12 10).
What, then, is more vital than to possess such love?
It is the fulfilment of the royal law (Jas 2 8), and
is to be put above everything else (Col 3 14); it is
the binder that holds all the other graces of the
Christian life in place (Col 3 14); by the posses-
sion of such love we know that we have passed from
death unto life (J Jn 3 14), and it is the supreme
test of our abiding in God and God in us (1 Jn 4
12.16). Witiram Evans


rove; Brotherly =THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA ~


Luke, Evangelist


1934


LOVE, BROTHERLY. See Brornerty Love.
LOVE-FEAST, luv‘fést. See AGare.


LOVELY, luv’li (238, ’ahabh, INN, Ghébh; wpoc-
gidts, prosphilés): ‘Lovely’ occurs only 4 t. In
2S 1 2 it is the tr of ’ahébh, ‘to be loved” (‘Saul
and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant [AVm
“sweet’’] in their lives’), where it seems to mean
“loving”? or “lovable.”? Two other words are so
tr? in the OT: mahmadh, ‘‘desire,” a ‘desirable
thing” (Cant 5 16, ‘He is altogether lovely,” that
is, “lovable,” ‘to be desired,” lit. “all of him lova-
bleness,”” or ‘‘desirableness’’); ‘dghabhim “loves,”
or “charms” (Ezk 33 32, ‘“‘Thou art unto them as
a very lovely song,’’ AVm ‘‘a song of loves,” RVm
“a love-song’’; in ver 31 the same word is tr?
“much love,” AVm. “They make loves or jests’’);
in Phil 4 8 we have prosphilés, ‘‘very lovely,” or
‘Jovable,’”’ ‘‘whatsoever things are lovely.”

: W. L. WaLKER

LOVER, luv’ér (AMIN, ’Ghébh, ANN, ’Ghebh): In
the OT ’éhébh, from ’ahébh, “‘to love,”’ is sometimes
“lover” in the sense of “friend,” in the older Eng.
sense of the word (1 K 6 1, “Hiram was ever
a lover of David’; Ps 38 11; 88 18; Lam 1 2);
more frequently it has the meaning of “lover” in
the special sense, sometimes in the evil sense of the
word (Jer 22 20.22; 30 14; Ezk 16 33.36f, etc;
Hos 2 5.7.10, etc); ‘aghabh, “to love” (Jer 4 30),
ré* “companion” (Jer 3 1), and ’éhabhim, “loves’’
(Hos 8 9), are also tr? “lovers’’ in this sense.

In the NT the simple word “‘lover’’ does not oceur,
but we have various compound words, philétheos
“lover of God” (2 Tim 3 4); phildgathos, “lover of
good,” and philézenos, “lover of hospitality’ (Tit
1 8); philautos, “lover of self” (2 Tim 3 2); philé-
donos, “lover of pleasure” (2 Tim 3 4).

In RV we have, for “a lover of hospitality” (Tit
1 8), “given to”; for “covetous” (Lk 16 14; 2
Tim 3 2), “lovers of money’; for “not covetous”
(L Tim 3 3), “no lover of money”; for ‘‘despisers
of them that are good” (2 Tim 3 3), “no lovers of
good.” W. L. Waker


LOVES, luvz (Ps 46 1, title).


LOVINGKINDNESS, luv-ing-kind’nes (10m,
hesedh): “Lovingkindness” in AV always represents
this word (30 t), but of hesedh there are many other
renderings, e.g. “mercy” (frequently), ‘kindness’’
(38), “goodness” (12). The word is derived from
hasadh, meaning, perhaps, “to bend or bow oneself,”’
“to incline oneself”; hence “to be gracious or mer-
ciful”’ ERV has not many changes, but in ARV
‘“fovingkindness” is invariably employed when
hesedh is used of God, and, as a rule, “kindness”
when it is used of man, asin Gen 21 23; Jgs 1 24
(AV ‘mercy,’ RV “deal kindly”); Ruth 3 10;
2 Ch 32 32; 35 26 (AV “goodness,” m ‘Heb
kindness,”’ RV “good deeds”); Job 6 14, ete. Of
the uses of the word as on man’s part toward God,
the only occurrences are: Jer 2 2, “I remember
for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine
espousals,” etc; Hos 6 4.6, “Your goodness [RVm
“or kindness”] is as a morning cloud,’ “I desire
goodness [AV “mercy,” RVm “kindness” ], and not
sacrifice,’ which last passage may denote kindness
as toward man.

When used of God hesedh denotes, in general, ‘the
Divine Love condescending to His creatures, more
esp. to sinners, in unmerited kindness” (Delitzsch).
It is frequently associated with forgiveness, and is
practically equivalent to “mercy” or ‘“mercifulness”’
(Ex 20 6), “showing lovingkindness [ERV “mercy”
unto thousands of them that love me’; 34 6f,


See Psaums.


“slow to anger, and abundant in lovingkindness
[ERV “‘plenteousin mercy”’]’’; [ver7] “keeping loving-
kindness [ERV “mercy’’] for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin’’ (cf Nu 14 18);
Mie 7 18, “He retaineth not his anger for ever,
because he delighteth in lovingkindness’” (ERV
“mercy’’). This quality in Jeh was one by which
He sought to bind His people to Himself. It is
greatly magnified in the OT, highly extolled and
gloried in, in many of the psalms (Ps 136 has the
constant refrain, ‘“For his lovingkindness endureth
forever”). In Dt 7 12 it is associated with the
covenant, and in2 S 7 15 with the covenant with
David (cf Isa 65 3, etc). It was something that
could always be relied on. :

Being such an essential and distinctive quality
of God, the prophets taught that it should also
characterize His people. It is part of the Divine
requirement in Mic 6 8, “to love kindness’ (cf
Zec 79, “Show kindness and compassion every
man to his brother’). The want of it in the nation
was a cause of Jeh’s controversy with them, e.g.
Hos 4 1, “There is no truth, nor goodness [hesedh]
[AV and ERV “mercy”, nor knowledge of God in
the land”; 12 6, “Therefore turn thou to thy God:
keep kindness [AV and ERV “‘mercy’’] and justice,
and wait for thy God continually.”’ Cheyne (#B)
regards hesedh as denoting paternal affection on
God’s part, answered by filial and loyal affection
and brotherly love on man’s part (philadelphia in
the NT).

The word “lovingkindness’’ does not occur in the
NT, but as its equivalents we have such terms as
“mercy’’ “goodness,’’ “kindness,” ‘‘brotherly love’’
(see special articles). W. L. WaLKER


LOW COUNTRY. See Spepaenan.
LOWLAND, lo/land (25%, shephélah; cf Arab.


a wy
slaw, sufdlat, “the lowest part”): The western
part of Pal, including the maritime plain and the
foothills. There has been an attempt to restrict
the term to the foothills, at least as far as the more
ancient documents are concerned, but there can be
little doubt that the maritime plain should be in-
cluded. RV has “lowland” throughout for sh¢phé-
lah, while AV has “low country” (2 Ch 26 10; 28
18), “low plains’ (1 Ch 27 28; 2 Ch 9 27),
“plain” (Jer 17 26; Ob ver 19; Zec 7 7), ‘vale’


or ‘valley’ (Dt 17; Josh 91; 10 40). See
Country; SHEPHELAH. Aurrep Ey Day
LOZON, ld’zon (Ac{év, Lozin): Head of a


family of Solomon’s servants (1 Esd 5 33); called
“Darkon” in Ezr 2 56; Neh 7 58.


LUBIM, li’bim (0°25, labhzm): A people men-
tioned in the OT (2 Ch 12 3; 16 8; Dnl 11 43;
Nah 3 9). In all these cases the word is tr? in
AV “Libyans”; in RV only in Dnl 11 43. The
people so named had their seat in North Africa,
W. of Egypt (cf Acts 2 10, “the parts of Libya
about Cyrene’). See Lisya. On three different
occasions the Libyans invaded Egypt, and at length,
in the 10th cent. BC, succeeded in founding an
Egyp dynasty under Suiswax (q.v.).


LUCAS, li’kas, 160’kas. In Philem ver 24 AV,
for “Luke” (RV). ;

LUCIFER, lii‘si-fér, 100’si-fér: The morning star,
an epithet of the planet Venus. See AstroLoey, I1.


LUCIUS, li’shi-us, li/shus (Actmos, Lodkios,
Acékvos, Levikios): A Rom consul who is said (1
Mace 16 16 ff) to have written a letter to Ptolemy


1935


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Love, Brotherly
Luke, Evangelist


Euergetes securing to Simon the high priest and
to the Jews the protection of Rome. As the
praenomen only of the consul is given, there has
been much discussion as to the person intended.
The weight of probability has been assigned to
Lucius Calpurnius Piso, who was one of the consuls
in 139-138 BC, the fact of his praenomen being
Cneius and not Lucius being explained by an error
in transcription and the fragmentary character of
the documents. The authority of the Romans not
being as yet thoroughly established in Asia, they
were naturally anxious to form alliances with the
kings of Egypt and with the Jews to keep Syria
in check. The imperfections that are generally
admitted in the transcription of the Rom letter
are not such as in any serious degree to invalidate
the authority of the narrative in 1 Macc.
J. HurcHison

LUCIUS (Actkwos, Lovkios): This name is men-
tioned twice:

(1) In the church at Antioch which sent out
Barnabas and Saul as its missionaries were several
prophets and teachers, among whom was Lucius
of Cyrene (Acts 13 1). He was probably one of
those ‘men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they
were come to Antioch, spake unto the Greeks also”
(Acts 11 20). It has been suggested that he is the
same as St. Luke, but this is merely conjecture.

(2) “Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my kins-
men” were among those who joined St. Paul in
saluting the Christians in Rome (Rom 16 21).
By “‘kinsmen’’ St. Paul means “Jews” (cf Rom 9 3;
16 11.21). This Lucius may have been the same
person as (1), but, as we have no more information
about either, we cannot determine this.

8. F. Hunter

LUCRE, lt’kér, loo’kér (723, beca'; képfos,
kérdos): Lit. “gain’’ (1 S 8 3; Tit 1 7), hence in
the NT always qualified by “filthy” (1 Tim 3 8,
‘not greedy of filthy lucre’”’ [alex poxepdys, aischroker-
dés]; so Tit 1 7). The advb. is found in 1 Pet 5 2
(see also Tit 1 11). In 1 Tim 3 3, RV changes
AV to ‘no lover of money” (a4¢ptAdpyupos, aphildr-
guros).


LUD, lud, LUDIM, la’dim, lood’im (79>, ladh,


mom, ladhim, pod, Ladhiyim, “Ludites’”’; Acts,
Lotid, Aovivelp, Loudieim; Tg Onk:


1. Two ae7d | ladha’é): In Gen 10 13 Ludim
Different appears as the firstborn of Mizraim
Nation- (Egypt), and in 10 22 Lud is the
alities fourth son of Shem. We have there-


fore to do with two different national-
ities bearing the same name, and not always easy
to distinguish. 1 Ch 1 11.17 simply repeat the
statements of Gen 10 13.22. In Isa 66 19 Lud is
mentioned with Tarshish and Pul (generally re-
garded as a mistake for Phut), Tubal, Javan, and
the isles. Accepting this emendation, the passage
agrees with Jer 46 9, where the Ludim are spoken
of with Kush and Phut as the allies of Egypt; and
also with Ezk 27 10, where Lud is referred to with
Persia and Put as soldiers of Tyre. Lud, again, is
mentioned with Ethiopia (Cush), Put, all the mingled
people, Cab, and the children of the land which is
in league (or, m “the land of the covenant”), which
were all to fall by the sword (Ezk 30 5).
Coming to the Semitic Lud, it is to be noted that
the Assyrians called Lydia Lu(d)du, and that the
mythical ancestor of the Lydians,


2. The according to Herodotus (i.7), was Ly-
Semitic dos, and their first king, Agros, was
Lud descended from Ninos and Belos, i.e.


Assyria and Babylonia. The appar-
ently Assyr colony in Cappadocia about 2000 BC,
who used the Bab script, may be regarded as sup-


porting this statement, and that there were other
colonies of the same nationality in the neighbor-
hood is implied by the fact that Assyro-Bab was
one of the official languages of the Hittite state
whose capital was Hattu or Boghaz-keui. On the
other hand when Gyges sent an embassy to ASSur-
bani-4pli of Assyria, Lu(djdu is described as a
country whose name had never before been heard,
and whose language was unknown. As, however,
the earlier kings of Assyria certainly warred in that
district, this statement has to be taken with caution.
Perhaps the name had changed in the interval,
owing to an immigration similar to that which
brought the Hittites into Asia Minor, and caused a
change in the language at the same time.
Naturally Lydia was not recognizable as Sem
in classical times. The existence of Lud in the
neighborhood of Egypt as well as in


3. Not Asia Minor finds parallels in the Syr-
Recogniz- ian Musri of the Assyr inscriptions
able as by the side of the Musgur which stood
Semitic for Egypt, and still more in the Cappa-
Later docian Cush (Kdasu) of certain Assyr

letters relating to horses, by the side
of the Cush (Kdésu likewise) which stands for


Ethiopia. ;
Everything points, therefore, to the Sem Lud and
Ludim being Lydia, and the identification may be
regarded as satisfactory. It is alto-
4, Egyptian gether otherwise with the Egyp Lud


Lud Not and Ludim, however, about which little
Recogniz- can be said at present. The reference
able to acity which seems to be Putu-yawan


in an inscription mentioning the 37th
year of Nebuchadrezzar, and apparently referring
to an expedition against Amasis, though it may
stand for “Grecian Phut,’”’ has very little bearing
upon the position of the Egyp Lud, esp. as the text
in which it occurs is very mutilated. One thing is
certain, however: the Hebrews regarded this Lud
and Ludim as being Hamitic, and not Semitic.
T. G. Pincuss
LUHITH, lo’hith, loo’hith, ASCENT OF (nba
mm, ma‘dléh ha-lahith): A place named in Isa
15 5; Jer 48 5. It is clearly identical with the
way, or descent, of Horonaim. Onom places Luhith
between Areopolis and Zoar. Some way is intended
by which fugitives from the Arabah could reach the
uplands of the Moabite plateau. Guthe thinks
it may be the road which leads from the district of
the ancient Zoar on the eastern shore of the Dead
Sea to the uplands through Wady Bene Hammédd.
Along this track ran also a Rom road. If Horo-
naim were the higher of the two places, this might
account for the way being called the ‘‘descent’”’ of
Horonaim as going down from that place, and the
“ascent” of Luhith as going up thence. Neither
place can as yet be identified with certainty.
EwIne


LUKE, look, lik, THE EVANGELIST: The
name Luke (Aoveds, Loukds) is apparently an abbre-
viation for <Aovxarés, Loukanés. Old
Lat MSS frequently have the words
Carta Lucanum as the title of the
Third Gospel. (But the form <Aov«os, Lowikios, is
also found in inscriptions synonymous with Aovxas;
ef Ramsay, Hxpos, December, 1912.)

It was a common fashion in the kotné to abbreviate

roper names, as it is today, for that matter (cf Amphias
rom Amphiatos, Antipas from Antipairos, Apollos from


Apollonias, Demas from Demetrios, Zenas from Zenodoros,
etc; and see Jannaris, Historical Gr Grammar, § 287).


Paul alone names Luke (Col 4 14; 2 Tim 4 11;
Philem ver 24). He does not mention his own name
in the Gospel or in the Acts. Cf the silence of
the Fourth Gospel concerning the name of the


1, Name


Luke, Evangelist
Luke, Gospel of


apostle John. There was no particular occasion
to mention Luke’s name in the Gospel, except as
the author, if he had so wished. The


2. Men- late legend that Luke was one of the
tioned Seventy sent out by Jesus (Epiphanius,
Three Hoaer., ii.51, 11) is pure conjecture,
Times by as is the story that Luke was one of
Name the Greeks who came to Philip for


an introduction to Jesus (Jn 12 20f),
or the companion of Cleopas in the walk to Em-
maus (Lk 24 13). The clear implication of Lk 1
2 is that Luke himself was not an eyewitness of
the ministry of Jesus.

In Col] 4 14 Luke is distinguished by Paul from
those “of the circumcision” (Aristarchus, Mark,

Jesus Justus). Epaphras, Luke, De-
3. A Gentile mas form the gentile group. He was

believed by the early Christian writers
to have come directly from heathendom to Chris-
tianity. He may or may not have been a Jewish
proselyte. His first appearance with Paul at Troas
(cf the ‘‘we’’-sections, Acts 16 10-12) is in har-
mony with this idea. The classic introduction to
the Gospel (1 1-4) shows that he was a man of
culture (cf Apollos and Paul). He was a man of
the schools, and his Greek has a literary flavor only
approached in the NT by Paul’s writings and by
the Ep. to the He.

His home is very uncertain. The text of D
(Codex Bezae) and several Latin authorities have

a ‘“we-’passage in Acts 11 27. If
4, Home this reading, the so-called B text of
Blass, is the original, then Luke was
at Antioch and may have been present at the great
event recorded in Acts 138 1f. But it is possible
that the Western text is an interpolation. At any
rate, it is not likely that Luke is the same person as
Lucius of Acts 138 1. Ramsay (St. Paul the Travel-
ler, 389f) thinks that Eusebius (HE, III, iv, 6)
does not mean to say that Luke was a native of
Antioch, but only that he had Antiochian family
connections. Jerome calls him Lucas medicus
Antiochensis. He certainly shows an interest in
Antioch (cf Acts 11 19-27; 13 1; 14 26; 15 22.
23.30.85; 18 22). Antioch, of course, played a
great part in the early work of Paul. Other stories
make Luke live in Alexandria and Achaia and
narrate that he died in Achaia or Bithynia. But
we know that he lived in Philippi for a consider-
able period. He first meets Paul at Troas just
before the vision of the Man from Macedonia
(Acts 16 10-12), and_a conversation with Paul
about the work in Macedonia may well have
been the human occasion of that vision and call.
Luke remains in Philippi when Paul and Silas leave
(Acts 16 40, “They .. . . departed”). He is here
when Paul comes back on his 8d tour bound
for Jerus (Acts 20 3-5). He shows also a natural
pride in the claims of Philippi to the primacy in
the province as against Amphipolis and Thessa-
lonica (Acts 16 12, “the first of the district’). On
the whole, then, we may consider Philippi as the
home of Luke, though he was probably a man who
had traveled a great deal, and may have been with
Paul in Galatia before coming to Troas. He may
have ministered to Paul in his sickness there (Gal
4 14). His later years were spent chiefly with Paul
away from Philippi (cf Acts 20 3-28.31, on the
way to Jerus, at Caesarea, the voyage to Rome and
in Rome).

Paul (Col 4 14) expressly calls him “the beloved
physician.’ He was Paul’s medical adviser, and
doubiless prolonged his life and res-
6. Physician cued him from many a serious illness.

He was a medical missionary, and prob-
ably kept up his general practice of medicine in
connection with his work in Rome (cf Zahn, Intro,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1936


III, 1). He probably practised medicine in Malta
(Acts 28 9f). He naturally shows his fondness
for medical terms in his books (ct Hobart, The
Medical Language of St. Luke; Harnack, NT
Studies: Luke the Physician, 175-98). Harnack
adds some examples to those given by Hobart, who
has overdone the matter in reality. See, further,
AcTs OF THE APOSTLES.
It is possible, even probable (see Souter’s article
in DCG), that in 2 Cor 8 18 “the brother” is
equivalent to “the brother” of Titus
6. Brother just mentioned, that is, “his brother.”
of Titus If so, we should know that Panl came
into contact with Luke at Philippi on
his way to Corinth during his 2d tour (cf also 2 Cor
12 18). It would thus be explained why in Acts
the name of Titus does not occur, since he is the
brother of Luke the author of the book.
If the reading of D in Acts 11 27f is correct,
Luke met Paul at Antioch before the Ist missionary
tour. Otherwise it may not have been
7. Connec- till Troas on the 2d tour. But he is
tion with the more or less constant companion
Paul of Paul from Philippi on the return
: to Jerns on the 3d tour till the 2 years
in Rome at the close of the Acts. He was appar-
ently not with Paul when Phil (2 20) was written,
though, as we have seen, he was with Paul in Rome
when he wrote Col and Philem. He was Paul’s
sole companion for a while during the 2d Rom
imprisonment (2 Tim 411). His devotion to
Paul in this time of peril is beautiful.
For the proof of the Lukan authorship of the Acts
see Acts or THE Aposties. For the discussion
of the Lukan authorship of the Gospel


8. Author with his name, see Luke, Gospen or.
of Both Our interest in him is largely due to
Gospel this fact and to his relations with Paul.
and Acts The Christian world owes him a great


. debt for his literary productions in the
interest of the gospel.
One legend regarding Lukeis that he was a painter.
Plummer (Comm. on Luke, xxif) thinks that the
legend is older than is sometimes sup-
9. Legends posed and that it has a strong ele-
_ ,, ment of truth. Itis true that he has
drawn vivid scenes with his pen. The early artists
were esp. fond of painting scenes from the Gospel
of Lk. The allegorical figure of the ox or calf in
Ezk 1 and Rev 4 has been applied to Luke’s
Gospel.
, LiTERaTURE.—Bible dicts., comms., lives of Paul,
intros. See also Harnack, ‘‘Lukas, der Arzt, der Ver-
fasser’’ (1906); NT Studies: Luke the Physician (1907);
Ramsay, Luke the Physician (1908); Selwyn, Si. Luke
the Prophet (1901); Hobart, The Medical Language of St.
Luke (1882); Ramsay, Was Christ Born at Bethlehem?


A Study in the Credibility of St. Luke (1898); Mac-
lachlan, St. John, Evangelist and ine nia


A. T. Ropertson
LUKE, THE GOSPEL OF:


Text |
. Canonicity
. Authorship
Sources
. Credibility
. Characteristics
Date

8. Analysis
LireERATURE


The five primary uncials (8, A, B, C, D) are the
chief witnesses for the text of Luke’s Gospel. This
group is reinforced by L, A and the

1. Text Freer (Detroit) MS; R, T, X and =
_ , are also valuable in fragments. The
other uncials are of secoridary value. The Lat,
Egyp and Syr VSS are also of went importance.
There are 4 Lat VSS (African, European, Italian,
Vulg), 3 Egyp (Memphitic, Sahidic, Bohairic), 5
Syr (Curetonian, Sinaitic, Peshitto, Harclean,


NID CU 09 bo et


1937


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


‘


Luke, Evangelist
Luke, Gospel of


Palestinian or Jerusalem). Many of the cursive
(minuscule) MSS are also of considerable worth, as
are some of the quotations from the Fathers.

Blass, Philology of the Gospels (1898), has advanced
the theory of two recensions of this Gospel (a louger and
a shorter), such as he holds to be true of Acts. In the
case of Acts, the theory has won some acceptance (see
Acts oF THs Apostizs), hut that is not true of the Gos-
pel to any extent. The Western text of the Gospel Is the
shorter text, while in Acts it is the longer text. In both
iustances Blass holds that the shorter text was issued
after the longer and orlglnal text. His idea is that Luke
himself revised and Issued the shorter text. In itself
this is, of course, possible, since the hooks are hoth ad-
dressed to an individual, Theophilus. The other edition
may have been meant’ for others. WH explain the
omission in the Western text of the Gospel as '‘ Western
non-interpolations,'' and often hold them to be the true
text. As samples one may note Lk 10 41; 12 19; 24
36.40.42, where the Western text is the shorter text. This
is not always true, however, for in6 2ff D has the famous
passage about the man working on the Sabbath, which
the other documents do not give. In Lk 3 22, D has
the reading of Ps 2 7 (‘‘Thou art my Son; this day I
have begotten thee”) for the usual text. Zahn (Intro,
III, 38) accepts this as the true text. There is no douht
of the interest and value of the Western readings in Lk,
but it cannot be said that Blass has carried his point here.
The peculiar mutilation of the Gospel by Marcion has
an interest of its own.

Plummer (Comm. on Lk, Ixxx) says: “In the
second half of the 2d cent. this Gospel is recognized

as authentic and authoritative; and
2. Canon- it is impossible to show that it had not
icity been thus recognized at a very much

earlier date.”? On the other hand,
Schmiedel (FB) says: ‘This ‘tradition,’ however,
cannot be traced farther back than toward the end
of the 2d cent. (Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of
Alexandria and the Muratorian Fragment); there
is no sound basis for the contention of Zahn (II,
175) that the existence of the tradition can also be
found as early as in Marcion, because that writer,
from his aversion to the Third Gospel (which never-
theless was the only one he admitted into his col-
lection—with alterations it is true) omitted the
expression of honor applied to Luke in Col 4 14.”
Here the two views are well stated. Schmiedel
shows dogmatic bias and prejudice against Lk.
Jilicher, however, frankly admits (Intro, 330) that
“the ancients were universally agreed that the writer
was that Luke, disciple of Paul, who is mentioned
in Philem ver 24; 2 Tim 4 11, and called ‘the
physician’ in Col 4 14; presumably a native of
Antioch.” This statement bears more directly on
the question of authorship than of canonicity, but
it is a good retort to the rather cavalier tone of
Schmiedel, who is reluctant to admit the facts.
The recognition of the Third Gospel in the Mura-
torian Canon (170 AD) is a fact of much signifi-
cance. It was used in Tatian’s Diatessaron (ec 170
AD) as one of the four recognized Gospels (cf
Hemphill, Diatessaron_of Tatian, 3 ff). The fact
that, Marcion (140 AD) mutilated this Gospel to
suit his theology and thus used it is even more sig-
nificant (cf Sanday, Gospels in the 2d Cent., App.).
Other heretics like the Valentinians (cf Lightfoot,
Bib. Essays, 5-7) made use of it, and Heracleon (cf
Clem. Alex., Strom., iv.9) wrote a comm. on it.
Irenaeus (end of 2d cent.) makes frequent quota-
tions from this Gospel. He argues that there could
be only “four” Gospels because of the four points
of the compass—an absurd argument, to be sure,
but a powerful testimony to the general acceptance
of this Gospel along with the other three. It is
needless to appeal to the presence of the Third
Gospel in the Curetonian Syr, the Sinaitic Syr, the
African Lat—VSS that date to the 2d cent., not to
mention the probability of the early date of the
Memphitie (Coptic) VSS. Examples of the early
use of this Gospel occur in various writings of the
2d cent.,as in Justin Martyr (150 AD), the Test.
XII P (c 140 AD), Celsus (¢ AD 160), the Gospel


of Peter (2d cent.), the Ep. of the Church of Lyons
and Vienne (177 AD), probably also Did. (2d cent.),
Clement of Alexandria (190-202 AD), Tertullian
(190-220 AD). It is doubtful about Clement of
Rome, Ignatius, Polycarp; and the Ep. of Barna-
bas seems to make no use of the Third Gospel.
But Clement of Rome, Ignatius and Polycarp
quote Acts. But surely the general use and ac-
ceptance of the Third Gospel in the early 2d cent.
is beyond reasonable donbt. It is not easy to de-
cide when the actual use began, because we have
so little data from the Ist cent. (cf Plummer, Comm.,
Ixxiti).

The fact that the author was not an apostle affected
the order of the book in some lists. ost MSS and
VSS have the common order of today, but the Western
order (Mt, Jn, Lk, Mk) is given by D, many Old Lat MSS,
the Gothic VS, the Apos Const. The object was prob-
ably to place the books by apostles together and first.
The Old Lat k has Lk second (Ju, Lk, Mk, Mt), while


the Curetonian Syr has Lk last of the four. ‘he cur-
sives 90 and 399 also have Lk second.


The first writers who definitely name Luke as the
author of the Third Gospel belong to the end of


the 2d cent. They are the Canon of
3. Author- Muratori (possibly by Hippolytus),
ship Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alex-


andria. We have already seen that

Jilicher (Intro, 330) admits that the ancients uni-
versally agreed that Luke wrote the Third Gospel.
In the early part of the 2d cent. the writers did not,
as a rule, give the names of the authors of the Gos-
pels quoted by them. It is not fair, therefore, to
use their silence on this point as proof either
of their ignorance of the author or of denial of
Luke’s authorship. Jilicher, for instance, says
(Intro, 330): ‘There is no tradition worthy of the
name concerning Luke, whom Papias did not men-
tion, or at any rate did not know.”’ But we owe
to Eusebius all the fragments that we have pre-
served from the writings of Papias. Our ignorance
of Papias can hardly be charged up tohim. Plum-
mer (Comm., xii) says that nothing in Bib.
criticism is more certain than the fact that Luke
wrote the Third Gospel. On the other hand,
Jiilicher (/niro, 331) is not willing to let it go as
easily as that. He demands appeal to Acts, and
there (ib, 447) he denies the Lukan authorship save
as to the “we” sections. J. Weiss (Die Schriften
des Newen Testaments; das Lukas Evang., 1906,
378) admits that but for Acts no sufficient reason
would exist for denying the authorship of the Third
Gospel to Luke, the disciple of Paul. A Pauline
oint of view in this Gospel is admitted generally.
any modern critics take it for granted that the
Lukan authorship of Acts is disproved, and hence
that of the Gospel likewise falls by the way. So
argue Baur, Clemen, De Wette, Hausrath, Hilgen-
feld, Holtzmann, Jiilicher, Pfleiderer, Schiirer,
Spitta, von Soden, J. Weiss, Weizsacker, Zeller.
Men like Blass, Credner, Harnack, Hawkins,
Hobart, Klostermann, Plummer, Ramsay, Renan,
Vogel, Zahn, stand by the tradition of Lukan
authorship, but Harnack is almost irritated (Luke
the Physician, 1907, 6), since ‘the indefensibility
of the tradition is regarded as being so clearly estab-
lished that nowadays it is thought scarcely worth
while to reprove this indefensibility, or even to
notice the arguments of conservative opponents.”
Harnack proceeds to make a plea for a hearing.
Jacobus (Standard Bible Dict.) admits that ‘Acts
tells us nothing more of the author than does the
Gospel.” That is true so far as express mention is
concerned, but not so far as natural implication
goes. It is true that the place to begin the dis-
cussion of the Lukan authorship of the Gospel is
Acts. For detailed discussion of the proof that
Luke wrote Acts, see Acts or THE AposTLEs. It is


Luke, Gospel of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1938


there shown that the line of argument which has
convinced Harnack, the leader of the liberal criti-
cism of Germany, ought to convince any open-
minded critic. It means a good deal when Harnack
(Luke the Physician, 14) says: “I subscribe to the
words of Zahn (Hint, 1, 427): ‘Hobart has proved
for everyone who can at all appreciate proof
that the author of the Lukan work was a man
practised in the scientific language of Gr medicine
—in short, a Gr physician.’”” It is here assumed
that the line of argument pursued in the art. on
Acts oF THE APposTLEs is conclusive. If so, little
remains to be done in the way of special proof for
the Gospel. The author of Acts specifically refers
(Acts 1 1) to a former treatise which was likewise
addressed to Theophilus. This we find to be the
case with the Gospel passing under the name of
Luke (1.4). The critics who admit the Lukan
authorship of Acts and deny the Lukan author-
ship of the Gospel are hardly worth considering.

It is, therefore, largely a work of supererogation to
give at length the proof from internal grounds that Luke
wrote the Gospel, after heing convinced ahout Acts.
Still it may be worth while to sketch in outline the line
of argument, even though it is very simple. Plummer
(Comm., x—xvii) argues three propositions: ‘‘(1) The
author of the Third Gospel is the author of the Acts.
(2) The author of Acts was a companion of Paul. (3)
This companion was St. Luke.'' Harnack (The Acts af
.the Apostles, 1909) has argued with great minuteness and
skill the theory that the same linguistic peculiarities
eccur in_all portions of Acts, including the ‘ we-'"sec-
tions. He accepts the facts set forth by Hawkins
(Horae Synopticae) and adds others. He agrees, there-
fore, that the author of Acts was a companion of Paul.
Harnack is convinced by the exhaustive lahors of Hohart
(Medical Language of St. Luke) that this author was a
Bhystetan, as we know Luke to have heen (Col 4 14).

e shows this to he true of the author of Acts hy the
use of ‘‘us” in Acts 28 10, showing that the author of
Acts received honors along with Paul, prohahly hecause
he practised medicine and treated many (cf Harnack, Luke
the Physician, 151). These medical terms occur in the
Gospel of Lk also, and the same poor at linguistic style
is found in both the Gospel and Acts. Hawkins has
made a careful study of likenesses and variations in style
in these two books (cf Horae Synopticae, 15-25, 174-89).
The argument is as conclusive as such a line of proof can
be expected to he. For further discussion see Ramsay,
Luke the Physician, 1908, 1-68; Zahn, Intro, III, 160 ff.
There are no phenomena in the Gospel hostile to this
position save the Sem character of chs 1 and 2 (barring
the classical introduction 1 1-4). Luke, though a
Gentile, has in these chapters the most Sem narrative in
the NT. But the explanation is ohvious. He is here
using Sem material (either oral or written), and has with
true artistic skill preserved the tone of the original. To
a certain extent the same thing is true of the opening
chapters of Acts.


The synoptic problem (see Gospris, Synoptic)

remains the most difficult one in the realm of NT

criticism. But the Gospel of Lk

4, Sources yields on the whole more satisfactory
results than is yet true of Mt.

(1) Unity—If the Lukan authorship of the book
is accepted, there remains no serious doubt concern-
ing the unity and integrity of the Gospel. The
abridgment of Luke’s Gospel used by Marcion does
not discredit those portions of the Gospel omitted
hy him. They are omitted for doctrinal reasons
(cf Sanday, Gospels in the 2d Cent., ch viii). His
readings are of interest from the viewpoint of tex-
tual criticism, as are the quotations of other early
writers, but his edition does not seriously challenge
the value of Luke’s work.

(2) Luke’s method—Inke has announced his
methods of work in a most classic introduction (1
1-4). Here we catch a glimpse of the author’s per-
sonality. That is not possible in Mk nor in Mt,
and only indirectly in passing shadows in the Fourth
Gospel. But here the author frankly takes the
reader into his confidence and discloses his stand-
point and qualifications for the great task. He
writes as a contemporary about the recent past.
always the most difficult history to interpret and
often the most interesting. He speaks of “those


matters which have heen fulfilled among us,” in


our time. He does not himself claim to have been
an eyewitness of ‘“‘those matters.” As we know
already, Luke was a Gentile and apparently never
saw Jesus in the flesh. He occupies thus a position
outside of the great events which he is to record.
He does not disguise his intense interest in the
narrative, but he claims the historical spirit. He
wishes to assure Theophilus of “the certainty con-
cerning the things wherein thou wast instructed.”
He claims to have investigated “the course of all
things accurately from the first,” just as the true
historian would. He thus implies that some of the
attempts made had been fragmentary at any rate,
and to that extent inaccurate. He has also pro-
duced an “orderly” narrative by which Theophilus
may gain a just conception of the historical progress
of the events connected with the life of Jesus of
Nazareth. The fact that ‘many have taken in
hand to draw up a@ narrative concerning those
matters’ does not deter Luke from his task. The
rather he is stirred thereby (‘It seemed good to me
also’’) to give his interpretation of the life and work
of Jesus as the result of his researches. He stands
not farther away than one generation from the
death of Jesus. He has the keen interest natural
to a cultured follower of Jesus in the origin of what
had become a great world-movement. He is able
to get at the facts because he has had intercourse
with eyewitnesses of Jesus and His work, ‘even as
they delivered them unto us, who from the begin-
ning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word.”
Luke had abundant opportunity during the two
years at Caesarea with Paul (Acts 24-26) to make
careful and extended investigations. Many of the
personal followers of Jesus were still living (1 Cor
15 It was a golden opportunity for Luke’s
purpose. He had also the written narratives which
others (“many”) had already drawn up. We are,
then, to expect in Luke’s Gospel a book closely akin
to Acts in style and plan, with the historian’s love
of accuracy and order, with the author’s own con-
tribution in the assimilation and use of this oral and
written material. One would not expect in such
a writer slavish copying, but intelligent blending of
the material into an artistic whole.

(8) The Aramaic infancy narrative—The very
first section in this Gospel (1 5—2 52) illustrates
Luke’s fidelity in the use of his material. Well-
hausen drops these two chapters from his edition
of Luke’s Gospel as not worthy of consideration.
That is conjectural criticism rim mad and is not
to be justified by the example of Marcion, who be-
gins with ch 4. Wright (Gospel acc. to St. Luke in
Gr, 1900, viii f; s.v. ‘“‘Luke’s Gospel,” DCG) holds
that this section was the last to he added to the
Gospel though he holds that it comes from Luke.
It may be said in passing that Wright is a stout
advocate for the oral source for all of Luke’s Gospel.
He still holds out against the “two-document” or
any document theory. However, he claims rightly
that Luke’s information for these two chapters was
private. This material did not form part of the
current oral Gospel. In Mt the narrative of the
birth of Jesus is given from the standpoint of Joseph,
and Mary is kept in the background, according to
Eastern feeling (Wright). But in Lk the story is
told from Mary’s point of view. Luke may, indeed,
have seen Mary herself in the years 57-59 AD (or
58-60). He could easily have seen some of Mary’s
intimate friends who knew the real facts in the case.
The facts were expressly said to have heen kept in
Mary’s heart. She would tell only to sympathetic
ears (cf Ramsay, Was Christ Born at Bethlehem?
74f). It is not possible to discredit Luke’s narra-
tive of the Virgin Birth on a priori grounds (ef Orr,
The Virgin Birth of Christ, 1907; Sweet, Birth


1939


and Infancy of Jesus Christ, 1906). The curious
Sem flavor of this narrative argues strongly for its
genuineness, since Luke was a Greek. We do not
know whether Luke knew Aram. or not. That
was possible, since he spent these 2 years in Pal.
We do not know whether this information came to
him in written form (note esp. the hymns of Mary
and of Zacharias) or in oral tradition. But it is
hardly possible to credit a Greek with the invention
of these birth-narratives and poems which ring so
true to the soil and the Heb life. Immediately
after Luke’s statement about historical research
comes the narrative of the birth of Jesus. Jt is the
first illustration of his work on his sources.

(4) Luke's relation to Mark’s Gospel.—Luke
knew Mark in Rome (Col 4 10.14; Philem ver 24).
He may have met him in Pal also. Had he seen
Mark’s Gospel when he wrote his own? Was it
one of the “many” narratives that came under
Luke’s eye? Wright (cf DCG) denies that Luke
had our Mk. He admits that he may have had an
Urmarkus or proto-Mk which he heard in oral form,
but not the present (written) Gospel of Mk. He
thinks that this can best be accounted for by the
fact that out of 223 sections in Mk there are 54 not
in Lk. But most modern critics have come to the
conclusion that both Matthew and Luke had Mk
before them as well as other sources. Matthew, if
he used Mk, in the early chapters, followed a topical
arrangement of his material, combining Mk with the
other source or sources. But Luke has followed the
order of Mk very closely in this part and indeed
throughout. Luke has a special problem in 9 51—
19 27, but the broad general outline follows that of
Mk. But it cannot be said that Luke made a
slavish use of Mk, if he had this Gospel before him.
He gives his own touch to each incident and selects
what best suits his purpose. It is not possible for
us to tell always that motive, but it is idle to sup-
pose that Luke blindly recorded every incident
found in every document or every story that came
to his ears. He implies in his introduction that he
has made a selection out of the great mass of ma-
terial and has woven it into a coherent and pro-
gressive narrative. We may admit with Harnack
(New Testament Studies: Sayings of Jesus, xiii)
that the Markan problem “‘has been treated with
scientific thoroughness’ and that Luke had Mk
ag one of hissources. The parallel between Lk and
Mk in the narrative portion is easily seen in any
Harmony of the Gospels, like Broadus or Stevens
and Burton.


(5) Q (Quelle) or the Logia.—It is a matter of


more uncertainty when we come to the mass of mate-
rial common to Mt and Lk, but absent from Mk.
This is usually found in the discourses of Jesus.
The more generally accepted theory today is that
both Matthew and Luke made use of Mk and also
this collection of Logia called Q for short (Ger.
Quelle, “source”). But, while this theory may be
adopted as a working hypothesis, it cannot be
claimed that it is an established fact. Zahn (cf
Iniro) stoutly stands up for the real authorship of
the First Gospel of Matthew. Rev. Arthur Carr
(“Further Notes on the Synoptic Problem,” Expos,
January, 1911, 543-553) argues strongly for_the


early date and Matthaean authorship of the First,


Gospel. He says on the whole subject: “The
synoptic problem which has of late engaged the
speculation of some of our keenest and most labo-
rious students is still unsolved.” He even doubts
the priority of Mark’s Gospel. Wellhausen
(Hinleitung in die drei ersten Hvangelien, 73-89)
advocates the priority of Mark to Q. But Harnack
balances the problem of “Q and St. Mark” (Sayings
of Jesus, 193-233) and decides in favor of Q. In
any case, it is to be noted that the result of critical


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Luke, Gospel of


research into the value of Q is to put it quite on a
par with Mk. Harnack is quite impressed with
the originality and vivid reality of the matter in Q.
The material present in Q cannot be gauged so
accurately as that in Mk, since we have the Gospel
of Mk in our hands. Where both Mt and Lk give
material not found in Mk, it is concluded that this
isdrawn from Q. But it cannot be shown that Mat-
thew may not have used Q at some points and Lk
at still others independently. Besides Q may have
contained material not preserved either in Mt or Lk.
A careful and detailed comparison of the material
common to both Mt and Lk and absent from Mk
may be found in Hawkins, Horae Synopticae, 107-
13; Harnack, Sayings of Jesus, 127-82; Well-
hausen, Hinlettung, 66; Robertson, “Matthew” in
Bible for Home and School, 14-19. But, if it is
true that Luke made use of Q as of Mk, he was no
mere copyist. No solution of the synoptic prob-
lem can ever be obtained on the idea that the Gos-
pels are mere reproductions of previous documents.
There was freedom in the use of all the material,
both oral and written, and the writer gave his own
interpretation to the result. It was often a re-
statement in the author’s own language, not formal
quotation. Wright (DCG) ealls this editorial
element “editorial notes’”;that is, of course, often
true when the author makes comments on the
matters presented, but “ancient authors took im-
mense pains to reduce the rude chronicles which
they used, into literary form” (ib). The point of
all this is that a great deal of criticism of the Gospels
is attempting the impossible, for many of the vari-
ations cannot possibly be traced to any “source.”’
Wright (ib) puts it tersely again: “And if in St.
John’s Gospel it is more and more recognized that
the mind of the evangelist cast the utterances of
Our Lord into the peculiar form which they there
hold, the same process of redaction may be ob-
served in St. Luke, who comes nearest of the synop-
tists to the methods of St. John.” As a matter of
fact, this is as it should be expected. The frank
recognition of this point of view marks progress
in synoptic criticism.

(6) Other sources.—There is a large block of ma-
terial in Lk (9 51—18 14) which is given by him
alone. There are various sayings like some re-
pecs by Matthew (or Mark) in other connections.

ome of the incidents are similar to some given
elsewhere by Matthew and Mark. There are
various theories concerning this position of Lk.
Some crities hold that Luke has here put a mass of
material which he had left over, so to speak, and
which he did not know where to locate, without any
notion of order. Against this theory 1s the express
statement of Luke that he wrote an orderly narra-
tive (1 3f). One is disposed to credit Luke’s own
interpretation unless the facts oppose it. It is
common for traveling preachers, as was Jesus, to
have similar experiences in different parts of the
country and to repeat their favorite sayings. So
teachers repeat many of their sayings each year to
different classes. Indeed, it is just in this section
of Lk that the best eu of his Gospel are found
(the parables of the Good Samaritan, the Prodigal
Son, the Pharisee and the Publican, etc). “The
more we consider this collection, the more we are
entranced with it. It is the very cream of the
Gospel, and yet (strange to say) it is peculiar to
Luke” (Wright, DCG). Wright calls this “a Paul-
ine collection,” not because Paul is responsible for
the material, but because the chapters breathe the
cosmopolitan spirit of Paul. That is true, but
Jesus loved the whole world. This side of the teach-
ing of Jesus may have appealed to Luke powerfully
because of its reflection in Paul. Matthew’s Gos-
pel was more narrowly Jewish in its outlook, and


ree Gospel of TH INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1940


Mark’s had fewer of the sayings of Christ. But it
is to be noted that this special material in Lk ex-
tends more or less all through the Gospel. Burton
(Some Principles of Literary Criticism and Their
Application to the Synoptic Problem, 49) calls this
special material in Lk 9 51—18 14 “the Peraean
document.’? We do not know, of course, anything
of the actual source of this material. Whether
Luke has here followed one or more documents,
he has, as elsewhere, given his own stamp to the
whole, while preserving in a marvelous way the
spirit of Jesus. (For the possible parallel between
this section of Lk and Jn see Robertson’s “Notes
to Broadus, Harmony of the Gospels, 249-52.) For
the earlier material in Lk not found elsewhere (3
7-15.17.18; 4 2b-13 [14.15].16-30; 6 1-11; 6 21-
49; 7 1—8 3) Burton suggests “the Galilean docu-
ment” as the source. Wright, on the other hand
proposes “anonymous fragments” as the source of
Luke’s material not in the infancy narrative, nor
in Mk, nor in Q, nor in the “Pauline” or Peraean
document. At any rate, it is certain that Luke’s
own words of explanation should warn us against
drawing too narrow a line around the “sources’’
used byhim. His “many” may well have included
a dozen sources, or even more. But it may be
said, in a word, that all that criticism has been able
to learn on the subject has confirmed the statement
of Luke himself concerning his method of research
and his use of the material.

More fault has becn found with Luke as a his-
torian in Acts than in the Gospel. Harnack ( Acts

of the Aposiles) is not disposed to give
6. Credi- Luke full credit as a reliable historian.
bility But Ramsay (Luke the Physician, 5)

champions the reliability of Luke (cf
also St. Paul the Traveller; The Church in the Roman
Empire) against the skepticism of Harnack, which
is growing less, since in the Theol. Literaturzeitung
(July 7, 1906, 8. 4) he speaks well of Luke’s ability
to secure correct information. So in Luke the
Physician (121-45) Harnack urges that the possible
“instances of incredibility have been much exag-
gerated by critics.” He adds about Acts 6 36:
“Tt is also possible that there is a mistake in Jos”
(cf Chase, Credibility of the Book of the Acts of the
Apostles; see also Acts oF THE APOSTLES).

But the Gospel is not free from attack. The chief
matter in the Gospel of Lk which is challenged on _his-
torical grounds, apart from the birth-narratives, which
some critics treat as legendary, is the census in Lk 2
1ff. Critics, who in general have accepted Luke's
veracity, have sometimes admitted that here he fell into
error and coufused the census under Quirinius in 6~7
AD when Quirinius came, after the banishment of
Archelaus, to take a census and to collect taxes, much
to the indignatlon of the Jews (cf Acts 5 37; Jos, Ant,
XVIII, i). It was not known that Quirinius had been
governor of Syria before this time, nor was there any
other knowledge of a census under Augustus. The case
against Luke seemed strong. But Ramsay (Was Christ
Born at Bethlehem? 227 ff) shows that the inscription
at Tibur, as agreed by Mommsen and like authorities,
shows that Quirinius ‘twice governed Syria as legaius
of the divine Augustus."' He was concul. in 12 BC, so
that the first mission was after that date. Ramsay
shows also from the papyri that the 14-year cycle was
used for the Rom census (many census papers are known
from 20 AD on). He argues that the first one was insti-
tuted by Augustus in 8 BC. Herod, as a vassal king,
would naturally be allowed to conduct it in the Jewish
fashion, not the Rom, and it was probably delayed
several years in the provinces. Thus once more Luke


is vindicated in a remarkable way (see CuRONOLOOY OF
NT, I, 1, (2). ,


The Acts of the Apostles has come out of the
critical ordeal in a wonderful manner, so that
Luke’s credit as a historical writer is now very
high among those qualified to know the facts. He
has been tested and found correct on so many points
thatthe presumption is in his favor where he cannot
as yet be verified. Moffatt (Intro to the Lit. of the
NT, 265) finds Luke “more graphic than historical.”’


He was the most versatile of the Gospel writers.
He was a Greek, a Christian, a physician, a man of
travel, a man of world-outlook, sym-
6. Charac- pathetic, cultured, poetic, spiritual,
teristics artistic, high-minded. His Prologue
is the most classic piece of Gr in the
NT, but the rest of ch 1 and all of ch 2 are the most
Sem in tone. The breadth of his literary equip-
ment is thereby shown. He not only uses many
medical terms common to technical circles, but he
bas the physician’s interest in the sick and afflicted,
as shown in the large number of miracles of healing
narrated. His interest in the poor is not due to
Ebionitic prejudice against the rich, but to human
compassion for the distressed. His emphasis on the
human side of the work of Jesus is not due to Ebion-
itic denial of the Divinity of Jesus, but to his keen
appreciation of the richness of the human life of the
Son of God. His rich and varied vocabulary re-
veals a man who read and mingled with the best
life of his time. He wrote his books in the ver-
nacular, but the elevated vernacular of an educated
man touched with a distinct literary flavor. His
poetic temperament is shown in the preservation
of the beautiful hymns of the nativity and in the
wonderful parables of Jesus in chs 10, 15-18. They
are reported with rare grace and skill. Luke is
fond of showing Christ’s sympathy with women
and children, and he has more to say about prayer
than the authors of the other Gospels. His interest
in individuals is shown by the dedication of both
his books to Theophilus. His cosmopolitan sym-
pathies are natural in view of his training and in-
heritance, but part of it is doubtless due to his asso-
ciation with the apostle Paul. He comes to the
interpretation of Jesus from a world-standpoint
and does not have to overcome the Pharisaic limi-
tations incident to one reared in Pal. It is a
matter of rejoicing that we have this book, called
by Renan the most beautiful book in the world, as
a cultured Greek’s interpretation of the origin of
Christianity. He thus stands outside of the pale
of Judaism and can see more clearly the world-
relations and world-destiny of the new movement.
With Luke, Jesus is distinctly the world’s Saviour.
The accent on sin is human sin, not specifically
Jewish sin. John in his Gospel came in his old age
to look back upon the events in Judaea from a non-
Jewish standpoint. But he rose to the essentially
spiritual and eternal apprehension of Christ, rather
than extended his vision, as Luke did, to the cos-
mopolitan mission and message of Jesus, though
this did not escape John. The Gospel of Lk thus
has points of affinity with Paul, John and the
author of He in style and general standpoint. But
while Luke’s own style is manifest throughout, it
is not obtrusive. He hides himself behind the
wonderful portrait of Jesus which he has here drawn
in undying colors.
_ The extreme position of Baur and Zeller may be
dismissed at once. There is no reason for dating
the Gospel of Lk in the 2d cent. on the
7. Date ground that he used Marcion’s Gospel,
since it is now admitted all round that
Marcion made use of Lk. The supposed use of Jos
by Luke (see Acts or THE ApostuEs for discussion
and refutation) leads a goodly number of radical
scholars (Hilgenfeld, Holsten, Holtzmann, Jiilicher,
Krenkel, Weizsicker, Wernle) to date the book at
the end of the Ist cent. This is still extreme, as
Harnack had already shown in his Chronologie der
alichristl. Litt., 1, 1897, 246-50. Any use of Jos
by Luke is highly improbable (see Plummer on Lk,
xxix). The Gospel was certainly written before Acts
(Acts 1 1) and while Paul was alive, if 1 Tim 5 18
be taken as a quotation from Lk 10 7, which is by no
means certain, however. Butitis true that the most


1941


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Luke, Gospel of


natural way to interpret the sudden close of Acts,
after 2 years in Rome (Acts 28 31), is the fact that
Luke finished the book at that time (Maclean, 1-
vol HDB). Moffatt (Historical NT, 273) calls
this early date “reactionary” and “extravagant.”’
But it is sup poried by Alford, Blass, Ebrard, Far-
rar, Gloag, Godet, Grau, Guericke, Hahn, Head-
lam, Hitzig, Hofmann, Hug, Keil Lange, Lumby,
Marshall, Nésgen, Oosterzee Resch, Riehm, Schaff,
Schanz, Thiersch, Tholuck, Wieseler, and Harnack
himself is now ready to join this goodly company.
He warns critics against too hasty a closing of the
chronological question (Acts of the Apostles, 291),
and admits that Acts was written ‘perhaps so early
as the beginning of the 7th decade of the 1st cent.”
[ib, 297], “the Acts (and therefore also the Gospel).”
In the Date of the Acts and the Synoptic Gospels (1911,
124) Harnack says: “It seems now to be established
beyond question that both books of this great his-
torical order were written while St. Paul was still
alive.” There is an intermediate date about 80 AD,
assigned by Adeney, Bartlett, Plummer, Sanday,
Weiss, Wright, on the ground that the investiga-
tions mentioned in Lk 1 1-4 describe the use of
narratives which could have been written only after
a long period of reflection. But that is not a valid
objection. There is no sound critical reason why
the Gospel of Mk, Q, the infancy narratives, and
all the other sources alluded to by this preface could
not have been in circulation in Pal by 55 AD.
Indeed, Allen writes in Expos T (July, 1910): “I
see no reason why such an original [Mark’s Gospel
in Aram.] should not have appeared before the year
50 AD.” The other objection to the early date
comes out of Lk 21 20, ‘“Jerus compassed with
armies’? as compared with “the abomination of
desolation” in Mk 13 14. The change is so specific
that it is held by some critics to be due to the fact
that Luke is writing after the destruction of Jerus.
But it is just as likely (Maclean) that Luke has
here interpreted the Hebraism of Mk for bis gentile
readers. Besides, as Plummer (p. xxxi) shows,
Luke in 21 5-36 does not record the fact that Jerus
was destroyed, nor does he change Christ’s “flee to
the mountains” to “Pella in North Peraea,”’ whither
the Christians actually fled. Besides, the fact that
Acts shows no acquaintance with Paul’s Epp. is
best explained on the assumption of the early date.
The question is thus practically settled in favor of
theearly date. The place of the writing isnot known.
The early date naturally falls in with Caesarea
(Blass, Michaelis, Thiersch), but there is little to
guide one.


(1) Prologue, 1 1-4.
(2) Infancy ead childhood of John and Jesus, 1 5—


8. Analysis Be aa a of Christ’s Ministry, 3 1


(4) Galilean Campaign, 4 14—9 6.
(5) Retirement from Galilee, 9 7-50.

(6) Later Judaean and Peraean Ministry, 9 51—19 28.
(7) Close of the Public Ministry in Jerusalem, 19 29—


21 37.

(8) The Dreadful End, chs 21-23.

(9) Resurrection of Christ, ch 24.

LireraTure.—See extended list of books at close of
art. on Acts oF THE APOSTLES; the extensive list of
Comms. Plummer’s Comm. on Lk can also be consulted.
After Plummer the best comms. on Luke’s Gospel are
Bruce, Ezpositor’s Gr Test.; Weiss’s Meyer Krit.-exeget.
Komm.; Godet; Holtzmann, Hand-Comm. Of the many
Intros to the NT, Zahn’s is the ahlest and most ex-
haustive (conservative) and Jtilicher’s is the fairest of
the radical school. The hest of the briefer ones is
Gregory’s Canon and Tezt_(1907). Special treatises de-
serving mention here are Blass, Philology of the Gospels
(1898); Ho. secundum Lukam (1897); Wellhausen, Das
Ev. Lukae (1904); Sense, Origin of the Third Gospel
(1901); Friedrich, Das Lukasevangelium und die A postel-
geschichte, Werke desselben Verfassers (1890); Harnack,
Luke the Physician (1907), and Sayings of Jesus (1908);
The Date of the Acts and the Synepde Gospels (1911);
Hawkins, Horae Synopticae (2d ed, 1909); ervey,
Authenticity of Luke (1892); Hobart, Medical Language of


St. Luke (1882); Litzinger, Die Entstehung des Lukasevan-
gelium und der Apostelgeschichte (1883); Ramsay, Was
Christ Born at Bethlehem? (1898) and Luke the Physician
1908); Resch, Das Kindheit-Evangelium nach Lukas und
atthdus; Selwyn, St. Luke the Prophet (1901); Vogel,
Zur Characteristik des Lukas nach Sprache und Stil (1897);
Weiss, Queilen des Lukasevangelium (1907); Wright, Syn-
opsis of the Gospels and his Gospel acc. to St. Luke in Gr


(1900)
A. T. Roperrson

LUNATIC(K), la’na-tik:

I. Epilepsy.—The Eng. word “lunatic,” which in
popular speech signifies a sufferer from any mental de-

rangement, whether periodic or chronic,
1. Incorrect other than congenital idiocy, appears
Translation in AV as a tr of the Gr word ceAnud-

fouat, selénidzomai, in the two pas-
sages where it occurs. In RV the word has very
properly been displaced by the strictly accurate
term “epileptic.”’? This change is justified not only
by the extra-Bib. usage (see Liddell and Scott, s.v.),
but clearly enough by Mt 17 15 (ef 4 24), where
epilepsy is circumstantially described.

The original meaning of the term seléniazomai,
“moon-struck,”’ is connected with the popular

belief, widespread and of strange per-
2. Original sistency, that the moon, in certain of
Meaning _its phases, is injurious to human beings,
esp. in the case of diseases of a periodic
or remittent character. There are no data by
which to determine whether, in the NT times, this
peculee word represented a living and active
elief or had passed into the state of usage in
which the original metaphor disappears, and the
word simply indicates the fact signified without
reference to the idea embodied in the etymology.
We still use the word ‘‘Iunatic’” to signify a person —
mentally diseased, although we have long since
ceased to believe in the moon’s influence in such
cases.

IL Madness.—The Bible designates “madness,”
or alienation of mind, by various terms, all of which
seem to be onomatopoetic. These various words
seem to be derived from the strange and fierce or
mournful cries uttered by the unfortunate victims
of this dread malady. In Dt 28 34 the word
“maddened” is 330, mshugga', part. of FIV,
shdgha' (ef also 1 8 21 15). With this corresponds
the word palvouat, mainomai, in the NT. In 18
21 13 (Heb 14) the word is a form of the vb. 557,
halal, which is also a derivative from the sound
indicated.

In certain cases, though by no means uniformly,
madness is ascribed to demon-possession (Lk 8 26f).
One is struck by the fact that mental derangement
occupies a very small place in Scripture.

Louis MatrHews SwEET

LURK, fark, LURKING-PLACE, ldrk’ing-plas:
“To lurk” means “to lie in wait,’’ usually with
intent to do harm (see Ps 17 12; Prov 1 11.18).

Lurking-place, a place of hiding, usually for the
purpose of murder. See1l S 23 23; Ps 10 8.


LUST (5 Heb and 5 Gr words are so rendered, viz.:
[1] WHI, nephesh, [2] MUIW, sherirath, [3] TINO,
ta’dwah, [4] WT, hamadh, [5] TR, ’awah; [1] em-
Ovpla, epithumia, [2] ASovh, hédoné, [3] éwimobéw,
epipothéd, [4] dpefis, drexis, [5] wabos, pdthos): The
word both as vb. and as subst. has a good and a bad
meaning. It probably meant at first a strong de-
sire, a craving, abnormal appetite, not only for physi-
cal but for spiritual satisfaction. It has come,
however, to be confined in its use almost entirely
to the bad sense. Some old tr® are not accepted
now, the word being used in connections which at
present seem almost irreverent. Shades of mean-
ing are learned from an examination of the Heb and
Gr originals.


Lute
Lysias


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1942


The subst. and vbs. are: (1) Nephesh, in Ex 15
9 and Ps 78 18 tr? “desire”; “My desire shall be
satisfied’; “by asking food according
1. The OT to their desire.” A strong but not
Use sensual sense. (2) Sh*riruth, meaning
“obstinacy,” evil imagination. Jeh
said (Ps 81 12), “TI let them go after the stnb-
bornness of their heart,” a wilful self-satisfaction.
(3) Ta’ dwah, “a delight,” “a longing satisfaction,”
and so it came to mean “sinful pleasure.” Tr¢in Ps
78 30, “that which they desired,” intensely longed
for, referring to Jeh’s provision of food in the
wilderness. Also in Nu 11 4 concerning “flesh to
eat,” it is said the multitude “Justed exceedingly,”
ie. ‘craved eagerly.” (4) Hamadh, the vb. mean-
ing “to delight in,” “greatly belove,” “covet,”
probably for evil purposes. The young man is
warned against the evil woman (Prov 6 25): ‘‘Lust
not after her beauty.’”’ Here the bad sense is
evident, for in the same connection are used such
expressions as “harlot,” “‘adulteress,’’ “evil woman.”
(5) ’Awah, meaning “greatly to desire,” long after,
with undue emphasis, with evil spirit though not
perhaps with impure thought. In Nu 11 34 refer-
ence is made to a place called kibhroth ha-ta’dwah,
“the graves of lust,’’ where ‘‘they buried the people
that lusted.” Ps 106 14 also refers to the Israelites
who “‘lusted exceedingly.” Tr¢in Dt 12 15.21 “de-
sire of thy soul’; 12 20; 14 26, ‘‘thy soul desireth.”’
These Dt passages evidently mean Just only in the
good sense.
As in the OT, so in the NT we find both mean-
ings of the word. (1) Hpithumia is used most fre-
quently, and means a longing for the
2, The NT unlawful, hence concupiscence, de-
Use sire, lust. The following references
hold the idea, not only of sinful desire
known as “fleshly,” “worldly,” as opposed to
“spiritual,’’ “heavenly,” “the will of man” as
opposed to “the will of God,” but also the sensual
desire connected with adultery, fornication; vb.
in Mt 6 28; Mk 419; Jn 8 44; Rom 1 24; 1
Cor 10 6; Gal 6 16.17.24; Tit 212; 1 Pet 1
14; 1 Jn 2 16f; Jude vs 16.18; Rev 18 14. (2)
Hédoné, delight in sensuality, hence wicked pleas-
ures; trd in Jas 4 1.3 “pleasures”: “Your pleasures
that war in your members’; “Ye ask amiss, that
ye may spend it in your pleasures” (AV “lusts”).
(3) Epipothed means to crave intensely the wrong
possession; tr? in Jas 45 “long [AV “‘Iusteth’’]
unto envying.” (4) Orezis, used in Rom 1 27,
from context evidently meaning “Just”’ in the worst
sense; tré “lust.” (5) Pathos, meaning “passion,”’
inordinate affection, with the idea in it of suffer-
ing; tr¢in 1 Thess 4 5 “passion of lust.”
Witiuram Epwarn Rarrety
LUTE, lat (523, nebdhel; thus RV; AV viol
[Isa 6 12]): Nebhel is rendered elsewhere by
“psaltery” or “viol.”’ The lute was originally an
Arab. instrument. It resembled a guitar, though
with a longer and more slender neck. The name is
derived from Arab. al’ood, with a of art. elided;
hence Italian liuto; Fr. luth. See Mustc.


LUZ (71>, luz): The Heb word means “almond
tree’ or “almond wood” (OHL, s.v.). It may also
mean “‘bone,” particularly a bone of the spine, and
might be applied to a rocky height supposed to
resemble a backbone (Lagarde, Uebersicht., 157 f).
Winckler explains it by Aram. laudh, “asylum,”
which might be suitably applied to a sanctuary (Ge-
schichte Israels). Cheyne (EB, s.v.) would derive it
by corruption from nyon , hdlucah, “strong [city].”

(1) This was the ancient name of Bethel (Gen
28 19; Jgs 1 23; cf Gen 36 6; 48 3; Josh 16 2;
18 13). It has been thought that Josh 16 2 con-


tradicts this, and that the two places were distinct.
Referring to Gen 28 19, we find that the name
Bethel was given to “the place,” ha-makom, i.e. “the
sanctuary,” probably “the place” (ver 11, Heb)
associated with the sacrifice of Abraham (12 8),
which lay to the E. of Bethel. Thenameof the city
ag distinguished from “the place” was Luz. As the
fame of the sanctuary grew, we may suppose, its
name overshadowed, and finally superseded, that
of the neighboring town. The memory of the
ancient nomenclature persisting among the people
sufficiently explains the allusions in the passages
cited.

(2) A Bethelite, the man who betrayed the city
into the hands of the children of Joseph, went into
the land of the Hittites, and there founded a city
which he called Luz, after the ancient name of his
native place (Jgs 1 26). No satisfactory identifi-
cation has been suggested. W. Ewine


LYCAONIA, lik-a-d’ni-a, li-ka-d’ni-a (Avraovia,
Lukaonia [Acts 14 6], Aveaowerl, Lukaonisti,
[Acts 14 11, “in the speech of Lycaonia’’]; Ly-
caonia is meant, according to the South Galatian
view, by the expression ryv Tadarechy xwepav, tin
Galatikén chéran, in Acts 18 23, and the incidents
in Acts 16 1-4 belong to L.): Was a country in the
central and southern part of Asia Minor whose
boundaries and extent varied at different periods.
In the time of Paul, it was bounded on the N. by
Galatia proper (but lay in the Rom province Gala-~
tia), on the E. by Cappadocia, on the S. by Cilicia
Tracheia, and on the W. by Pisidia and Phrygia.
The boundary of Phrygia and L. passed between
Iconium and Lystra (see Iconrum). L. consists of
a level plain, waterless and treeless, rising at its
southern fringe for some distance into the foothills
of Taurus, and broken on its eastern side by the
volcanic mass of Kara~-Dagh and by many smaller
hills. Strabo informs us that King Amyntas of
Galatia fed many flocks of sheep on the Lycaonian
plain. Much of the northern portion of L. has
been proved by recent discovery to have belonged
to the Rom emperors, who inherited the crown lands
of Amyntas.

In Acts 14 6 L. is summed up as consisting of
the cities of Lystra and Derbe and the district
(including many villages) lying around them.
This description refers to a particular division of L.,
which alone is mentioned in the Bible. In the time
of Paul, L. consisted of two parts, a western and
an eastern. The western part was a “region” or
subdivision of the Rom province Galatia; the
eastern was called Lycaonia Antiochiana, after
Antiochus of Commagene under whom it had been
placed in 387_AD. This non-Rom portion was
traversed by Paul; but nothing is recorded of his
journey through it (see DerBE). It included the
important city of Laranda; and when L. is described
as consisting of the cities of Lystra and Derbe and
the surrounding district, the writer is clearly think-
ing only of the western portion of L., which lay in,
and formed a “region” of, the province Galatia.
This is the tract of country which is meant in Acts
18 23, where it is called the “region” of Galatia,
and placed side by side with Phrygia, another region
of Galatia. The province Galatia was divided into
districts technically known as “regions,” and Rom
L. is called the ‘region of Galatia” in implied con-
trast with Antiochian L., which lay outside the
Rom province. Of the language of L. (see Lysrra)
nothing survives except some personal and place-
names, which are discussed in Kretschmar’s Ein-
lettung in die Gesch. der griech. Sprache.

LitEeRaTURS.—Ramsay, ist. : x
(Intro); Sterrett, Wolfe Bapedition (accdcGaee

W. M. Caner


1943


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lute
Lysias


LYCIA, lish’i-a (Av«la, Lukia): An ancient
country forming the southeast portion of Asia
Minor. The surface of Lycia is exceedingly rugged,
and its lofty mountains rise almost directly from the
sea. Over them several trade routes or passes lead
from the coast to the interior. Down the mountain
sides rush many small rivers, of which the Xanthus
is the chief. The history of L., like that of the
neighboring countries, forms a part of the history
of Asia Minor. Successively it was in the pos-
session of the Persians, of Alexander the Great, of
the Seleucid kings and of the Ptolemies. In 188
BC it fell into the hands of the Romans, who gave
it to the island of Rhodes; 20 years later, because
of its loyalty to Rome, it became free and inde-
pendent (1 Mace 16 23). In 53 AD, during the
reign of the emperor Claudius, it became a Rom
province, and in 74 AD it was united with Pam-
phylia to form a double province over which a Rom
governor presided.

At different times during the history of L., there
were about 100 places which issued coins of their
own. Pliny speaks of 70 cities which had existed
there, but in his age there were but 36. Of these,
Patara, Myra and Phaselis are of interest to Bible
students. From the coast city of Patara, accord-
ing to Acts 21 1f, Paul took ship for Phoenicia.
It was a place celebrated not only as a trading-
center, and a port of entry to the interior, but as
the seat of the oracle of Apollo, and the birthplace
of St. Nicholas. Myra, though over 2 miles from the
coast, possessed a harbor, and was also a trading-
center. Here, according to Acts 27 5-38, Paul
found a corn ship from Alexandria. For some time
Myra was the capital of the Rom province; to
Christendom it is esp. known as the home of St.
Nicholas, who was its bishop and the patron saint
of the sailors along the coast. Phaselis, on the
ponder of Pamphylia, was also the home of the

ishop.

L. was a stopping-place, rather than the scene
of the active work of Paul, and therefore it figures
little in the earliest history of Christianity. For
a long time the people strongly opposed the intro-
duction of a strange religion, and in 312 AD they
even petitioned the Rom emperor Maximin against
it. A portion of the petition has been discovered
at Arykander. E. J. Banxs


LYDDA, lid’a.


LYDIA, lid’i-a (Av8la, Ludia): An important
country in the western part of Asia Minor bounded
on the N. by Mysia, on the E. by Phrygia, on the
8. by Caria, and on the W. by the AegeanSea. Its
surface is rugged, but along the valleys between its
mountain ranges ran some of the most important
highwaysfrom the coast cities to the distant interior.
Of its many rivers the chief are the Cayster, the
Lower Hermus, the Cogamos, the Caicus and,
during 2 part of its course, the Maeander.

Lydia was an exceedingly ancient and powerful
kingdom whose history is composed chiefly of that
of its individual cities. In 546 BC it fell into the
hands of the Persians, and in 334 BC it became a
part of Alexander’s empire. After the death of
Alexander its possession was claimed by the kings
both of Pergamos and of Seleucia, but in 190 BC
it became the undisputed possession of the former
(1 Mace 8 8). With the death of Attalus III,
133 BC, it was transferred by the will of that king
to Rome, and L., which then became but a name,
formed, along with Caria, Mysia and Phrygia, a
part of the Rom province of Asia (see Asta). Chief
among its cities were Smyrna and Ephesus, two of
the most important in Asia Minor, and Smyrna is
still the largest and wealthiest city of that part of


See Lon.


_give heed to his teaching (‘“To open is the


Turkey. At Ephesus, the seat of the goddess
Diana, Paul remained longer than elsewhere in
Asia, and there his most important missionary
work was done (Acts 19). Hence L. figures promi-
nently in the early history of the church; it became
Christianized during the residence of the apostle
at Ephesus, or soon afterward (see also Lup).
E. J. Banxs

LYDIA, lid’i-a (Avdla, Ludia): The fem. of
Lydian, a native of Lydia, a large country on the
W. of Asia Minor, and the name of St. Paul’s first
convert in Europe. This name was a popular one
for women (cf Horace Odes 1.8; iii.9; vi.20), but
Ramsay thinks she ‘“‘was familiarly known in the
town by the ethnic that showed her origin”
(HDB, s.v. “Lydia”; ef St. Paul the Traveller,
214). It bas always been and is still a common
custom in the Orient to refer to one living in a
foreign land by employing the adj. which desig-
nates the nationality. Renan thinks it means
“the Lydian”; Thyatira is a city of Lydia. Lydia
was (1) living in Philippi, (2) of the city of Thya-
tira, (3) a seller of the purple-dyed garments from
her native town, (4) and ‘‘one that worshipped God.”
Her occupation shows her to have been a woman of
some capital. The phrase which describes her
religion (seboméné tén Theén) is the usual designa-
tion for a proselyte. She was in the habit of fre-
quenting a place of prayer by a riverside, a situation
convenient for the necessary ablutions required by
the Jewish worship, and there Paul and his com-
panions met her. After she had been listening to
St. Paul (Gr impf.), the Lord opened her heart y
art 0
God, to pay attention that of the woman,”’ Chry-
sostom). Her baptism and that of her household
followed. To prove her sincerity she besought the
missionaries to accept the hospitality of her home.
Her house probably became the center for the
church in Philippi (Acts 16 14.15.40). L. is not
mentioned in St. Paul’s letter to the Philippians,
but, if Ramsay be correct, she may have been
Enuodias or Syntyche (Phil 4 2). 5. F. Honrer


LYDIAN, lid’i-an. See Lypra.
LYE, li. See Nrrre.
LYING, li'ing. See Liz.


LYSANIAS, lisa’/ni-as (Aveavias, Lusantas):
Mentioned in Lk 3 1 as tetrarch of Abilene in the
15th year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, and thus
fixing the date of the preaching of John the Baptist
in the wilderness at about 26 or 28 AD. A Lysanias
is mentioned by Jos as having ruled over Chalcis
and Abilene, and as having been slain by Mark
Antony at the instigation of Cleopatra. As this
happened about 36 BC, Luke has been charged with
inaccuracy. Inscriptions, however, corroborate
the view that the L. of Luke was Senay a de-
scendant of the L. mentioned by Jos (cf Schiirer,
HJ P, div I, vol II, App. 1, p. 338). C. M. Kure


LYSIAS, lis‘i-as (Avolas, Lusias):

(1) “A noble man, and one of the blood royal’’
whom Antiochus Epiphanes (c 166 BC) left with the
government of Southern Syria and the guardian-
ship of his son, while he went in person into Persia
to collect the revenues which were not coming
in satisfactorily (1 Mace 3 32; 2 Macc 10 11).
According to Jos ( Ant, XII, vii, 2), the instructions
of Lysias were “to conquer Judaea, enslave its in-
habitants, utterly destroy Jerus and abolish the
whole nation.’ L., accordingly, armed against
Judas Maccabaeus a large force under Ptolemy, son
of Dorymenes, Nicanor and Gorgias. Of this force


Lysimachus
Maaseiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1944


Judas defeated the two divisions under Nicanor
and Gorgias near Emmaus (166 BC), and in the
following year L. himself at Bethsura (1 Macc 4),
after which he proceeded to the purification of the
temple. In the narration of these campaigns there
are considerable differences between the writers of
1 Mace and 2 Macc which scholars have not found
easy to explain. Antiochus died at Babylon on
his Pers expedition (164 BC), and L. assumed the
office of regent during the minority of his son, who
was yet a child (1 Macc 6 17). He collected
another army at Antioch, and after the recapture of
Bethsura was besieging Jerus when he learned of
the approach of Philip to whom Antiochus, on his
deathbed, had intrusted the guardianship of the
prince (1 Mace 6 15; 2 Mace 18). He defeated
Philip in 163 BC and was supported at Rome, but in
the following year he fell with his ward Antiochus
into the hands of Demetrius I (Soter), who put both
of them to death (1 Macc 7 1-23).

(2) See Cuauptus Lysras (Acts 23 26).

J. HurcHison

LYSIMACHUS, Ii-sim’a-kus (Avotpaxos, Lusi-
machos):

(1) The son of Ptolemy, of Jerus, is named (Ad
Est 11 1) as the interpreter (translator of the Rest
of Esther into Gr). See EstHer, THE REst or.

(2) Brother of Menelaus, a Gr name said by Jos
(Ant, XII, v, 1) to have been assumed by Onias,
the high priest in the hellenizing days of Antiochus
Epiphanes, as the Jewish name Jesus was changed
to Jason. When Menelaus was summoned to
Antioch (2 Macc 4 29) on a charge of malversa-
tion, he left L. as his deputy in the priesthood at
Jerus. L. robbed the temple and caused an in-
surrection in which he met his death beside the
treasury (2 Macc 4 42). The name of L. does
not appear in the narrative of these events given by
Jos. J. Hurcuison


LYSTRA, lis’tra: The forms Aiorpav, Liistran,
and Aterpots, Liistrois, occur. Such variation in
the gender of Anatolian city-names is common (see
Harnack, A postelgeschichte, 86; Ramsay, St. Paul
the Traveller, 128). Lystra was visited by Paul 4 t
(Acts 146.21; 16 1; 18 23—the last according
to the “South Galatian” theory), and is mentioned
in 2 Tim 3 10f as oneof the places where Paul
suffered persecution. Timothy resided in L.
(Acts 16 1).

L. owed its importance, and the attention which
Paul paid to it, to the fact that it had been made a

Rom colonia by Augustus (see AN~


1. Char-  rrocw), and was therefore, in the time
acter and of Paul, a center of education and en-
Site lightenment. Nothing is known of


its earlier, and little of its later, his-
tory. The site of L. was placed by Leake (1820)
at a hill near Khatyn Serai, 18 miles 8.8.W. from
Iconium; this identification was proved correct by
an inscription found by Sterrett in 1885. The
boundary between Phrygia and Lycaonia passed be-
tween Iconium and L. (Acts 14 6) (see Iconrum).
The population of L. consisted of the local aris-
tocracy of Rom soldiers who formed the garrison of
the colonia, of Greeks and Jews (Acts 16 1.3), and
of native Lycaonians (Acts 14 11).


After Paul had healed a life-long cripple at L.,
the native population (the “multitude” of Acts 14
11) regarded him and Barnabas as
2. Worship pagan gods come down to them in the
of Paul and likeness of men, and called Barnabas
Barnabas “Zeus” and Paul “Hermes.’’ Com-
mentators on this incident usually
point out that the same pair of divinities appeared
to Baucis and Philemon in Ovid’s well-known story,
which he locates in the neighboring Phrygia. ‘The
accuracy in detail of this part of the narrative in
Acts has been strikingly confirmed by recent epi-
graphic discovery. Two inscriptions found in the
neighborhood of L. in 1909 run as follows: (1)
“Kakkan and Maramoas and Iman Licinius priests
of Zeus’; (2) “Toues Macrinus also called Abas-
cantus and Batasis son of Bretasis having made in
accordance with a vow at their own expense [a
statue of] Hermes Most Great along with a sun-dial
dedicated it to Zeus the sun-god.”’

Now it is evident from the narrative in Acts that
the people who were prepared to worship Paul and
Barnabas as gods were not Greeks or Romans, but
native Lycaonians. This is conclusively brought
out by the use of the phrase ‘‘in the speech of Ly-
caonia” (Acts 14 11). The language in ordinary
use among the educated classes in Central Anato-
lian cities under the Rom Empire was Gr; in some
of those cities, and esp. of course, in Rom colonies,
Lat also was understood, and it was used at this
period in official documents. But the Anatolian
element in the population of those cities continued
for a long time to use the native language (e.g.
Phrygian was in use at Iconium till the 8d cent. of
our era; see Iconrum). In the story in Acts, a
fast distinction is implied, and in fact existed, be-
tween the ideas and practices of the Greeks and the
Rom colonists and those of the natives. This dis-
tinction would naturally maintain itself most vigor-
ously in so conservative an institution as religious
ritual and legend. We should therefore expect to
find that the association between Zeus and Hermes
indicated in Acts belonged to the religious system
of the native population, rather than to that of the
educated society of the colony. And this is pre-
cisely the character of the cult illustrated in our
two inscriptions. It is essentially a native cult,
under a thin Gr disguise. The names in those in-
scriptions can only have been the names of natives;
the Zeus and Hermes of Acts and of our inscriptions
were a graecized version of the Father-gad and Son-
god of the native Anatolian system. The college
of priests which appears in inscription no. 1 (sup-
porting the Bezan variant “priests’’ for “priest”
in Acts 14 13) was a regular Anatolian institu-
tion. The miracle performed by Paul, and hiscom-
panionship with Barnabas would naturally suggest
to the natives who used the “speech of Lycaonia”’
a pair of gods commonly associated by them in a
local cult. The two gods whose names rose to their
lips are now known to have been associated by the
dedication of a statue of one in a temple, of the other
in the neighborhood of L.


Lireraturse.—Ramsay, Cities of St. Paul, 407 ff.
On the new inscriptions, see Calder, Expos, 1910, 1 ff,
148 ff; id, Classical Review, 1910, 67 ff. Inscriptions
ot Lystra are published in Sterrett, Wolfe Expedition,
and in Jour, Heil. Stud., 1904 (Cronin).


W. M. Caper


1945


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Lysimachus
Maaseiah


MAACAH, MAACHAH, ma’a-ka ("32'9, ma-
‘dkhah):

(1) B, Moxé, Mochd, A, Moxé, Maché, daughter
of Nahor, borne to him by Reumah (Gen 22 24).

(2) B, Maaxé, Maachd, A, Maaxd0, Maachdth,
the one wife of David who was of royal rank, the
daughter of Talmai, king of Geshur, who became
the mother of Absalom (2 § 8 3; 1 Ch 3 2).

(3) Maaxé, Maachd, father of Achish, king of
Gath (1 K 2 39). He is probably referred to as
“Maoch” in 1 § 27 2.

(4) The daughter of Absalom, the favorite wife
of Rehcboam, and mother of Abijah (1 K 16 2;
2 Ch 11 20, etc). Evidently “daughter” must
here be understood as “granddaughter,” accord-
ing to a common oriental usage. ‘amar was the
only daughter of Absalom. If Tamar married
Uriel of Gibeah (2 Ch 18 2), then Maacah was
her daughter. In that case the name Micaiah in
this passage would be either a copyist’s error or
avariantof Maacah. She must have been a woman
of strong personality. Unfortunately her influence
was cast upon the side of idolatry. She maintained
her position in the palace, however, till the reign of
her grandson Asa. Possibly she acted as regent
during his minority. Ultimately she was degraded
by him for an act of peculiar infamy (1 K 16 13;
2 Ch 16 16).

P (e) Concubine of Caleb, son of Hezron (1 Ch 2
8).

(6) Sister of Huppim and Shuppim the Benja-

mites, who became the wife of Machir the Manassite,

the “father” of Gilead (1 Ch 7 12.15 f).

(7) Wife of Jeiel, the ‘father’ of Gibeon, an
ancestress of King Saul (1 Ch 8 29; 9 35).

(8) Father of Hanan, one of David’s mighty
men (1 Ch 11 48).

(9) Father of Shephatiah, ruler of the Simeonites
under David (1 Ch 27 16). W. Ewine


MAACAH, mi/a-ka ("29 , ma‘dkhah; B, Moxa,
Maochdé, A, Maoyé, Maachd): A small Syrian king-
dom adjoining that of Geshur on the western border
of Bashan, the inhabitants of which are called
Maachathites (RV ‘‘Maacathites’”’), whose terri-
tory was taken by Jair (Dt 3 14; Josh 12 5).
The border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites
and all Mt. Hermon were given to the half-tribe
of Manasseh (Josh 18 11). The inhabitants of
these kingdoms, however, were not driven out by
Tsracl (ver 13), and at a later day the children of
Ammon hired mercenaries from Maacah for their
encounter with David. The armies met near
Medeba when the “Syrians” from Maacah found
themselves opposed to Joab. That famous captain
completely routed them (2.8 10 6 ff, LXX “Ama-
lek”). In 1 Ch 19 6 it is called Aram-maacah,
Syria-maachah (AV) ; and in 1 Ch 2 23 “Aram
appears instead of “Maacah.”

t evidently lay between Geshur on the 8. and
Hermon on the N., being probably bounded by
Jordan on the W., although no certain indication
of boundaries is now possible. They would thus be
hemmed in by Israel, which accounts for ‘Geshur
and Maacath dwell in the midst of Israel’? (Josh
13 13). It is possible that Abel-beth-maacah
may have been a colony founded by men from
Maacah. W. Ewina


MAACATHITES, mé-ak’a-thits CM9TAI, ha-
ma'ékhathi; B, 6 Mayarel, ho Machatei, A, Maxa6l,
Machathi): Mentioned in Scripture are Ahasbai


M


(2S 23 34), Jaazaniah (2 K 25 23), Naham (1
Ch ‘ 19) and Jezaniah (Jer 40 8). See preceding
article.


MAADAI, m4-a-da’l, ma’a-di ("122 , ma‘ddhay):
Son of Bani; one of those who married foreign
wives (Ezr 10 34).


MAADIAH, mia-a-di’a (WIT22, ma‘adhych,
‘““vwhose ornament is Jah’’): A priest who returned
with Zerubbabel (Neh 12 5). The name also
occurs in the form ‘‘Moadiah” (Neh 12 17).


MAAI, m4-3’i, mai (JA, ma‘ay): An Asaphite
musician who took part in the ceremony of the
dedication of the walls (Neh 12 36).


MAALEH-ACRABBIM, m4’a-la-a-krab’im, ma-
al’a-. See AKRABBIM.


MAANI, ma’a-ni (Maavi, Maant):

(1) AV “Meani” (1 Esd 5 31), corresponding
to ‘‘Meunim” in Ezr 2 50; Neh 7 52.

(2) RV “‘Baani,” head of a family, many of whom
had married foreign wives (1 Esd 9 34; called
“Bani” in Ezr 10 34).


MAARATH, mi’a-rath (M2, ma‘drdth): A
city in the hill country of Judah, mentioned between
Gedor and Beth-anoth (Josh 16 59). The small
village of Bett Ummar upon the watershed, a little
to the W. of the carriage road to Hebron and about
a mile from Kh. Jedar (Gedor), is a probable site.
There are many rock tombs to its E. The village
mosque is dedicated to Nebi Matta, i.e.St. Matthew.
See PEF, ITI, 305, Sh XXI.


MAAREH-GEBA, mi/a-re-gé’ba, -ga’ba (119A
vad, ma‘dréh gebha‘; B, MapaayéBe, Maraagdbe,
A, 8vopéev ris TaBad, dusmén tés Gabad): The place
where the men of Israel lay in ambush, from which
they broke forth upon the children of Benjamin
(Jgs 20 33). AV renders ‘‘the meadows of Gib-
eah,” RVm “the meadow of Geba [or Gibeah].”
LXX A affords a clue to the correct reading. It
is not a place-name.‘ The text must be emended
to read mimma-‘drabh legebha‘, “to the W. of
Geba.” Pesh suggests a reading mimm*-‘drath
gebha‘, “from the cave of Geba.’’ This, however,
there is nothing to warrant. Ewina


MAASAI, m’a-si, ma-as’i ("WI'A, matsay; AV
Maasiai): A priest, son of Abdid (1 Ch 9 12).


MAASEAS, mi-a-sé’as (Maacaios, Maasatos;
AV Maasias): Grandfather of Baruch (Bar 1 1);
called Mahseiah in Jer 32 12; 61 59.


MAASEIAH, mi-a-sé’ya, mi-a-si’a CTUT'|,
ma‘dséyaha, “Jeh’s work”; Maacoaé, Maassaid,
and Massatas in LXX): A name common in exilic
and late monarchic times (Gray, HPN).

(1) A Levite musician named in connection with
David’s bringing up of the ark from the house of
Obed-edom (1 Ch 15 18.20).

(2) A Levite captain who aided Jehoiada at the
coronation of Joash (2 Ch 23 1).

(3) An officer of Uzziah (2 Ch 26 11).

(4) Ahaz’ son, slain by the Ephraimite, Zichri
(2 Ch 28 7). :

(5) A governor of Jerus under Josiah (2 Ch 34
8).


Maasiai
Mace, Books o:


¢ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1946


(6) (7) (8) (9) The name of 4 men, 3 of them
priests, who had married foreign wives (Ezr 10
18.21.22.30).

(10) Father of Azariah, one of the builders of the
wall (Neh 3 23).

(11) One of those who stood at Ezra’s right hand
during the reading of the Law (Neh 8 4).

(12) One of the expoundersof the Law (Neh 8 7).

(13) One of those who took part in sealing the
covenant (Neh 10 25).

(14) A Judahite inhabitant of Jerus (Neh 11 5),
who in 1 Ch 9 5is called Asaiah.

(15) A Benjamite (Neh 11 7).

(16) (17) Name of two priests (Neh 12 41 f).

(18) A priest in Zedekiah’s reign, father of a
certain Zephaniah who interviewed the prophet
Jeremiah (Jer 21 1; 29 25; 37 3).

(19) Father of the false prophet Zedekiah (Jer
29 21).

(20) A keeper of the threshold in the reign of
Jehoiakim (Jer 35 4).

(21) Baaseiah (q.v.), a Kohathite name (1 Ch
6 40), is probably a textual error for Maaseiah.

(22) AV for Mahseiah, an ancestor of Baruch
(Jer 32 12). Joun A. Lirs

MAASIAI, mi-as’i-i. See Maasatr.

MAASMAS, mé&-as’mas, m4’/as-mas (Maacpds,
Maasmds; Swete reads Maasmén; AV Masman,
1 Esd 8 43): Corresponds to “Shemaiah” in Ezr
8 16.


MAATH, mi’/ath (Mad0, Madth): An ancestor
of Jesus in St. Luke’s genealogy in the 12th gen-
eration before Joseph, the husband of Mary (Lk
3 26).


MAAZ, ma’az (V2"2, ma‘ag): A descendant of
Judah (1 Ch 2 27).


MAAZIAH, ma-a-zi’a (UVTI, ma‘azydha):

(1) The priest to whom fell the lot for the 24th
course (1 Ch 24 18).

(2) One of those who took part in sealing the
covenant (Neh 10 8).


MABDAI, mab‘da-i.


MABNABEDAI, mab-nab’é-di.
DEBAI.


MACALON, mak’a-lon (ot é& Maxadév, hoi ek
Makalén; 1 Esd 5 21): This corresponds to ‘‘the
men of Michmas” in Ezr 2 27. The mistake has
peppy arisen through reading M in Gr uncials
or AA,


See Mamnpat.


See Macna-


MACCABAEDS, mak-a-bé’ns (MaxxaBaios, Mak-
kabaios), MACCABEES, mak’a-béz (of Maxxa-
Baio, hot Makkabaioi):

I. PaLesTine UNDER Kincs or Synra
1. Rivalry of Syria and Egypt
2. Palestine Seized by Antiochus the Great
3. Accession of Antiochus Epiphanes
II. PaLestine UNDER THE MaAccABEES
1. Mattathias
2. Judas
3. Jonathan
4, Simon
5. John Hyrcanus
6. John and Eleazar
LiteRaTuRE


The name Maccabaeus was first applied to Judas,
one of the sons of Mattathias generally called in
Eng. the Maccabees, a celebrated family who de-
fended Jewish rights and customs in the 2d cent.
BC (lL Mace 2 1-3). The word has been variously
derived (e.g. as the initial letters of Mi Kha-


mikhd, Ba-’élim Yahweh! ‘Who is like unto thee
among the mighty, O Jeh?”), but it is probably best
associated with makkabhah, “hammer,” and as
applied to Judas may be compared with the malleus
Scotorum and malleus haerelicorum of the Middle
Ages (see next article). To understand the work
of the Maccabees, it is necessary to take note of the
relation in which the Jews and Pal stood at the
time to the immediately neighboring nations,
I. Palestine under Kings of Syria.—On the di-
vision of Alexander’s empire at his death in the
year 323 BC, Pal became a sort of
1. Rivalry buffer state between Egypt under the
of Syria Ptolemies on the S., and Syria, under
and Egypt the house of Seleucus, the last survivor
of Alexander’s generals, on the N.
The kings of Syria, as the Seleucid kings are gen-
erally called, though their dominion extended prac-
tically from the Mediterranean Sea to India, had
not all the same name, like the Ptolemies of Egypt,
though most of them were called either Selencus
or Antiochus. For a hundred years after the death
of Alexander, the struggle went on as to which of the
two powers was to govern Pal, until in the year 223
came the northern prince under whom Pal was
destined to fall to the Seleucids for good.
This was Antiochus III, commonly known as
Antiochus the Great. He waged two campaigns
against Egypt for the possession of
2. Palestine Pal, finally gaining the upper hand in


Seized by the year 198 BC by his victory at
Antiochus Panium, so called from its proximity
the Great to a sanctuary of the god Pan, a spot


close to the sources of the Jordan and
still called Banias. The Jews helped Antiochus to
gain the victory and, according to Jos, his rule was
accepted by the Jews with good will. It is with him
and his successors that the Jews have now to deal.
Antiochus, it should be noticed, came in contact with
the Romans after their conquest of Macedonia in
197, and was defeated by Scipio Asiaticus at Mag-
nesia in 190. He came under heavy tribute which
he found it difficult to pay, and met his end in 187,
while plundering a Gr temple in order to secure its
contents. His son and successor Seleucus IV was
murdered by his prime minister Heliodorus in 176—
175 BC, who reaped no benefit from his crime.
The brother of the murdered king succeeded to
the throne as Antiochus IV, generally known as
Antiochus Epiphanes (‘‘the TIllus-


3. Acces- rious’), a typical eastern ruler of
sion of considerable practical ability, but
Antiochus whose early training while a hostage
Epiphanes at Rome had made him an adept in


dissimulation. Educated in the fash-
ionable Hellenism of the day, he made it his aim
during his reign (175-164 BC) to enforce it upon
his empire, a policy which brought him into conflict
with the Jews. Even before his reign many Jews
had yielded to the attraction of Gr thought and
eustom, and the accession of a ruler like Antiochus
Epiphanes greatly increased the drift in that direc-
tion, as will be found described in the article dealing
with the period between the Old and the New Tes-
taments (see BETWEEN THE TESTAMENTS). Pious
Jews meanwhile, men faithful to the Jewish tradi-
tion, Chasidim (see Hastpanans), as they were
called, resisted this tendency, and in the end were
driven to armed resistance against the severe op-
pression practised by Antiochus in advancing his
Hellenizing views. See ASMONEANS.
UW. Palestine under the Maccabees.—Mattathias, a
priest of the first 24 courses and therefore of the noblest


who dwelt at Modin, a city of Judah, was
a Matta- the first to strike a blow. With his own
thias


hand he slew a Jew at Modin who was
willing to offer the idolatrous sacrifices
ordered by the king, and also Apelles, the leader of the


1947


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Maasiai
Macc, Books of


king’s messengers (1 Macc 2 15-28). He fled with his
sons to the mountains (168 BC), where he organized a
successful resistance; but helng of advanced age and
unfit for the fatigue of active service, he dled in 166 BC
aud was buried ‘‘in the sepulchres of his fathers” at
Modin (1 Mace 2 70; Jos, Ant, XII, vi, 3). He appar-
ently named as his successor his 3d son, Judas, though
it was with real insight that on his deathbed he recom-
mended the four brothers to take Simon as their coun-
sellor (1 Macc 2 65).
Judas, commonly called Judas Maccahaeus—often
called in 2 Macc ‘‘Judas the Maccahee’’—held strongly
roe ppinions of ae TBEDGE and proved at
st a very capable leader in guerilla war-
2. Judas fare. He defeated several of the generals
of Antiochus—Apollonius at Beth-horon,
art of the army of Lysias at Emmaus (166 BC), and
ysias himself at Bethsura the following year. He took
possession of Jerus, except the ‘' Tower,’’ where he was
subsequently besieged and hard pressed hy Lysias and
the young king Antiochus Eupator in 163 BC; but
quarrels among the Syrian generals secured relief and
liherty of religion to the Jews which, however, proved of
short duration. The HellenizIng Jews, with Auciuus
(q.v.) at their head, secured the favor of the king, who
sent Nicanor against Judas. The victory over Nicanor
first at Capharsalama and later (161 BC) at Adasa near
Beth-horon, in which engagement Nicanor was slain,
was the greatest of Judas’ successes and practically
secured the independence of the Jews. The attempt of
Judas to negotiate an alliance with the Romans, who
had now serious interests in these regions, caused much
dissatisfaction among his followers; and their defection
at Elasa (161 BC), during the invasion under Bacchides,
which was undertaken before the answer of the Rom
Senate arrived, was the cause of the defeat and death of
Judas in battle. His body was buried ‘'in the sepulchres
of his fathers’? at Modin. There is no proof that Judas
held the office of high priest like his father Mattathias.
(An interesting and not altogether favorable estimate
of Judas and of the spiritual import of the revolt will he
found in Jerusalem under the High Priests, 97-99, hy
E. R. Bevan, London, 1904.)
Jonathan (called Apphus, ‘‘the wary’’), the youngest
of the sons of Mattathias, succeeded Judas, whose defeat
and death had left the patriotic Ser ae in
3. Jonathan a deplorable condition from which it was
i rescued by the skill and ability of Jona-


than, aided largely by the rivalries among
the competitors for the Syrian throne. It was in reality
from these rivalries that resulted the 65 years (129-64
BC) of the completely independent rule of the Has-
monean dynasty (see AsMonEANS) that elapsed between
the Gr supremacy of the Syrian kings and the Rom
supremacy established by Pompey. The first step
toward the recovery of the patriots was the permission
granted them by Demetrius I to return to Judaea in
158 BC—the year in which Bacchides ended an unsuc-
cessful campaign against Jonathan and in fact accepted
the terms of the latter. After his departure, Jonathan
“judged the people at Michmash"’ (1 Macc 9 73).
Jonathan was even authorized to reénter Jerus and to
maintain a military force, only the Tower” the 'Akra,
as it was called in Gr, being held by a Syrian garrison.
See further under AsmMoNEANS; LacEDAEMONIANS;
TRYPHON.

Simon, surnamed Thassi (‘the zealous’’?) was now
the only surviving member of the original Maccabean
family, and he readily took up the inherit-
ance. Tryphon murdered the boy-king
Antiochus Dionysus and seized the throne
of Seleucus, although having no connection
with the Seleucid family. Simon accordingly broke
entirely with Tryphon after making successful overtures
to Demetrius, who granted the fullest immunity from
all the dues that had marked the Seleucid supremacy.
Even the golden crown, which had to be paid on the
investiture of a new high priest, was now remitted. On
the 23d of Ijjar (May), 141, the patriots entered even
the ’Akra “with praise and palm branches, and with
harps, and with cymbals and with viols, and with hymns,
and with songs” (1 Mace 18 51). Simon was declared
in a Jewish assembly to he high priest and chief of the
people ‘for ever, until there should arise a prophet
worthy of credence” (1 Macc 14 41),a limitation that
was felt to he necessary on account of the departure
of the people from the Divine appointment of the high
priests of the old line and one that, pec perpetuated
the high-priesthood in the family of Simon. Even a
new era was started, of which the high-priesthood of
Simon was to he year 1, and this was really the founda-
tion of the Hasmonean dynasty (see ASMONEANS).

John Hyrcanus, one of the sons of Simon, esca ed from


the plot laid by Ptolemy, and succeeded his fat. er both


4, Simon


as prince and high priest. See
5. John mes He was succeeded (104 BC) hy
his son Aristobulus I who took the final
Hyrcanus step of assuming the title of king.


Two members of the first generation of the Macca-
bean family still remain to be mentioned: (1) John,


the eldest, surnamed Gaddis (AV “Caddis’),
probably meaning ‘‘my fortune,’’ was murdered
y a marauding tribe, the sons of
6. John JAMBRI (q.v.), near Medeba, on the
and Eleazar E. of the Jordan, when engaged upon
the convoy of some property of the
Maccabees to the friendly country of the Naba-
taeans (1 Macc 9 35-42). (2) Eleazar, surnamed
Avaran, met his death (161 BC) in the early stage
of the Syrian war, shortly before the death of
Judas. In the battle of Bethzacharias (163 BC),
in which the Jews for the first time met elephants
in war, he stabbed from below the elephant on
which he supposed the young king was riding.
He killed the elephant but he was himself crushed
to death by its fall (1 Macc 6 43-46). For the
further history of the Hasmonean dynasty, see
Asmoneans; Maccasess, Booxs or.


Lirerature.—There is a copious literature on the
Maccahees, a family to which history shows few, if any,
parallels of such united devotion to a sacred cause. The
main authorities are of course the Maccahean Books of
the Apocrypha: but special reference may be made to the
chapters of Stanley, Lectures on the History of the Jewish
Church, dealing with the subject, and to E. R. Bevan,
Jerusalem under the High Priests, 1904, or to the 2d
vol of House of Seleucus by the same author, 1902.

J. Hurcuison

MACCABEES, mak’a-héz, BOOKS OF:


I. 1 MaccasEEs
1. Name
2. Canonicity
3. Contents
4. Historicity
5. Author's Standpoint and Aim
6. Date
7. Sources
8. Original Language
9. Text and Versions
LITERATURE
II. 2 MaccaseEs
Name
. Canonicity
Contents
Sources
. Historicity
. Teaching of the Book
Author
Date
. Original Language
10. Text and Versions
LITERATURE
III. 3 MaccaBees
1. Name
. Canonicity
. Contents
. Historicity
Aim and Teaching
. Authorship and Date
. Original Language
. Text and Versions
LITERATURE
I 4 MaccaBBEs


OWNS OA GoNE


CONOR Ooo


. Name
. Canonicity
Contents
. Teaching
. Authorship and Date
Original Language
. Text and Versions
LitERATURE
V. 5 MaccasEEs
Name
. Canonicity
. Contents
. Historicity
. Original Language
. Aim and Teaching
? pucker and Date
. Text and Versions
LITERATURE


I. 1 Maccabees.—The Heb title has perished
with the original Heb text. Rabbinical writers call
the Books of Mace D°V2WMI “10 ,
siphtré ha-hashmonim, “The Book of
the Hasmoneans” (see ASMONEANS).
Origen gives to Book I (the only one he seemed to
know of) the name Zap8i0 ZaBavaér, Sarbéth Saba-
naiél, evidently a Heb or Aram. name of very un-
certain meaning, but which Dalman (Aram. Gram.,
§6) explains as a corruption of Aram. words= “The


NOUR Ob


ANOAPONE


1. Name


Mace, Books of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1948


Book of the House of the Hasmoneans” (cf the rab-
binical name given above). In the Gr MSS N,
AV (Cod. Venetus), the 4 books go under the desig-
nation Maxkxafalw», Makkabaion, A BT A, plBros,
biblos, being understood. In the Vulg the 1st and
2d books are alone found, and appear under the
name Machabaeorum liber primus, secundus. The
spelling Machabaeorum reproduces probably the
pronunciation current in Jerome's day.

The name “Maccabee” belongs strictly only to
Judas, who in 2 Macc is usually called “the Mac-
cabee” (6 MaxxaBatos, ho Makkabaios). But the
epithet came to be applied to the whole family and
their descendants. The word means probably
“extinguisher” (of persecution) CA>% » makhbi,
from kabhah, ‘‘to be extinguished”; so Niese; Jos,
Ant, XII, vi, 1 f; S. J. Curtis, The Name Macea-
bee). The more usual explanation, “hammerer”
Caps, makkabhay), is untenable, as thenoun from
which it is derived (MAP, makkebheth) (Jgs 4 21)
denotes a smith’s hammer.

Since the Vulg includes only the first 2 books of
Mace, these are the only books pronounced canon-
ical by the Council of Trent and in-
cluded in recognized Protestant VSS
of the Apoc (see ApocrypHa). That
J Macc was used largely in the early
Christian church is proved by the numerous ref-
erences made to it and quotations from it in the
writings of Tertullian (d. 220), Clement of Alex-
andria (d. 220), Hippolytus (d. 2385), Origen (d.
254), etc. The last named states that 1 Macc is
uncanonical, and it is excluded from the lists of
canonical writings given by Athanasius (d. 373),
Cyril of Jerus (d. 386), and Gregory of Nazianzus
(d. 390). Indeed, none of the books of the Macc
was recognized as canonical until the Council of
Trent (1553) gave this rank to the first 2 books,
and Protestants continue in their confessions to
exclude the whole of the Apoc from the Bible proper,
though Luther maintained that 1 Macc was more
worthy of a place in the Canon than many books
now included in it.

1 Macc gives first of all a brief view of the reign of
Alexander the Great and the partition of bis kingdom

among his successors. Having thus ex-

3. Contents plained the origin of the Seleucid Dynasty,
sd the author proceeds to give a history of the
Jews from the accession of Antiochus 1V,

king of Syria (175 BC), to the death of Simon (135 BC).
The events of these 40 years are simply but graphically
related and almost entirely in the order of their occur-
rence. The contents of 1 Macc and 2 Macc 4-15 are
In the main parallel, dealing with thesame incidents; but
the simple narrative character of 1 Macc, in contrast
to the didactic and highly religious as well as super-
natural coloring of 2 Macc, can easily be seen in these
corresponding parts. The victories due to heroism in
1 Macc are commonly ascribed to miraculous interven-
tlon on the part of God in 2 Macc (see 1 Macc 4 1f;
ci 2 Macc 8 23f). 2 Macc is more given to exaggera-
tions. The army of Judas at Bethsura consists of 10,000


according to 1 Macc 4 29, but of 80,000 according to
2 Macc 11 2. The following is a brief analysis of 1


acc:
(1) 1 1-10: An account of the rise of the Seleucid
Dynasty.
@ 1 11—16 24: History of the Jews from 175 to


(a) 1_11-64: Introductory. Some Jews inclined to
adopt Gr customs (religious, etc); Antiochus’ aim to
conquer Egypt and to suppress the Jewish religion as a
source of Jewish disloyalty. Desecration of the Jewish
temple: martyrdom of many faithful Jews.

tC 2 1-70: The revolt of Mattathias.

c) 8 1—9 22: Leadership of Judas Maccabaeus
after his father’s death. Brilliant victories over the
Syrians. Purification of the temple. Death of An-
tiochus IV (Epiphanes) and accession of Antlochus V
(Eupator) (164 BC). DemetriusI became king of Syrla,
and Alcimus Jewish high priest (162 BC). Treaty be-
tween Jews and Romans. Defeat of Jews at Eleasa and
death of Judas Maccahbaeus (161 BC).

(d) 9 23—12 53: Leadership of Jonathan, 5th son of
Mattathias, elected to_succeed his brother Judas. He
Pecan high priest. Political independence of Judaea
secured.


2. Canon-
icity


(e) 18 31—16 24: Peaceful and prosperous rule of
Simon, brother of Jonathan; accession of his son John
Hyrcanus (135 BC).

That the author of 1 Macc aims at giving a cor-
rect narrative, and that on the whole his account is

correct, is the opinion of practically
4, Histo- all scholars. The simple, straight-
ricity forward way in which he writes inspires

confidence, and there can be no doubt
that we have here a first-class authority for the
period covered (175-135 BC). It is the earliest
Jewish history which dates events in reference to a
definite era, this era being that of the Seleucids,
312 BC, the year of the founding of that dynasty.
The aid received from God is frequently recognized
in the book (2 51 ff; 3 18; 410f; 9 46; 16 3),
yet it is mainly through personal valor that the
Jews conquer, not, as in 2 Mace (see III, 3 below),
through miraculous Divine interpositions. Ordi-
nary, secondary causes are almost the only ones
taken into account, so that the record may be relied
upon as on the whole trustworthy. Yet the writer
shows the defects which belong to his age and en-
vironment, or what from the standpoint of literal
history must be counted defects, though, as in the
case of 2 Macc (cf Ch), a writer may have other
aims than to record bare objective facts. In 1 1-9
the author errs through ignorance of the real facts
as regards Alexander’s partition of his kingdom;
and other misstatements of fact due to the same
cause occur in 10 1ff (Alexander [Balas}, son of
Antiochus Epiphanes) and in 13 31 ff (time of assas-
sination of Antiochus VI by Tryphon). In 6 37
it is said there were 32 men upon each elephant, per-
haps a misreading of the original “2 or 3,”’ although
the Indian elephant corps of today carry more.

We know nothing of a Pers village Elymais (6 1).
The number of Jewish warriors that fought and
the number slain are understated, while there are
evident exaggerations of the number of soldiers who
fought against them and of those of them who were
left dead on thefield (see 4 15; 7 46; 11 45-51, etc).

But in this book, prayers, speeches and official
records abound as they do in Ezra, Nehemiah (see
Century Bible, “Ear,” “Neh,” “Est,” 12 ff), and
many modern Protestant writers doubt or deny
the authenticity of a part of those, though that is
not necessarily to question their genuineness as part
of the original narrative. )

As regards the prayers (8 50-54; 4 30-83) and
speeches (2 7-13; 2 50-68; 4 6-11, etc), there is
no valid reason for doubting that they give at least
the substance of what was originally said or written,
though ancient historians like Thucydides and
Livy think it quite right to edit the speeches of their
characters, abbreviating, expanding or altering.
Besides, it is to be remembered that the art of
stenography is a modern one; even Dr. Johnson,
in default of verbatim reports, had to a large extent
to make the speeches which he ostensibly reported.

There is, however, in the book a large number
of official documents, and it is in regard to the
authenticity of these that modern criticism has
expressed greatest doubt. They are the following:
mB Letter of the Jews in Gilead to Judas (6 10-13).

(2) Treaty of alliance between the Romans and Jews:
copy written on brass tablets seut to Judas (8 22-32).
a oe from King Alexander Balas to Jonathan


Pee from King Demetrius I to Jonathan (10

(5) Letter from King Demetrius II to Jonatha:
30-37), together with letter to Lasthenes (11 sree ytd
(6) Letter from the young prince Antiochus to Jona-
than, making the latter hlgh priest (11 57).

(7) Letter from Jonathan to the Spartans, asking for
ane mance Ch vente roe

) Earlier letter of the Spartan ki i i

priest Onlas (12 20-23). eben ra ecg ie
aor” Letter from King Demetrius II to Simon (18 36-—


1949


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Macc, Books of


(10) Letter from the Spartans to Simon (14 20-24).
_{11) A decree of the Jews recognizing the services of
Simon and his brothers (14 27-45).
a i? Letters from Antiochus VIL (Sidetes) to Simon


(13) Message from the Rom consul Lucius to Ptolemy,
king of Egypt, asking protection for the Jews (15 16-21).
A copy was sent to Simon (15 24).

Formerly the authenticity of these state docu-
ments was accepted without doubt, as they are still
by Romanist commentators (Welte, Scholz, etc).
At most they are but translations of translations,
for the originals would be written in Gr and Lat,
from which the author would translate into Heb.
The Gr of our book is a tr from the Heb (see II, 8
below).

Rawlinson (Speaker’s Apoc, II, 329) says these
documents ‘‘have a general air of authenticity.”
Most modern scholars reject the letters purporting
to emanate from the Romans (nos. 2 and 13 above)
and from the Spartans (nos. 8, 10 above), together
with Jonathan’s message to the latter (no. 7, above),
on the ground that they contain some historical in-
accuracies and imply others. How could one consul
issue official mandates in the name of the Rom
republic (see no. 13, above)? In no. 8 above, it is
the king of the Spartans who writes on behalf of his
people to Onias the high priest; but it is the ephorot
or rulers who write for the Spartans to Simon. Why
the difference? Moreover, in 12 21 the Spartans
and Jews are said to be kinsmen (lit. brothers),
both alike being descendants of Abraham; so also
14 20. This is admittedly contrary to fact. For
a careful examination of these official documents
and their objective value, see Kautzsch, Die
Apokryphen des AT, 27-30. Though, however,
these documents and some others can be proved in-
correct as they stand, they do seem to imply actual
negotiations of the kind described; i.e. the Jews must
have had communications with the Romans and
Spartans, the Jews of Gilead must havesent a missive
to Judas (no. 1), Alexander Balas did no doubt write
to Jonathan, etc, though the author of 1 Macc puts
the matter in his own way, coloring it by his own
patriotic and religious prejudices.

Though the name of the author is unknown, the
bock itself supplies conclusive evidence that he

belonged to the Sadducee party, the
6. Author’s party favored by the Hasmoneans.
Standpoint The aim of the writer is evidently his-
and Aim torical and patriotic, yet his attitude

toward religious questions is clearly
indicated, both directly and indirectly.

(1) Nowhere in the bock is the Divine Being
mentioned under any name except Heaven (3 18f.
50.60; 4 10.55; 12 15, etc), a designation common
in rabbinical Heb (Talm, etc). As early as 300 BC
the sacred name “Yahwe”’ was discarded in favor
of “Adonai” (Lord) for superstitious reasons. But
in 1 Mace no strictly Divine name meets us at all.
This would seem to suggest the idea of a certain
aloofness of God, such as characterized the theology
of the Sadducee party. Contrast with this the
mystic closeness of God realized and expressed by
the psalmists and prophets of the OT.

(2) The author is a religious patriot, believing
that his people have been Divinely chosen and that
the cause of Israel is the cause of God.

(3) He is also a strict legalist, believing it the
duty of every Jew to keep the Law and to preserve
its institutions (1 11.15.43.49.54.60.62f; 2 20 ff.
27.42.48.50; 3 21, etc), and deprecating attempts
to compel Jews to desecrate the Sabbath and feast
days (1 45), to eat unclean food (1 63) and to sac-
rifice to idols (1 43). Yet the comparatively lax
attitude toward the Sabbath implied in 2 41 ff,
involving the principle of Christ’s words, ‘The
sabbath was made for man, and not man for the


Sabbath” (Mk 2 27), agrees with the Sadducee
position against that of the Pharisees.

(4) The book teaches that the age of inspiration
is past, and that the sacred beoks already written
are the only source of comfort in sorrow and of en-
cauragement under difficulties (12 9).

(5) The legitimacy of the high-priesthood of
Simon is not once questioned, though it is con-
demned by both pheaitarancene law (D), which
restricts the priesthood to the tribe of Levi, and by
the priestly law '(P), which requires in addition that
a priest must be of the family of Aaron. This
laxity agrees well with the general tenets of the
Sadducees.

(6) The book contains no trace of the Messianic
hope, though it was entertained at the time in other
circles (the Pharisees; see Messtau, II, 2; Prorn-
ECY); 2 57 is no exception, for it implies no more
than a belief that there would be a restoration of the
Davidic Dynasty. Perhaps it is implied that that
expectation was realized in the Hasmoneans.

(7) There is no reference in the book to the doc-
trine of a resurrection from the dead or to that of
the immortality of the soul, though we know that
both these beliefs were commonly held by Jews of
the time (see Dnl 12 3; En 19; 22 11-14; 9 1.
5ff; 2 Macc 7 9.11.14.29). We know that the
Pharisee party believed in a resurrection (see Acts
23 6). The Maccabean heroes fought their battles
and faced death without fear, not because, like
Moslems, they looked to the rewards of another
life, but because they believed in the rightness of
their cause and coveted the good name won by
their fathers by acts of similar courage and devotion.

This outline of the doctrines taught or implied
in the book makes it extremely hkely that the
author was a member of the Sadducee party.

1 Macc must have been written Pas the Rom
conquest under Pompey, since the writer speaks

of the Romans as allies and even
6. Date friends (8 1.12; 121; 14 40); ie.

the composition of the book must
have been completed (unless we except chs 14-16;
see below) before 63 BC, when Pompey conquered
Jerus, and Judaea became a Rom province. We
thus get 63 BC as a terminus ad quem. Moreover,
the historical narrative is brought down to the
death of Simon (16 16), i.e. to 135 BC. We have
thus an undoubted terminus a quo in 135 BC. The
book belongs for certain to the period between
135 and 63 BC. But 16 18-24 implies that John
Hyrcanus (d. 105 BC) had for some time acted as
successor to Simon, and Reuss, Ewald, Fritzsche,
Grimm, Schiirer, Kautzsch, etc, are probably right
in concluding from 16 23 f that John was dead when
the book was completed, for we have in this verse
the usual formula recording the close of a royal
career (see 1 K 11 41; 2 K 10 34, etc), and the
writer makes it sufficiently understood that all his
acts were already “entered in the public annals of
the kingdom” (Ewald, History of Israel, V, 463, n.),
so that repetition was unnecessary. But Bertheau,
Keil, Wellhausen and Torrey draw the contrary con-
clusion, arguing that John had but begun his rule,
so that at the time of writing there was practically
nothing to record of the doings subsequent to 135,
when John succeeded Simon (see #B, IIT, 2860[Toy]).
In 13 30 we read that the monument erected in
143 BC by Simon in memory of his father and
brothers was standing at the time when this book
was written, words implying the lapse of say 30
years at least. This gives a terminus a quo of 113
BC. Moreover, the poncey sie on Simon (d. 135
BC) and his peaceful rule in 14 4-15 leaves the
impression that he had been long in his grave. We
cannot be far wrong in assigning a date for the book
in the early part of the last cent. BC, say 80 BC.


Macc, Books of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1950


Destinon (Die Quellen des Flavius Jos, I, 1882, 80
ff), followed by Wellhausen (JJG, 1894, 222 f),
maintained that Jos (d. ¢ 95), who followed 1 Macc
up to the end of ch 18, could not have seen chs
14-16 (or from 14 167), or he would not have given
so meager an account of the high-priesthood of
Simon (see Ant, XIII, vi, 7), which the author of
1 Mace describes so fully in those chapters. But
Jos must have used these chapters or he could not
have written of Simon even as fully as he does.

If, as Torrey (ZB, III, 2862) holds, we have in
1 Macc “the account of one who had witnessed the

whole Maccabean struggle from its be-
7. Sources ginning,” the book having been com-

pleted soon after the middle of the 2d
cent. BC, it may then be assumed that the writer
depended upon no other sources than hisown. But
even in this case one is compelled, contrary to Torrey
(l.c.), to assume that written sources of his own
were used, or the descriptions would not have been
so full and the dating so exact. If, however, we
follow the evidence and bring down the date of the
book to about 80 BC (see I, 6), it must be supposed
that the author had access to written sources. It
may legitimately be inferred from 9 22 and 16 23
and from the habit of earlier times (see Century
Bible, ‘‘Ezr,”’ etc, 11 ff) that official records were
kept in the archives of the temple, or elsewhere.
These might have contained the state documents
referred to in I, 4, some or all, and reports of
speeches and prayers, etc. It must be admitted
that, unlike the compilers of the historical books
of the OT (S, K, Ch, etc), the author of 1 Macc does
not definitely mame his written sources. The
writer might well be supposed to have kept a kind
of diary of his own in which the events of his own
early life were recorded. Ora] tradition, much
more retentive of songs, speeches and the like in
ancient than in modern times, must have been a
very important source.

We have the testimony of Origen (see I, 1) and
Jerome (Prolog. Galeatus) that the book existed in

Heb in their day. But itis doubtful
8. Original whether the words of Origen imply a
Language Heboran Aram. original, and though

Jerome does speak of the book as Heb
(hebraicus), it has to be remembered that in later
times the Gr adj. denoting Heb (é8paiert, hebraistt)
and perhaps the corresponding Lat one (hebraicus)
denoted often Palestinian Aram. (see Jgs 5 2; 19
13.17; and Kautzsch, Grammatik des bib. Aram.,
19).

Hebraisms (or Aramaisms?) abound throughout
the book. In the following examples Hebraisms
are literally rendered in Gr, though in the latter
language they are unidiomatic and often unintelli-
gible: “two years of days’ =two full years (1 29,
etc); “month and month” =every month (1 58)
“a man [or each one] his neighbor’’=each ...
the other (2 40; 3 43); “sons of the fortress” =
occupants of the fortress (4 2); “against our face”
=before us (4 10); ‘‘men of power’ =warriors
(5 32); “of them”=some of them (6 2; ch 33,
“of the priests’’=some of the priests); “the right
hand wing’=the southern wing (9 1); ‘‘yester-
day and the third day’=hitherto (9 44). The
above are strictly Hebraisms and not for the most
part Aramaisms. The implied use of the “waw-
consecutive” in 3 1.41; 8 1; 9 1, and often, points
also to a Heb, not to an Aram. origin.
as a substitute for “God,” so common in this book
(see I, 5), is perhaps as much an Aramaism as a
Hebraism (see Tg Jerus Nu 25 19). Many of the
proper names in the book are obviously but trans-
literations from the Heb; thus @uderiely, Phulis-
tiein (3 24); cf Sir 46 18; 47 7; see the names in
11 34; and Schirer, GJV‘, I, 233.


?


The original Heb text of 1 Macc (see I. 8) must have
been lost at a very early time, since we have no evidence
of its use by any early writer.


9. Text Michaelis held that Jos used it, but this
and idea has been abandoned in the face of

5 overwhelming evidence to the contrary.
Versions The Heb text of the first half of 1 Mace,


edited by A. Schweizer and taken by him
to be a part of the original text, is in reality a tr from the
Lat made in the 11th cent. of our era (so Néldeke, etc).

(1) Greek.—The Gr text from which the other VSS
are nearly all made is given in all edd of the LXX. It
occurs in the uncials N (Fritzsche, X), A (Fritzsche, ITT),
and V (8th or 9th cent.), notin B; and in a large number
of cursives. Swete (OT in Gr) gives the text of A with
the variations of N and V. Though the Gr text has so
many Hebraisms, it is an exceedingly good, rendering,
full of spirit and on the whole more idiomatic than the
rest of the LXX.

(2) Latin.—There are two Lat recensions of the book:
(a) that found in the Vulg, which agrees almost entirely
with the Old Lat VS. It is in the main a literal rendering
of the Gr. (b) Sabatier (Bibliorum sacrorum Latinae
versiones antiquae, II) published in 1743 a Lat VS of chs
1-13 found in but one MS (Sangermanensis). Though
it is evidently made from the Gr it differs at many points
from the Vulg. Itis probably older than the Old Lat and
therefore than the Vulg.

(3) Syriac—There are also two varying texts in this
language. (a) The best known is that printed in the
Paris Polyglot (vol LX), copied with some changes into
the London Polyglot (vol IV; for readings see vol V).
Lagarde (Lib. Vet. Test. Apoc. Syr., 1861) has edited
this VS, correcting and appending readings. (b) A text
differing in many respects from (a) is given by Ceriani
in his Cod. Ambros. of the Pesh (1876-83), though this
also is made from the Gr. For a careful collection of
both the ahove Syr texts by G. Schmidt, see ZATW,
1897, 147, 233-62.

Lirrratoure.—See literature cited in the foregoing
material. For texts and comms. on the Apoc, see
ArocrreHa. The following comms. deserve special
mention: Grimm, Kurz. ereg. Handbuch, etc, to which the
comms. by Keil (1 and 2 Macc) and Bissel (Lange) owe
very much; Kautzsch, Die Apoc des AT; W.
weather and J. S. Black, Cambridge Bible, ‘1 Macc,”
and Oesterley in the Oxford Apoc edited by R. HW. Charles
(1913). Of the dict. arts. those in EB (Torrey) and HDB
(Fairweather) are excellent. See also E. Montet, Essai
sur les origines des saducéens et des pharisiens, 1885:
Wibrich, Juden und Griechen vor der mak. Erhebung, 1875,
69-76; B. Niese, Kritik der beiden Makkabderbiicher,
1900. For a very full hibliography see Schiirer, GJV‘4,
a a ff, and his art. ‘‘Apocrypha”"’ in RE’, and in

Ca- Lt erz,


If, 2 Maccabees.—SeeI, above. The earliest ex-
tant mention of the book as 2 Macc is in Euseb.,
Praep. Evang., VIII, 9. Jerome also
(Prol. Galeatus) calls it by this name.

In the early church 2 Macc was
much less valued and therefore less read than 1


1. Name


Macc. Augustine was the only church Father to

claim for it canonical rank and even he,
2. Canon- iu a controversy with the Donatists
icity who quoted 2 Macc, replied that this


_ book had never been received into the

Canon. Since they formed an integral part of the

Vulg, 1 and 2 Mace were both recognized by the

eviie of Trent as belonging to the Romanist
anon.


(1) 1—2 18: Two letters from the Jews of Jerus to
their brethren in Egypt, urging them to keep the Feast
of Deveanon and a be general way to oh-

serve the Law given them by God through

3. Contents Moses. Both letters appear designed io

. _.. ,Win for the Jerus temple the love and de-
yotion which the Jews of Egypt were in danger of lavish-
ing upon the Leontopolis temple in Egypt. These letters
have no connection with the rest of the book or with
each other, and both are undoubted forgeries. There
can be no doubt that 2 Macc was first of all composed,
and that subsequently either the author or a later hand
prefixed these letters on account of their affinity in
thought to the book as it first existed. See further on
these letters II, 4 and 9.

(2) 2 19-32: Introduction to what follows. The
author or epitomizer claims that his history (ch 3 to end
of the hook) is an epitome in one book of a larger work
in 5 hooks hy Jason of Cyrene. But see II, 4, below.

(3) 8 1—15 39 (end of book): History of the rise and
progress of the Maccabean wars from 176 BC, to the
closing year of the reign of Seleucus IV Philopator, to
the defeat and death of Nicanor in 161 BC, a perlod of
15 years. The record in 2 Macc begins one year earlier
than that of 1 Macc, but as the latter reaches down to


1951


135 BO (and probably below 105 BO; see I, 5

covers a period of at least 40 years, while 2 eS pabae
the history of but 15 years (176-161 BC). The history
of this perlod is thus treated: (a) 3 1 6: Traitorous
conduct of the Benjamite Simon in regard to the temple
treasures and the high priest; futile attempt of Heli -
dorus, prime minister of Seleucus IV, to rob the temple
(see I, 3, [11] above); (6) 4 7—7 42| 1 Macc 1 10-64,
with significant variations and additions. Accession of
Antiochus Epiphanes (175 BC); the Hellenizing of some
Jews; persecution of the faithful; martyrdom of Eleazar
and the 7 brethren and their mother (this last not in
1 Macc); (c) chs 8-15 (end) || 1 Macc 8-7, with sig-
nificant divergences in details. Rise and development
of the Maccabean revolt (see I, 8, above). _ In the closing
verses (15 38 ff) the writer begs that his composition
a be received with consideration.

, The record of events in 2 Macc ends with the brillant
victory of Judas over Nicanor, followed by the death of
the latter; but it is strange that the history of the main
hero of the book should be dropped in the middle. Per-
haps this abrupt ending is due to the writer’s aim to
commend to the Jews of Egypt the two new festivais,
both connected with the Jerus temple: (a) Hanukkah
(Festival of Dedication) (1 9.18; 5 16: y 8); )
Nicanor Day (15 ep to commemorate the defeat and
death of Nicanor. To end the book with the account of
the institution of the latter gives it greater prominence.


In its present form 2 Macc is based ostensibly
on two kinds of written sources.
(1) In 2 19-32 the writer of 3 1 to
4, Sources the end, which constitutes the book
: proper, says that his own work is but
an epitome, clearly, artistically and attractively set
out, of a larger history by one Jason of Cyrene.
Most commentators understand this statement
literally, and endeavor to distinguish between the
parts due to Jason and those due to the epitomizer.
Some think they see endings of the 5 books reflected
in the summaries at 3 40; 742; 109; 13 26;
15 37. But W. H. Kosters gives cogent reasons
for concluding that the reference to Jason is but a
literary device to secure for his own composition
the respect accorded in ancient, as in a lesser degree
in modern, times to tradition. The so-called
“epitomizer” is in that case alone responsible for
the history he gives. The present writer has no
hesitation in accepting these conclusions. We
read nowhere else of a historian called ‘‘Jason,’’ or
of such a large history as his must have been if it
extended to 5 books dealing with the events of 15
years, thongh such a man and so great a work could
hardly have escaped notice. Hitzig (Gesch. des
Volkes Israels, J1, 415) held that Jason or his sup-
posed epitomizer made use of 1 Mace, altering,
adding and subtracting to suit his purpose. But
the different ofder of the events and the contra-
dictions in statements of facts in the 2 books, as
well as the omission from 2 Macc of important items
found in 1 Macc, make Hitzig’s supposition quite
untenable. A careful examination of 2 Macc hasled
Grimm, Schiirer, Zéckler, Wibrich, Cornill, Torrey
and others to the conclusion that the author de-
ended wholly upon oral tradition. This gives the
pest clue to the anachronisms, inconsistencies and
loose phrasing which characterize the book. Ac-
cording to 1 Macc 4 26-33, the first campaign of
Lysias into Judaca took place in 165 BC, the year
before the death of Antiochus IV; but 2 Macc 11
tells us that it occurred in 163 BC, i.e. subsequent
to the death of Antiochus IV. Moreover; in the
latter passage this Ist expedition of Lysias is con-
nected with the grant of freedom to the Jews, which
is really an incident of the 2d expedition, and in
18 1-24 is rightly mentioned in the account of the
2d expedition. The writer of 2 Mace, relying upon
memory, evidently mixes up the stories of two
different expeditions. Similarly the invasions of
neighboring tribes under Judas, which are repre-
sented in 1 Macc 6 1-68 as taking place in quick
succession, belong, according to 2 Macc 8 30;
10 15-38; 12 2-45, to separate dates and different
sets of circumstances. The statements in 2 Mace


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Mace, Books of


are obscure and confused, those in I Macc 5 clear
and straightforward. Though in 2 Macc 10 37
we read of the death of Timotheus, yet in 12 2 ff he
appears as a leader in other campaigns. There
again the writer’s memory plays him false as he
recalls various accounts of the same events. It
was Mattathias who gathered together the Jews and
organized them for resistance against Syria, if we
follow 1 Mace 2 1-70; but 2 Macc 8 1-7 ascribes
this réle to his son Judas. The purification of the
temple took place 3 years subsequent to its prof-
anation, according to 1 Macc 1 54; 4 52, but
only 2 years, according to 2 Macc 10 3.

(2) The two letters sent from Palestinian to
Egyp Jews (1 1—2 18) form no integral part of the
original 2 Macc. They are clearly forgeries, and
abound in inaccuracies and inconsistencies. The
second letter, much the longer, gives an account
of the death of Antiochus Epiphanes, which is irrec-
oncilable with that in_9 1-28 and also with that
in 1 Macc 6 1-16. Nehemiah is said in 1 18 to
have rebuilt the temple and altar, a work accom-
plished by Zerubbabel nearly a cent. earlier (Ezr 3
3; 6 15). Nehemiah’s work was to repair the
gates and walls (Neh 3 1-32; 61; 71; Sir 49
13). The writer of this letter says (2 Mace 2 3-5)
that at the time of the exile, Jeremiah concealed
in a cave on Mt. Pisgah the tabernacle, the ark of
the covenant and the altar of incense, a statement
which no one accepts as correct or even plau-
sible. That the author of the rest of the book is
not the composer of the letters is proved by the dif-
ference of style and the contradictions in subject-
matter. But that he himself prefixed them is
made probable by the connecting particle in the Gr
(6é), though some (Bertholdt, Grimm, Paulus,
Kosters) think rather plausibly that the letters
were added by a later hand, the connection in the
Gr being also introduced by him and not by the
author of the rest of the book. It has been main-
tained that we have but one letter in 1 1—2 18,
and on the other hand that there are three. But
the division into two is quite natural and is almost
universally accepted.

2 Macc belongs to the class of lit. called by the
Germans Tendenz-Schriften, i.e. writings originating

in the desire to teach some doctrine
5. Histo- or to correct some supposed error.
ricity 1 Macc gives us a history of the Macca-
bean wars as such, taking so little
notice of the part played by God that the Divine
Being is not so much as mentioned, except under
the impersonal form Heaven (cf ‘Heaven helps
those who help themselves”). Nor has 1 Macc a
word to say about a life beyond the grave. In
short, 1 Macc is written from the standpoint of the
Sadducees, to which party the reigning dynasty
(the Hasmonean) belonged. The writer of 2 Macc
is evidently a Pharisee and his aim is not historical
but doctrinal; i.e. the book is a historical romance
with a purpose, that purpose being to make promi-
nent the outstanding tencts of the Pharisees (see
JI, 6). Two extreme opinions have been defended
as to the historical value of 2 Mace: (1) That 2
Macc is a strictly historical work, is more trust-
worthy than 1 Mace and is to be followed when the
two books differ; so the bulk of Roman Catholics
and also Niese and Schlatter. The supernatural-
ism of the book is to Romanists a recommendation.
(2) That 2 Macc has virtually no historical value,
since it was written for other than historical ends;
so Wibrich, Kosters and Kamphausen. But the
bulk of Protestant critics of recent times occupy a
position midway between these two opposite opin-
ions, viz. that 1 Mace is much more accurate than
2 Mace and is to be preferred when the 2 books of
Macc differ or contradict each other; so Grimm,


Macc, Books of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1952


Reuss, Schiirer, Kamphausen. On the other hand,
when 2 Mace contains historical matter absent
from 1 Mace it is to be accepted as correct unless
opposed by intrinsic improbability or direct contrary
evidence. In chs 3-5 we have details concerning
the Maccabean revolt not found in 1 Mace, and in
treatment of episodes or incidents with which 1
Macc deals it is often fuller and more specific, as
in 10 14-23; 12 7-9 (cf 1 Macc 5 1-5; 12 17-25);
10 24-38 (cf 1 Macc 5 29-44); 12 32-45 (ef
1 Macc 5 65.68.63f). On the other hand, the
account of the celestial appearances in 3 24 ff; 11
8, etc, and the description in 6 18 ff of the martyr-
dom of Eleazar the scribe and of the 7 brethren and
their mother, carry on their face the marks of their
legendary and unhistorical character. The edi-
fying remarks scattered throughout the book, many
of them pragmatic and reminding one of the Book of
Dnl, confirm the impression otherwise suggested,
that the author’s aim was didactic and not his-
torical. The book as it stands is a real authority
for the ideas prevalent in the writer’s circle at the

time of its composition.
In general it may be said that the doctrines taught
in 2 Macc are those of the Pharisees of the day.
Several scholars consider 2 Macc the


6. Teach- answer of Pharisaism to the Saddu-
ing of the ceeism of 1 Macc (see Wellhausen,
Book Die Pharisder und die Saducder; cf


Geiger, Urschrift und Ubersetzungen
der Bibel, 219 ff). But there is evidence enough
(see II, 4) that the anthor of 2 Macc had not seen
1 Macc. Yet it is equally clear that 2 Macc
does give prominence to the distinctive tenets of
Pharisaism, and it was probably written on that
account.

(1) The strictest observance of the law is eu-
forced. The violation of the sanctity of the Sabbath
countenanced under special circumstances in 1 Macc
(2 39-48) is absolutely forbidden in 2 Macc (6 6.11;
8 26f; 12 88); cf the words of the Pharisees to
Petronius when the latter proposed to have a statue
of the emperor Caius erected in the temple: “We
will die rather than transgress the law’ (Jos, Ant,
XVIII, viii, 3).

(2) The Pharisaic party took but little interest
in political affairs, and supported the Hasmoneans
only because and in so far as they fought for the
right to observe their religious rites. When, how-
ever, they compromised with Hellenism, the Phari-
sees turned against them and their allies the Sad-
ducees. In this book we miss the unstinted praise
accorded the Hasmonean leaders in 1 Mace, and it
is silent as to the genealogy of the Hasmoneans,
the death of Judas Maccabaeus and the family
grave at Modin.

(8) The book reveals thus early the antagonism
between the Pharisees and the priestly party, which
is so evident in the Gospels. The high-priesthood
had through political circumstances become the
property of the Maccabees, though they were not
of the Aaronic family, or even of the tribe of Levi.
The priestly circle became the aristocratic, broad-
church party, willing to come to terms with Gr
thought and life. Hencein 2 Macc, Jason and
Menelaus are fit representatives of the priesthood.
In the list of martyrs (chs 6f) no priest appears,
but on the other hand, Eleazar, one of the principal
scribes—scribes and Pharisees were then as in NT
times virtually one party—suffered for his loyalty
to the national religion, “leaving his death for an
example” (6 18-31).

(4) The temple occupies a high and honorable
place in 2 Macc, as in the mind of the orthodox
party (see 2 19; 3 2; 5 15; 9 16; 18 23; 14 31).
Great stress is laid on the importance of the feasts
(6 6; 10 8, ctc), of sacrifice (10 3), of circumcision


(6 10), of the laws of diet (6 18; 11.31). The
author seems in particular anxious to recommend
to his readers (Egyp Jews) the observance of the
two new festivals instituted to commemorate the

urification of the temple after its pollution by the
Bovine and also the victory over Nicanor. Accord-
ing to this book the Hanukkah feast was established
immediately after the death of Antiochus Epiphanes
(10 6 ff), not before this event (1 Macc 4 56),
probably to give it additional importance. The
book closes with the defeat and death of Nicanor and
the founding of the Nicanor Day festival, without
mentioning the death of Judas, as though the
writer’s aim was to give prominence to the two
new festivals.

(5) This book shows a Jewish particularism which
agrees well with Pharisaism and Scribism, but is
opposed to the broader sentiments of the ruling
party: Israel is God’s people (1 26); His por-
tion (14 15); He often intervenes miraculously on
behalf of Israel and the religion of Israel (3 24-30;
10 29f; 11 6-8); even the calamities of the nation
are proofs of Divine love because designed for the
nation’s good (6 18); but the snfferings brought
upon the heathen are penal and show the Divine
displeasure (488; 659; 138; 16 32f). The
writer is deadly opposed to the introduction of Gr
customs and in particular to the establishment of
a gymnasium in Jerus (4 7f; 11 24), The Book
of Jub, also written by a zealous Pharisee, takes up
the same hostile attitude toward foreign customs
(see 3 31; 7 20, and the note by R. H. Charles
[Book of Jub] on the former).

(6) This book gives prominence to the doctrine


- of a resurrection and of a future life about which


1 Macc, a document of the Sadducee party, is silent
(cf I, 5 above; see 7 9.11.14.86; 12 43-45; 14
46 [cf IV, 4, below]). The Sadducees, to which the
Hasmoneans belonged, denied a resurrection, limit-
ing their conception of religion to the_present life,
in this agreeing with the teaching of the Heb Scrip-
tures down to the time of the exile (536 BC). But
the Pharisees and scribes, though professing to rest
their beliefs on the “Law of Moses,’’ departed from
that law in this matter (see Warburton, The
Divine Legation of Moses). The resurrection is to
be a bodily one (7 11.22 f; 14 46) and to a life that
is unending (7 9.36). The following related beliefs
supported in this book and forming part of the creed
of orthodox Pharisaism are adduced by Roman-
ists on behalf of their own teaching: (a) the effi-
cacy of prayers for the dead (12 44); (b) the power
exercised by the intercession of saints (15 12-14);
Philo (De execrat., 9) and Jos (Ant, I, xi, 3) held
the same doctrine; (c) the atoning character of the
martyrdom of the righteous (7 36.38; cf 4 Macc
17 22; see IV, 4, [8], below).

(7) The angelology of 2 Macc forms a prominent
feature of the book (see 3 24-80; 10 29f; 11 6-8).
The Sadducees accepted the authority of the Pent,
though they rejected tradition. They were there-
fore mconsistent in allowing no place for angelic
beings in their creed, though consistent in rejecting
the doctrine of a future life.

(8) The comparative silence of this book on the
question of the Messianic hope is strikingly in con-
trast with the prominence of the subject in Ps Sol
(17 23 ff, etc; see Ryle and James, Psalms of
Solomon, lii ff) and other contemporary writings
emanating from the Pharisees. But why should
the author of 2 Macc be expected to give equal
prominence to all his opinions in one tract? Some
such hope as that connected with the Messiah does,
peer seem to be implied in 1 27; 2 18; 7 33;

The present writer holds that one man is respon-
sible for 2 Macc in its present form and that the


1953


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Macc, Books of


only written source was the 2 letters with which
the book opens (1 1—2 18) (see II, 4, above).

Even if we have to assume an origi-
7. The nal in 5 books of which 2 Macc, as we
Author have it, is but an epitome, it is not pos-
sible to distinguish between the senti-
ments of “Jason” and his epitomizer. The author
—assuming but one—wag_ evidently an Egyp,
probably an Alexandrian Jew, who nevertheless
retained his loyalty to the Jerus temple and its
constitutions and desired to prevent the alienation
of his fellow-countrymen in the same country from
the home sanctuary and its feasts, esp. the two new
feasts, Hanukkah (Dedication) and Nicanor Day.
The Jews of Egypt had a temple of their own, in
opposition to the teaching of the Jewish law (D and
P; ef Dt 12 2-18 and Lev 17 1-9; 19 30), and
it was perhaps the growing influence of this temple
that prompted the author to compose this book
which sets so much honor upon the Jerus temple
and its observances. The character of the Gr (see
II, 9, below), the ignorance of Pal and also the deep
interest in Egypt which this book reveals—these
and other considerations point to the conclusion
that the author lived and wrote in Egypt. There
is no evidence that Judas Maccabaeus (Leon
Allatius), or the author of Sir (Hasse) or Philo the
Jew (Honorius d’Autun) or Jos wrote the book,
though it has been ascribed by different scholars
to each of the persons named.

The book must have been written sufficiently
long after 161 BC, the year with which the record

closes, to allow mythical tales of the
8. Date martyrdoms in chs 6f and the history

of the supernatural appearances in
3 24-30, etc, to arise. If we allow 30 years, or the
lifetime of a generation, we come down to say 130
BC as a terminus a quo. There is probably in 15
36 a reference to the Book of Est (so Cormill,
Kautzsch and Wellhausen, JJG+4, 302 f) which would
bring the terminus a quo down to about 100 BC.
That 2 Macc was written subsequently to 1 Macc
(i.e. after 80 BC) is made certain by the fact that
the Jews now pay tribute to Rome (8 10.36).
Since Philo, who died about 40 AD, refers to 4 8
—T 42 (Quod omnis probus liber, Works, ed Mangey,
II, 459), the book must have been composed before
40 AD. This is confirmed by the certainty that it
was written before the destruction of Jerus and
the temple (70 AD), for the city still exists and the
temple services are in full operation (83 6 ff, etc).
He 11 35f is no doubt an echo of 6 18—7 42 and
shows that the unknown author of He had 2 Macc
before him. The teaching of the book represents
the views of the Pharisees about the middle of the
last cent. BC. A date about 40 BC would agree
with all the evidence.

That the original language was Gr is made exceed-
ingly likely by the easy flow of the style and the almost
entire absence of Hebraisms (yet see 8 15;
9 5; 14 24). No scholar of any standing
has pleaded for_a Heb original of the
present book. Bertholdt, however, ar-

ued that the two letters (1 1—2 18)
were ne orinoaat in Heb (or Aram.). Ewald held that the
2d letter (1 11—2 18) is from the Heb, and Schllinkes
that this applies to the lst only. But the evidence given
by these scholars is unconvincing, though the 1st letter
is certainly more Hebraic in style than the 2d, the con-
trary of what Ewald said.

As to the texts and versions, see I, 9, above, where the


statements apply here with but slight qualifications.
hut the book is lacking in & as well as in


9. Original
Language


10. Text A. In addition to the Old Lat text
d adopted for the Vulg, we have another
an Lat text in Cod. Ambrosianus, published


Versions in 1824 by Peyron; but this book js
unrepresented in Sabatier's collection of

Old Lat texts.
Lireratoure.—In addition to the lit. mentioned under
Arvocrrrua and I above, and in the course of the present
art., note the following items: Comm. of Moffatt (Ozford


Apoc); C. Bertheau, De sec. lib. Macc., 1829 (largely
quoted by Grimm); W. H. Kosters, '*De Polemiek yan
het tweede hoek de Mak,”’ TT, XII, 491-558; Schlatter,
‘Jason von Cyrene,” TLZ, 1893, 322; A. Biichler, Die
Tobiaden u. die Oniadenim II Mak, 1889; Wibrich, Juden
und Griechen, etc, 1895, 64; Kamphausen (Kautzsch, Die
Apoc des AT). The followlng discussing the two letters
(1 1—2 18) deserve mention: Valckenaer, De Aristobulo,
38-44; Schliinkes, Hpistolae quae secundo Mace libro I,
etc, 1844, 1-9; also Diffciliorum locorum epistolae, etc,
1847; Graetz, ‘‘Das Sendschreiben der Palaestinenser an
die aegyptischen Gemelnden,’’ etc, Monatss. fir Gesch. u.
Wissen. des Judenthums, 1877, 1-16, 49-60; A. Biichler,
“Das Sendschreiben der Jerusalemer,” etc, Monatss. fir
Geach. u. Wissen. des Judenthums; see last notice, 1897,
481-500, 529-54); Bruston, ‘'Trois lettres des Juifs de
Palestine,” ZATW, X, 110-17; W. H. Kosters, ‘' Strek-
king der brleven In 2 Macc,’ TT, 1898, 68-76; Torrey,
**Die Briefe 2 Mak,” ZAT W, 1900, 225-42.

IH, 3 Maccabees.—The name 3 Macc, though
occurring in the oldest MSS and VSS, is quite un-
suitable, hecause the book refers to
events which antedate the Maccabean
age by about half a cent., and also to
events in which the Maccabees took no part. But
this book tells of sufferings and triumphs on the
part of loyal Jews comparable to those of the
Maccabean period. Perhaps the term Maccabees
was generalized so as to denote all who suffered for
their faith. Some hold that the book was written
originally as a kind of introduction to the Books of
Macc, which it precedes as Book I in Cotton’s Five
Books of Maccabees. But the contents of the book
do not agree with this view. Perhaps the title is
due to a mistake on the part of a copyist.

The book has never been reckoned as canonical
by the Western church, as is shown by the fact that

it exists in no edition of the Vulg
2. Canon- and was not included in the Canon by
icity the Council of Trent. It is for the

latter reason absent from the Protes-
tant VSS of the Apoc which contain but the Books
of Macc (Land 2). But 3 Macc has a place in two
uncials of the LXX (A and V) and also in the an-
cient (Pesh) Syr VS of the Scriptures, and it is
given canonical rank in the Apos Const (canon 85).
The book must therefore have been held in high
esteem in the early church.

3 Macc is a historical novel in which there ls much
more romance than history, and more silly and super-

ficial writing than either. It professes
3. Contents to narrate occurrences in the history of the
° Jews which took place at Jerus and at
Alexandria in which the Jews were per-

secuted but in various ways delivered.

(1) 1 1—2 24: After conquering at Raphia Antiochus
Ili, the great king of Syria (224-187 BC), Ptolemy IV
Philopator, king of Egypt (221-204 BC), resolved to
visit Jerus and to enter the sanctum (‘‘holy of holies,’’
veés, naés) of the temple to which by the Jewish law
access was allowed on to the high priest, and even to
him but once a his (Day of Atonement [1 11]). The


people, were in a paroxysm of grief
ersisted


1. Name


Jews, priests an
and earnestly entreated him to desist, but he
inhis plan. They then through Simon, the hig riest,
219-199 BC, prayed that God might intervene and avert
this desecration. The prayer Js answered, the king being
paralyzed before realizing his purpose.

(2) 2 25-30: Returned to Alexandria, Ptolemy is ex-
asperated at the failure of his long-cherished project and
resolves to wreak his vengeance upon the Jews of Egypt.
He issues a decree that all Jews in Alexandria who re-
fused to bend the Imee to Bacchus should be deprived
of all their rights as citizens. :

2 31—4 21: Agoodly number of Alexandrian Jews
refuse to obey the royal mandate, whereupon Ptolemy
issues an edict that all the Jews of Egypt, men, women
and children, shall be brought in chaius to Alexandria
and confined in the race-course (hippodrome), with a
view to their wholesale massacre. Prior to the massacre
there is to be a complete register taken of the names of
the assembled Jews. Before the list is complete the
writing materials give way and the huge slaughter Is
averted.

(4) 422—6 21: The king, still thirsting for the blood
of this people, hits upon a different method of compass-
ing their ruin. Five hundred elephants are intoxicated
with wine and incense and let loose upon the Jews in the
race-course. Here we have the principal plot of the
book, and we reach the climax in the various providential
expedients, childish in their character, of preventing the


Macc, Books of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1954


urpose. The lesson of it all


execution of the king's
deliver those who put their


seems to be that Ged wi
trust in Him.


(5) 6 22—7 23: At length the king undergoes a


change of heart. He releases the Jews and restores
them to all their lost rights and honors. In response
to their request, he gives them permission to slay their
brother-Jews who, in the hour of trial, had given up their
faith. They put to death 300, ‘‘esteeming this destruc-
tion of the wicked a season of joy” (7 15).

3 Maccis made up of a number cf incredible tales, the
details cf which are absurd and contradictory. The
beginning of the book has evidently heen lost, as appears
from the opening words, '‘'Now when Philopator”' (6
é¢ tAondtup, ho dé Philopdiér), and also from the refer-
ences to an earlier part of the narrative now lost, e.g.:
11 (‘from those who came back"); 1 2 (‘‘the plot
afcre mentioned'’’); 2 25 (‘'the aforenamed boon com-
panicns'’), etc.


The book contains very little that is true history,
notwithstanding what Israel Abrahams (see ‘‘Litera-~
ture’’ to this section), depending largely
4, Histo- on Mahaffy (TheEmpire of the Piole-
Tricity mies), says to the contrary. Itismuch
more manifest than even in the case of
2 Macc that the writer’s aim was to convey certain
impressions and not to write history (see III, 5).

The improbabilities of the book are innumerable
(see Bissell, The Apoc of the OT, 616f), and it is
evident that we have to do here with a combination
of legends and fables worked up in feeble fashion
with a view to making prominent certain ideas
which the author wishes his readers to keep in mind.
Yet behind the fiction of the book there are certain
facts which prompted much of what the writer says.

(1) That Ptolemy IV bore the character of
cruelty and capriciousness and effeminacy is borne
out by Polybius (204-121 BC) in his History and
by Plutarch in his Life of Cleomenes.

(2) The brief outline of the war between Ptolemy
IV and Antiochus JII, the latter being conquered
at Raphia (chs 1f), agrees in a general way with
what has been written by Polybius, Livy and
Justin.

(3) In this book, by the command of Ptolemy,
500 intoxicated elephants are let loose upon the
Jews brought bound to the race-course of Alexan-
dria. Jos (CAp, II, v) tells us that Ptolemy VII
Physcon, king of Egypt, 145-117 BC, had the
Jews of Alexandria, men, women and children,
brought bound and naked to an inclosed space and
that he had let loose on them a herd of elephants,
which, however, turned instead upon his own men,
killing a large number of them. The cause of the
king’s action was that the Jewish residents of
Alexandria sided with his foes. In 3 Mace the
cause of the action of Ptolemy IV was the failure
of his project to enter the sanctum of the Jerus
temple; this last perhaps areflection of 2 Macc 3 9
ff, where it is related that Heliodorus was hindered
from entering the temple by a ghostly apparition.
Now these two incidents, n both of which Jews
are attacked by intoxicated elephants, must rest
upon a common tradition and have probably a
nucleus of fact. Perhaps, as Israel Abrahams
holds, the tradition arose from the action of the
elephants of Ptolemy in the Battle of Raphia.
Most writers think that the reference is to some-
thing that occurred in the reign of Ptolemy VII.

(4) The shutting-up of the Jews in the race-
course at Alexandria was not improbably suggested
by a similar incident in which Herod the Great
was the principal agent.

(5) In the opinion of Grimm (Comm., 216) we
have in the two festivals (6 36; 7 19) and in the
existence of the synagogue at Ptolemais an implied
reference to some great deliverance vouchsafed to
the Jews.

3 Macc was probably written by an Alexandrian
Jew at a time when the Jews in and around Alex-


andria were sorely persecuted on account of their
religion. The purpose of the author seems to have
been to comfort those suffering for the
5. Aim and faith by giving examples showmg how
Teaching God stands by His people, helping
in all their trials and delivering
them out of the hands of their enemies. Note
further the following points: (1) The book, unlike
2 Mace, is silent as to a bodily resurrection and a
future life, though this may be due to pure accident.
Hades (‘Atdys, Haidés) in 4 8; 5 42; 6 31, etc,
appears to stand only for death, regarded as the
end of all human life. (2) Yet the belief in angelic
beings is clearly implied (sce 6 18 ff). (8) The
author has much confidence in the power of prayer
(see 2 10; 2 21-24; 5 6-10.13.50f; 6 1-15, etc).
(4) The book lays stress upon the doctrine that God
is on the side of His people (4 21, etc), and even
though they transgress His commandments He
will forgive and save them (2 13; 4 18, etc).
From the character of the Gr, the interest shown
in Alexandrian Judaism, and the acquaintance dis-
played with Egyp affairs (see I. Abra-


6. Author- hams, op. cit., 39 ff), it may be in-
ship and ferred with confidence that the author
Date was a Jew residing in Alexandria.


The superior limit (terminus a quo) for
the date is some time in the last cent. BC. Since
the existence of the additions to Du] is implied (see
Dnl 6 6), the inferior hmit (terminus ad quem) is
some time before 70 AD. If the temple had been
destroyed, the continuance of the temple services
could not have been implied (see 1 8 ff). As the
book seems written to comfort and encourage
Alexandrian Jews at a time when they were per-
secuted, Ewald, Hausrath, Reuss and others thought
it was written during the reign of the emperor
Caligula (37-41 AD), when such a persecution
took place. But if Ptolemy is intended to repre-
sent Caligula, it is strange, as Schtirer (GJ V4, III,
491) remarks, that the writer does not make
Ptolemy claim Divine honors, a claim actually
made by Caligula.

Though Jos (d. 95 AD) could not have known the
book, since his version of the same incidents differs
so much, yet it must have been written some 30
years before his death, i.c. before the destruction
of Jerus and the temple in 71 AD.

That 3 Macc was composed in Gr is the opinion of all


scbclars and is proved hy the free, idiomatic and rather
bombastic character of the language in the

7. Original . : i
(1) Greek.—This book occurs in the two
Language uncials A and V(not in B or &), in most cur-
.  Sives and also in nearly alledd of the LXX.
(2) Syriac.—The Syr VS (Pesh) reproduced in the
Paris and London Polyglot and by Lagarde, Lib. A poe.


Vet. Test. Itis not a good tr.
8. Text and (3) att ico eer Lat tr is that
Versions made for the Complutensian Polyglot.


(4) The earliest in Eng. is that of Walter
Lynne (1650).

_LIrERATURE.—Besides the comms. by Grimm (the best),
Bissell (Lange), Kautzsch and Emmet (Ozford A poc), and
the arts. in HDB (Fairweather, excellent), EB (Torrey,
gocd), GJ V4 (Schiirer), III, 489-92; HJP, II, iii, 216-19,
let the following be noted: A. Hausrath, A Hist of NT
Times, 1895, II, 70 ff; Wibrich, Juden u. Griechen; Abra-
hams, ‘‘The Third Book of the Macc,’ JQR, LX, 1897,
39-58; A. Biichler, Die Tobiaden u. die Oniaden, 1899,
172-212. Both Abrahams and Biichler defend the his-
toricity of some parts of 3 Macc; Wibrich, ‘' Der histori-
sche Kern des III Makk,"” Hermes, Bd. 39, 1904, 244-58.
For ET see (1) Henry Cottou, The Five Books of Macc
(elton calls it eee Fonts of Mace, (2) W. R. Churton,

e Uncanonical an pocryphal Scriptures, and (3) Bax-
ter, The Apoc, Gr and Eng. : “ Sa


IV. 4 Maccabees.—4 Macc is a philosophical
treatise or discourse on the supremacy of pious
reason (= religious principle) in the vir-
tuousman. The oldest title of the book,
4 Mace (MaxaBalwy 8, Makkabatan d,
[4]), occurs in the earliest extant MSS of the LXX


1. Name


1955


(&, A, V, etc), in the list of the Cod. Claromontanus
(8d cent.?), the Catalogue of the Sixty Canonical
Books (5th cent.?) and the Synopsis of Athanasius
(9th cent.). It obtained this name from the fact
that it illustrates and enforces its thesis by examples
from the history of the Maccabees. Some early
Christian writers, believing 4 Macc to be the work
of Jos (see IV, 5), gave it a corresponding title.
Eusebius and Jerome, who ascribe the book to Jos,
speak of it under the name of: A Discourse con-
cerning the Supreme Power of Reason.

Though absent from the Vulg, and therefore from
the Romanist Canon and from Protestant VSS of

its Apoc, 4 Macc occurs in the prin-
2. Canon- cipal MSS (&, A, V, etc) and edd
icity (Fritzsche, Swete, not Tischendorf) of

the LXX, showing it was highly es-
teemed and perhaps considered canonical by at least
some early Christian Fathers.

This book is a philosophical disquisition in the form
of a sermon on the question ‘‘ Whether pious reason is

Oot ie Phe writer dines of all states
3. Contents fie inane and thé method" ii which he
intends to treat it.

(2) 1 18—83 18: He defines his terms and endeavors
from general principles to show that pious reason does
of right rule the passions.

(3) 3 19 to end of book: He tries to prove the same
proposition from the lives of the Maccahean martyrs.
These historical illustrations are based on 2 Macc 6 18—
7 42 (cf 3 Macc 6).

Because the hook is written as a discourse or sermon
and is largely addressed to an apparen audience (1 17;
214: 13 10; 18 4), Freudenthal and others think we
have here an example of a Jewish sermon delivered as
here written. But Jewish preachers based their dis-
courses on Scripture texts and their sermons were more
concise and arresting than this book.

The author’s philosophical standpoint is that
of Stoicism, viz. that in the virtuous man reason
dominates passion. His doctrine of
four cardinal virtues (dpdyqots, phré-
nésis, Sixawctvn, dikatosing, avdpela,
andreia, swgpoctrn, sophrosiiné, ‘“Provi-
dence,” “Justice,” ‘‘Fortitude,” “Temperance” {1
18]), is also derived from Stoicism. Though, how-
ever, he sets out as if he were a true Stoic, he pro-
ceeds to work out his discourses in orthodox Jewish
fashion. His all-dominating reason is that which is
guided by the Divinely revealed law, that law for
the faithful observing of which the martyrs died.
The four cardinal virtues are but forms of that true
wisdom which is to be obtained only through the
Mosaic law (7 15-18). Moreover, the passions
are not, as Stoicism taught, to be annihilated, but
regulated (L 61; 3 5), since God has planted them

2 21).

The author’s views approach those of Pharisaism.
(1) He extols the self-sacrificing devotion to the
law exhibited by the Maccabean martyrs _men-
tioned in 3 9 to the end of the book. (2) He be-
lieves in a resurrection from the dead. The souls
of the righteous will enjoy hereafter ceaseless
fellowship with God (9 8; 15 2; 18 5), but the
wicked will endure the torment of fire forever and
ever (10 11.15; 1212; 13 14). Nothing, how-
ever, is said of the Pharisees’ doctrine of a bodily
resurrection which 2 Macc, a Pharisaic document
(see II, 6, [6], above), clearly teaches. (3). The mar-
tyrdom of the faithful atones for the sins of the
people (6 24; 17 19-21; ef Rom 3 25).

According to Eusebius (HE, III, 6), Jerome

(De Viris Illust., xiii; C Peleg, ii.6), Suidas (Lex

"Iéonros, Iésépos) and other early
6. Author- writers, Jos is the author of this book,
ship and and in Gr edd of his works it consti-
Date tutes the last chapter with the head-

ing: AaB. “Jooyrov els MaxxaBalous
Abyos, 4 wept abroxpdropos Aovyicpod, Phiab. I osé pou eis
Makkabaious légos, @ pert autokrdtoros logismot,


4, Teach-
ing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Mace, Books of


“The Discourse of Flavius Josephus: or concerning
the Supreme Power of Reason” (so Niese, Bekker,
Dindorf, etc). But this tradition is negatived by
the style and thought, which differ completely from
those found in the genuine writings of that Jewish
historian. Besides this, the author of the book
makes large use of 2 Macc, of which Jos was ig-
norant. Moreover, there are traditions equally
ancient of a contrary kind.

The author must have been a Jew and he prob-
ably belonged to the Pharisee party (see IV, 7).
He was also a Hellenist, for he reveals the influence
of Gr thought more than any other apocryphal
writer. He was also, it would appear, a resident
of Alexandria, for the earliest notices of it occur in
literature having an Alexandrian origin, and the
author makes considerable use of 2 Mace, which
emanated from Alexandria.

It is impossible definitely to fix the date of the
book. But it was certainly written before the
destruction of the temple in 70 AD and after the
composition of 2 Macc, on which it largely depends.
A date in the first half of the Ist cent. of our era
would suit all the requirements of the case.


The book was certainly written in Gr, as all scholars
agree. It employs many of the terms of Gr philosophy
and it bears the general characteristics
6. Original oc eat spoken and ig aa Alexan-
Language ete a e commencement of the Christian
G (1) Greek—This book occurs in the prin-
cipal MSS (N, A, V, etc) and printed edd (Grabe,
Breitinger, Apel, Fritzsche, Swete [Cod. A with variants ,
of N and V] and Baxter, The Apoc, Gr and
7. Textand 2Z7g.), also in various Jos MSS and most
Versi edd of Jos, including Naber, but not Niese.
ersions (2) Latin—No Old Lat VS has come
down to us.

(3) Syriac.—The Pesh text is printed in Cod. Ambros.
(Ceriani) and by Bensley from a MS in The Fourth Book
of Mace and Kindred Documents in Syr (agrees mostly
with Cod. A). Sixtus Senensis (Bibliotheca Sancta, 1566,
I, 39) speaks of having seen another 4 Macc. But this
was probably ‘‘simply a reproduction of Jos’ (Schiirer,
AJP, Ii, iii, 14).

Literaturre.—Besides the lit. mentioned under the
other books of Macc, under Aprocrryrua, and in the
course of the present art., note the following: The comms.
of Grimm (excellent; the only one on the complete book)
and Deissmann (in Kantzsch, Apok des AT, brief but
up to date and good); the valuable monograph by
Freudenthal: Die Flavius Josephus beigelegte Schrift
tiber die Herrschafft der Vernunft ((V. Makkabierbuch)
Untersuchit, 1869. See, besides the arts. in HDB (Fair-
weather); £B (Torrey); Gfrérer, Philo, etc, II, 1831, 173—
200; Dahne, Gesch. Darstellung der jid.-alex. Religions-
Philosophie, II, 1834, 190-99; and the History of Ewald,
IV, 632 ff. There are ETs in Cotton, The Five Books
of Macc, Oxford, 1832; W. R. Churton, The Uncanonical
are Apocryphal Scripture; Baxter, The Apoc, Gr and

ng.

V. 5 Maccabees.—The designation 5 Macc was
first given to the book (now commonly so called)
by Cotton (The Five Books of Macc in
Eng., 1832), and it has been perpet-
uated by_Dr. Samuel Davidson (Intro
to the OT, III, 465); Ginsburg (Kitto’s Cyc. of Bib.
Lit.); Bissell (Apoc of the OT) and others. It has
been called the Arab. 2 Macc (so in the Paris and
London Polyglot), and the Arab. Macc. The 5
Macc in the Translatio Syra Peshitto, edited by
Ceriani, is really nothing more than a Syr VS of the
6th book of Jos, The Wars of the Jews.

This book has never been recognized
as canonical by either Jews or Chris-
tians.

The book is ostensibly a history of the Jews from the
attempt of Heliodorus to plunger the temple (186 BC)

to about © BC. It arate nO CuIng mors

than a clumsy compilation from 1 an
3. Contents qyace and Jos (except ch 12, which is the

only original part, and this teems with errors
of various kinds); a note at the end of ch 16 says 1 1—
16 26is called The Second Book of Mace according to the
Tr of the Hebrews. Ch 19 closes with the events narrated
at the end of 1 Macc. The rest of the book (chs 20—-
59) follows Jos (BJ, If) closely. Perhaps the original


1. Name


2. Canon-
icity


Macedonia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1956


work ended with ch 19. Ginsburg (op. cit., III, 17),
Bissell (Apoc, 639) and Wellhausen (Der arab. Josippus)
give uscful tahles showing the dependence of the various
parts of 5 Macc on the sources used.


In so far as this book repeats the contents of 1
and 2 Macc and Jos, it has the historical value of
the sources used. But in itself the
4. Histo- book has no historical worth. The
ricity author calls Rom and Egyp soldiers
“Macedonians,” Mt. Gerizim, ‘“Jeze-
bel,’ Samaria ‘“Sebaste,’’ Shechem ‘“‘Neapolis” or
“Naploris.” Herod and Pilate exchange names.
Some of the mistakes may of course be traceable
to the tr.
The original work was almost certainly composed
in Heb, though we have no trace of a Heb text (so
Ginsburg, op. cit., and Bissell). This
5. Original conclusion 1s supported by the nu-
Language merous Hebraisms which show them-
selves even in a double tr. The Pent
is called the ‘‘Torah,” the Heb Scriptures are spoken
of as ‘‘the twenty-four books,” the temple is “the
house of God” or ‘‘the holy house,’”’ Judaea is “the
land of the holy house” and Jerus is ‘“‘the city of the
holy house.” These and like examples make it
probable that the writer was a Jew and that the
language he used was Heb. Zunz (Die gottesdienst-
lichen Vortrége, 1832, 146 ff), Graetz (Geschichte,
V, 281) and Dr.S. Davidson (op. cit., 465) say the
book was written in Arab. from Heb memoirs.
According to Zunz (1.c.) and Graetz (l.c.) the Jew-
ish history of Joseph ben Gorion (Josippon), the
“‘pseudo-Josephus” (10th cent.), is but a Heb re-
cension of 5 Macc (the Arab. 2 Macc). On the
contrary, Wellhausen (op. cit.) and Schiirer (GJV4,
I, 159 f) maintain that the shorter narrative in
5 Macc represents the extent of the original com-
position far more correctly than the Heb history of
Josippon (which ranges from Adam to 70 AD), and
than other recensions of the same history.
The book was compiled for the purpose of con-
soling the Jews in their sufferings and encouraging
them to be stedfast in their devotion
6. Aim and to the Mosaic law. The same end
Teaching was contemplated in 2, 3 and 4 Macc
and in_a lesser degree in 1 Macc, but
the author or compiler of the preseut treatise wished
to produce a work which would appeal in the first
instance and chiefly to Heb (or Arab.?) readers.
The author believes in a resurrection of the body,
in a future life and a final judgment (6 13.43f).
The righteous will dwell in future glory, the wicked
will be hereafter punished (5 49.50f; 59 14).
We have no means of ascertaining who the author
was, but he must have been a Jew and he lived some
time after the destruction of the temple
7. Author- in 70 AD (see 9 5; 21 30; 22 9; 53
ship and 8, though Ginsburg regards these
Date passages as late additions and fixes
the date of the original work at about
6 BC, when the history ends). The author makes
large use of Jos (d. 95 AD), which also favors the
lower date.
The Arab. text of the book and a Lat tr by Gabriel
Sionita is printed in the Paris and London Polyglots.
No other ancient text has come down to
8. Text and us.


Cotton (op. cit., xxx) errs in saying
Versions that there is a Syr VS of the book.


LitERaTURE.—The most important lit. bas been
mentioned in the course of the art. The Eng. and
earlier Ger. edd of Schtirer, GJV, donot help. The only
Eng. tr is that by Cotton made directly from the Lat of
Gabriel Sionita. Bissell says that a Fr. VS appears as
an appendix in the Bibie of de Sacy; not, however, in the
Nouvelle Edition (1837) in the possession of the present
writer.

} T. Wrrton Davies

MACEDONIA, mas-é-do’ni-a (MaxeSovla, Make-
donia, ethnic Maxedév, Makedén):


I. Tae Maceponian Prorys anp Lanp
II. History or Maceponia
1. Philip and Alexander
2. Roman Intervention
. Roman Conquest
. Macedonia a Roman Province
. Later History
AUL AND MacEpoNia
. Paul's First Visit
- Paul's Second Visit
- Paul’s Third Visit
. Paul’s Later Visits
IV. Tae Macreponian Cuurca
1. Prominence of Women
2. Marked Characteristics
3. Its Members
LirERATURE


A country lying to the N. of Greece, afterward
enlarged and formed into a Rom province; it is to
the latter that the term always refers when used
in the NT.

I. The Macedonian People and Land.—Eth-
nologists differ about the origin of the Macedonian
race and the degree of its affinity to the Hellenes.
But we find a well-marked tradition in ancient times
that the race comprised a Hellenic element and a
non-Hellenic, though Aryan, element, closely akin
to the Phrygian and other Thracian stocks. The
dominant race, the Macedonians in the narrower
sense of the term, including the royal family, which


Won oo


II.


PONE


Coin of Macedonia.


was acknowledged to be Gr and traced its descent
through the Temenids of Argos back to Heracles
(Herod. v.22), settled in the fertile plains about the
lower Haliacmon (Karasu or Vistritza) and Axius
(Vardar), to the N. and N.W. of the Thermaic
Gulf. Their capital, which was originally at Edessa
or Aegae (Vodhena), was afterward transferred to
Pella by Philip II. The other and older element—
the Lyncestians, Orestians, Pelagonians and other
tribes—were pushed back northward and westward
into the highlands, where they struggled for gen-
erations to maintain their independence and weak-
ened the Macedonian state by constant risings and
by making common cause with the wild hordes of
Illyrians and Thracians, with whom we find the
Macedonian kings in frequent conflict. In order
to maintain their position they entered into a good
understanding from time to time with the states of
Greece or acknowledged temporarily Pers suze-
rainty, and thus gradually extended the sphere of
their power.

Hl. History of Macedonia.—Herodotus (viii.137-
39) traces the royal line from Perdiccas I through
Argaeus, Philip I, Aeropus, Alcetas and Amyntas I
to Alexander I, who was king at the time of the
Pers invasions of Greece. He and his son and
grandson, Perdiccas II and Archelaus, did much to
consolidate Macedonian power, but the death of
Archelaus (399 BC) was followed by 40 years of
disunion and weakness.

With the accession of Philip II, son of Amyntas
II, in 359 BC, M. came under the rule of a man
powerful alike in body and in mind, an able gen-
eral and an astute diplomatist, one, moreover, who
started out with a clear perception of the end at
which he must aim, the ercation of a great national
army and a nation-state, and worked consistently


1957


and untiringly throughout his reign of 23 years to
gain that object. He welded the Macedonian
tribes into a single nation, won by


1. Philip force and fraud the important posi-
and tions of Amphipolis, Pydna, Potidaea,
Alexander Olynthus, Abdera and Maronea, and


, secured a plentiful supply of guld by
founding Philippi on the site of Crenides. Grad-
ually extending his rule over barbarians and Greeks
alike, he finally, after the battle of Chaeronea (338
BC), secured his recognition by the Greeks them-
selves aS captain-general of the Hellenic states and
leader of a Graeco-Macedonian crusade against
Persia. On the eve of this projected eastern ex-
pedition, however, he was assassinated by order
of his dishonored wife Olympias (336 BC), whose
son, Alexander the Great, succeeded to the throne.
After securing his hold on Thrace, Illyria and
Greece, Alexander turned eastward and, in a series
of brilliant campaigns, overthrew the Pers empire.
The battle of the Granicus (834 BC) was followed
by the submission or subjugation of most of Asia
Minor. By the battle of Issus (333), in which
Darius himself was defeated, Alexander’s way was
opened to Phoenicia and Egypt; Darius’ second
defeat, at Arbela (331), sealed the fate of the Pers
power. Babylon, Susa, Persepolis and Ecbatana
were taken in turn, and Alexander then pressed
eastward through Hyrcania, Aria, Arachosia, Bac-
tria and Sogdiana to India, which he conquered
as far as the Hyphasis (Sutlej): therice he returned
through Gedrosia, Carmania and Persis to Babylon,
to make preparations for the conquest of Arabia.
A sketch of his career-is given in 1 Macc 1 1-7,
where he is spoken of as “Alexander the Mace-
donian, the son of Philip, who came out of the land
of Chittim’” (ver 1): his invasion of Persia is also
referred to in 1 Macc 6 2, where he is described
as “the Macedonian king, who reigned first among
the Greeks,” i.e. the first who united in a single
empire all the Gr states, except those which lay
to the W. of the Adriatic. It 1s the conception of
the Macedonian power as the deadly foe of Persia
which is responsible for the description of Haman
in Ad Est 16 10 as a Macedonian, ‘‘an alien in
truth from the Pers blood,” and for the attribution
to him of a plot to transfer the Pers empire to the
Macedonians (ver 14), and this same thought ap-
pears in the LXX rendering of the Heb Agagite
CAIN, 'dghaght) in Est 9 24 as Macedonian
(Makedon). : ;

Alexander died in June 323 BC, and his empire
fell a prey to the rivalries of his chief generals (1
Mace 1 9); after a period of struggle

2. Roman and chaos, three powerful kingdoms
Intervention were formed, taking their names from
Macedonia, Syria and Egypt. Even

in Syria, however, Macedonian influences remained
strong, and we find Macedonian troops in the serv-
ice of the Seleucid monarchs (2 Macc 8 20). In
215 King Philip V, son of Demetrius II and suc-
cessor of Antigonus Doson (229-220 BC), formed
an alliance with Hannibal, who had defeated the
Rom forces at Lake Trasimene (217) and at Cannae
(216), and set about trying to recover, Illyria.
After some years of desultory and indecisive war-
fare, peace was concluded in 205, Philip binding
himself to abstain from attacking the Rom pos-
sessions on the E. of the Adriatic. The Second
Macedonian War, caused by a combined attack of
Antiochus III of Syria and Philip of Macedon on
Egypt, broke out in 200 and ended 3 years later in
the crushing defeat of Philip’s forces by T. Quinctius
Flamininus at Cynoscephalae in Thessaly (cf 1
Macc 8 5). By the treaty which followed this
battle, Philip surrendered his conquests in Greece,
Illyria, Thrace, Asia Minor and the Aegean, gave


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Macedonia


up his fleet, reduced his army to 5,000 men, and
undertook to declare no war and conclude no alli-
ance without Rom consent.


In 179 Phillp was succeeded by his son Perseus, who
at once renewed the Rom alliance, but set to work to con-
solidate and extend his power. In_172
3. Roman war again broke out, and after several Rom
Cc t reverses the consul Lucius Aemilius Pau-
onques lus decisively defeated the Macedonians
at ne In 168 BC (cf 1 Macc 8 5,
where Perseus is called ‘‘king of Chittim’’). The king-
ship was abolished and Perseus was banished to Italy.
The Macedonians were declared free and autonomous;
thelr land was divided into four regions, with their capi-
tals at Amphipolis, Thessalonica, Pella and Pelagonia
respectlvely, and each of them was governed by its own
council; commercitum and cennubium were forbidden
between them and the gold and silver mines were closed.
A tribute was to be paid annually to the Rom treasury,
amounting to half the land tax hitherto exacted by the
Macedonian kings.
But this Compromise between freedom and subjection
could not be of long duration, and after the revolt_of
Andriscus, the pseudo-Philip, was quelled


4. Mace- (148 BC), M. was constituted a Rom
donia a province and enlarged by the addition of
R : parts of Illyria, Epirus, the Jonian islands

oman and Thessaly. Each year a governor was
Province dispatched from Rome with supreme mili-


. + tary and judiclal powers; the partition fell
into aheyance and communication within the province
was improved by the construction of the Vie Zgnatia from
Dyrrhachium to Thessalonica, whence it was afterward
continued eastward to the Nestus and the Hellespont.
In 146 the Achaeans, who had declared war on Rome,
were crushed by Q. Caecilius Metellus and L. Mummius,
Corinth was sacked and destroyed, the Achaean league
was dissolved, and Greece, under the name of Achaea,
was made a Ripvine and placed under the control of the
governor of M. In 27 BC, when the administration of
the provinces was divided between Augustus and the Sen-
ate, M.and Achaea fell to the share of the latter (Strabo,

. 840; Dio Cassius liii.12) and were governed separately

y ex-praetors sent out annually with the title of pro-
consul. In 15 AD, however, senatorial mismanagement
had hrought the provinces to the verge of ruin, and they
were transferred to Tiberius (Tacitus, Annals, 1.76),
who united them under the government of a legatus
Augusti pro praetore until, in 44 AD, Claudius restored
them to the Senate (Suetonius, Claudius 25; Dio Cassius
1x.24). Itis owing to this close historical and geographical
connection that we find M.and Achaea frequently men-
tioned together In the NT, M. being always placed first
(Acts 19 21; Rom 15 26; 2 Cor 9 2; 1 Thess 1 7.8).

Diocletian (284-305 AD) detached from M. Thessaly
and the Illyrian coast lands and formed them into two
Pro ees the latter under the name of


5. Later pirus Nova. Toward the end of the 4th
r: cent. what remained of M. was broken
History up into two provinces, Macedonia prima


and Macedonia secunda or salutaris, and
when in 395 the Rom world was divided into the western
and eastern empires, M. was included In the latter.
During tho next few years it was overrun and plundered
by the Goths under Alaric, and later, in the latter half of
the 6th cent., immense numbers of Slavonians settled
there. In the 10th cent. a large part of it was under
Bulgarian rule, and afterward colonies of various Asiatic
tribes were settled there by the Byzantine emperors.
In 1204 it became a Lat kingdom under Boniface, mar-
wis of Monferrat, but 20 years later Theodore, the Gr
despot of Epirns, founded a Gr empire of Thessalonica.
During the 2d half of the 14th cent. the greater pare of
it was part of the Servian dominions, but in 1430 Thessa-
Jonica fell hefore the Ottoman Turks, and from that time
down to the year 1913 M. has formed part of the Turk-
ish empire. Its history thus accounts for the very mixed
character of its population, which consists chiefly of
Turks, Albanians, Greeks_and Bulgarians, but has in it
a considerable element of Jews, Gypsies, Viachs, Servians
and other races.


UI. Paul and Macedonia.—In the narrative of
Paul’s journeys as given us in Acts 13-28 and in
the Pauline Epp., M. plays a prominent part. The
apostle’s relations with the churches of Philippi,
Thessalonica, and Beroea will be found discussed
under those several headings; bere we will merely
recount in outline his visits to the province.

On his 2d missionary journey Paul came to Troas,
and from there sailed with Silas, Timothy and Luke

to Neapolis, the nearest Macedonian
1. Paul’s seaport, in obedience to the vision of a
First Visit Macedonian (whom Ramsay identifies
with Luke: see s.v. ‘“‘Philippi”) urging
him to cross to M. and preach the gospel there


Macedonia
Machpelah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1958


(Acts 16 9). From Neapolis he journcyed inland
to Philippi, which is described as ‘“‘a city of M., the
first of the district” (ver 12). Thence Paul and
his two companions (for Luke appears to have
remained in Philippi for the next 5 years) traveled
along the Egnatian road, passing through Amphip-
olis and Apollonia, to Thessalonica, which, though
a “free city,” and therefore technically exempt
from the jurisdiction of the Rom governor, was
practically the provincial capital. Driven thence
by the hostility of the Jews, the evangelists preached
in Beroea, where Silas and Timothy remained for a
short time after a renewed outbreak of Jewish ani-
mosity had forced Paul to leave M. for the neigh-
boring province of Achaia (Acts 17 14). Although
he sent a message to his companions to join him
with all speed at Athens (ver 15), yet so great was
his anxiety for the welfare of the newly founded
Macedonian churches that he sent Timothy back
to Thessalonica almost immediately (1 Thess $
1.2), and perhaps Silas to some other part of M.,
nor did they again join him until after he had settled
for some time in Corinth (Acts 18 5; 1 Thess 3
6). The rapid extension of the Christian faith in
M. at this time may be judged from the phrases
used by Paul in his Ist Ep. to the Thess., the ear-
liest of his extant letters, written during this visit
to Corinth. He there speaks of the Thessalonian
converts as being an example “‘to all that believe
in M. and in Achaia” (1 7), and he commends their
love “toward all the brethren that are in all M.”
(4 10). Still more striking are the words, “From
you hath sounded forth the word of the Lord, not
only in M. and Achaia, but in every place your

faith to God-ward is gone forth” (1 8).
On his 3d missionary journey, the apostle paid
two further visits to M. During the course of a
long stay at Ephesus he laid plans for


2. Paul’s a 2d journey through M. and Achaia,
Second and dispatched two of his helpers,
Visit Timothy and Erastus, to M. to prepare


for his visit (Acts 19 21.22). Some
time later, after the uproar at Ephesus raised by
Demetrius and his fellow-silversmiths (vs 23-41),
Paul himself set out for M. (20 1). Of this visit
Luke gives us a very summary account, telling us
merely that Paul, “when he had gone through those
parts, and had given them much exhortation,
. . . . came into Greece” (ver 2); but from 2 Cor,
written from M. (probably from Philippi) during
the course of this visit, we learn more of the apos-
tle’s movements and feelings. While at Ephesus,
Paul had changed his plans. His intention at first
had been to travel across the Aegean Sea to Corinth,
to pay a visit from there to M. and to return to
Corinth, so as to sail direct to Syria (2 Cor 1 15.
16). But by the time at which he wrote the Ist
Ep. to the Cor, probably near the end of his stay
at Ephesus, he had made up his mind to go to
Corinth by way of M., as we have seen that he
actually did (1 Cor 16 5.6). From 2 Cor 2 13
we learn that he traveled from Ephesus to Troas,
where he expected to find Titus. Titus, however,
did not yet arrive, and Paul, who “had no relief
for [his] spirit,’’ left Troas and sailed to M. Even
here the same restlessness pursued him: ‘‘fightings
without, fears within’ oppressed him, till the
presence of Titus brought some relief (2 Cor 7
5.6). The apostle was also cheered by “the grace
of God which had been given in the churches of
M.” (8 1); in the midst of severe persecution,
they bore their trials with abounding joy, and their
deep poverty did not prevent them begging to be
allowed to raise a contribution to send to the Chris-
tians in Jerus (Rom 15 26; 2 Cor 8 2-4). Liber-
ality was, indeed, from the very outset one of the
characteristic virtues of the Macedonian churches.


The Philippians had sent money to Paul on two
occasions during his first visit to Thessalonica (Phil
4 16), and again when he had left M. and was stay-
ing at Corinth (2 Cor 11 9; Phil 4 15). On the
present occasion, however, the Corinthians seem to
have taken the lead and to have prepared their
bounty in the previous year, on account of which
the apostle boasts of them to the Macedonian
Christians (2 Cor 9 2). He suggests that on his
approaching visit to Achaia he may be accompanied
by some of these Macedonians (ver 4), but whether
this was actually the case we are not told.
The 3d visit of Paul to M. took place some 3
months later and was occasioned by a plot against
his life laid by the Jews of Corinth,
3. Paul’s = which led him to alter his plan of sail-
Third Visit ing from Cenchreae, the eastern sea-
port of Corinth, to Syria (2 Cor 1
16; Acts 20 3). He returned to M. accompanied
as far as Asia by 3 Macedonian Christians—So-
pater, Aristarchus and Secundus—and by 4 from
Asia Minor. Probably Paul took the familiar
route by the Via Egnatia, and reached Philippi
immediately before the days of unleavened bread;
his companions preceded him to Troas (Acts 20 5),
while he himself remained at Philippi until after
the Passover (Thursday, April 7, 57 AD, according
to Ramsay’s chronology), when he sailed from
Neapolis together with Luke, and joined his friends
in Troas (ver 6).
Toward the close of his 1st imprisonment at Rome
Paul planned a fresh visit to M. as soon as he should
be released (Phil 1 26; 2 24), and
4. Paul’s even before that he intended to send
Later Visits Timothy to visit the Philippian church
and doubtless those of Beroea and
Thessalonica also. Whether Timothy actually
went on this mission we cannot say; that Paul
himself went back to M. once more we learn from
1 Tim 1 3, and we may infer a 5th visit from the
reference to the apostle’s stay at Troas, which in all
probability belongs to a later occasion (2 Tim 4 13).
IV. The Macedonian Charch.—Of the churches
of Macedonia in general, little need be said here.
A striking fact is the prominence in


1. Promi- them of women, which is probably
nence of due to the higher social position held
Women by women in this province than in

Asia Minor (Lightfoot, Philippians,
55 ff). We find only two references to women in


connection with Paul’s previous missionary work;
the women proselytes of high social standing take
a share in driving him from Pisidian Antioch (Acts
13 50), and Timothy’s mother is mentioned as a
Jewess who believed (16 1). But in M. all is
changed. To women the gospel was first preached
at Philippi (ver 13); a woman was the first convert
and the hostess of the evangelists (vs 14.15); a
slave girl was restored to soundness of mind by the
apostle (ver 18), and long afterward Paul mentions
two women as having “labored with fhim] in the
gospel” and as endangering the peace of the church
by their rivalry (Phil 4 2.3). At Thessalonica
a considerable number of women of the first rank
appear among the earliest converts (Acts 17 4),
while at Beroea also the church included from the
outset numerous Gr women of high position (ver 12).
The bond uniting Paul and the Macedonian
Christians seems to have been a peculiarly close
and affectionate one. Their liberality

2. Marked and open-heartedness, their joyous-
Character- ness and patience in trial and perse-
istics cution, their activity in spreading the
Christian faith, their love of the
brethren—these are a few of the characteristics
which Paul specially commends in them (1 and 2
Thess; Phil; 2 Cor 8 1-8), while they also seem


1959


to have been much freer than the churches of Asia
Minor from Judaizing tendencies and from the
allurements of “philosophy and vain deceit.”
We know the names of a few of the early members
of the Macedonian churches—Sopater (Acts 20 4)
or Sosipater (Rom 16 21: the iden-
3. Its tification is a probable, though not a
Members certain, one) of Beroea; Aristarchus
: (Acts 19 29; 20 4; 27 2; Col 4 10;
Philem ver 24), Jason (Acts 17 5-9; Rom 16
21?) and Secundus (Acts 20 4) of Thessalonica;
Clement (Phil 4 3), Epaphroditus (Phil 2 25;
4 18), Huodia (Phil 4 2; this, not Euodias [AV],
is the true form), Syntyche (ib), Lydia (Acts 16
14.40; a native of Thyatira), and possibly Luke
(Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, 201 ff) of Philippi.
Gaius is also mentioned as a Macedonian in Acts
19 29, but perhaps the reading of a few MSS
Maxedéva is to be preferred to the TR Maxedévas,
in which case Aristarchus alone would be a Mace-
donian, and this Gaius would probably be identical
with the Gaius of Derbe mentioned in Acts 20 4
as a companion of Paul (Ramsay, op. cit., 280).
The later history of the Macedonian churches
together with lists of all their known bishops, will
be found in Le Quien, Oriens Christianus, II, 1 £;
TIT, 1089 ff, 1045 f.


Lireraturs.—General: C. Nicolaides, Macedonien,
Berlin, 1899; Bérard, La Macédoine, Paris, 1897;
“Odysseus,’’ Turkey in Europe, London, 1900.
History: Hogarth, Philip and Alezander of Macedon,
London, 1897, and the histories of the Hellenistic period
by Holm, Niese, Droysen and Kaerst. Ethnography
and Language: O. Hoffmann, Die Makedonen, thre
Sprache und thr Volkstum, Gottingen, 1906. Topog-
raphy and Antiquities: Heuzey and Daumet, Mission
archéologique de Macédoine, Paris, 1876; Cousinéry,
Voyage dansla Macédoine, Paris, 1831; Clarke, Travels',
VII, VIII, London, 1818; Leake, Travels in Northern
Greece, III, London, 1835; Duchesne and Bayet, Mémoire
sur une mission en Macédoine et au Mont Athos, Paris,
1876; Hahn, Reise von Belgrad nach Saloniki, Vienna,
1861. Coins: Head, Historia Nummorum, 193f; British
Museum Catalogue of Coins: Macedonia, etc, London,
1879. Inscriptions: CIG, nos. 1951-2010; CIL, III,
1 and III, Suppl.; Dimitsas, ‘H Maxedovia, Athens,
1896.


M. N. Top

MACHAERUS, ma-ké’rus (Mayapots, Ma-
chairotis): Not mentioned in Scripture, canonical
or apocryphal, but its importance in Jewish history
justifies its inclusion here. Pliny (NH, v.16.72)
speaks of it as, after Jerus, the strongest of Jewish
fortresses. It was fortified by Alexander Jannaeus
(BJ, VII, vi, 2). It was taken and destroyed by
Gabinius (ib, I, viii, 5; Ant, XIV, v, 4). Herod
the Great restored it and, building a city here, made
it one of hig residences (BJ, VII, vi, 1,2). It lay
within the tetrarchy assigned to Antipas at the
death of Herod. The wife of Antipas, daughter
of Aretas, privately aware of his infidelity, asked to
be sent hither (Ant, XVIII, v, 1). Here Jos has
fallen into confusion if he meant by the phrase “a
place in the borders of the dominions of Aretas and
Herod” that it was still in Herod’s hands, since
immediately he tells us that it was “subject to her
father.” It was natural enough, however, that a
border fortress should be held now by one and now
by the other. It may have passed to Aretas by
some agreement of which we have no record; and
Herod, unaware that his wife knew of his guilt,
would have no suspicion of her design in wishing
to visit her father. If this is true, then the Bap-
tist could not have been imprisoned and beheaded
at Machaerus (ib, 2). The feast given to the lords
of Galilee would most probably be held at Tiberias;
and there is nothing in the Gospel story to hint that
the prisoner was some days’ journey distant (Mk
6 14ff). The citadel was held by a Rom garrison
until 66 AD, which then evacuated it to escape a
siege (BJ, II, xviii, 6). Later by means of a


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Macedonia
Machpelah


stratagem it was recovered for the Romans by
Bassus, ¢c 72 AD (BJ, VII, vi, 4).

The place is identified with the modern Mkaur,
a position of great strength on a prominent height
between Wady Zerka Ma‘in and Wady el-Majib,
overlooking the Dead Sea. There are extensive
ruins. W. Ewine


MACHBANNAI, mak’ba-ni, -ba-na‘i (73257,
makhbannay; AV Machbanai): A Gadite who at-
tached himself to David in Ziklag (1 Ch 12 18).


MACHBENA, mak-bé’na (73292 , makhbénah; B,
MaxaByva, Machabénd, A, Maxapnvé, Machaménd;
AV Machbenah): A name which occurs in the gen-
ealogical list of Judah (1 Ch 2 49), apparently the
name of a place, which may be the same as “‘Cabbon’”’
(Josh 15 40), probably to be identified with el-
Kubeibeh, about 3 miles 8. of Beit Jibrin.


MACHI, ma’ki ("2%2, makhi; Pesh and some
MSS of LXX read “Machir’’): A Gadite, father
of Geuel, one of the 12 spies (Nu 13 15).


MACHIR, ma’‘kir (“9, makhir;
Macheir), MACHIRITE, m2’kir-it:

(1) The eldest son of Manasseh (Gen 60 23).
In Nu 26 29 itisrecorded that Machir begat Gilead,
but another narrative informs us that the children
of Machir “went to Gilead, and took it, and dis-
possessed the Amorites that were therein. And
Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manas-
seh; and he dwelt therein” (Nu 32 39.40; Josh
17 1.3; cf also 1 Ch 2 21.25; 7 14-17; Dt 3 15;
Josh 13 31). In the song of Deborah, Machir is
used as equivalent to Manasseh (Jgs 5 14).

(2) Son of Ammiel, dwelling in Lo-debar (2 8
9 4.5), a wealthy landowner who protected
Mephibosheth (Meribbaal), son of Jonathan, until
assured of the friendly intentions of David (cf Ant,
VII, ix, 8). Afterward, during the rebellion of
Absalom, Machir with others came to David’s
assistance at Mahanaim, bringing supplies for the
king and his men (2 § 17 27 ff). Joan A. Less


MACHMAS, mak’mas. See Micumasa.


MACHNADEBAI, mak-nad’é-bi, mak-na-dé’bi
C3292, makhnaddbhay): Son of Bani, one of
those who married foreign wives (Ezr 10 40).


MACHPELAH, mak-p@'la (M2 AT, ha-makh-
pélah, “the Machpelah”; 16 Surdotv, t6 diplotn,
“the double”): The name of a piece of ground and
of a cave purchased by Abraham as a place of
sepulcher. The word is supposed to mean “double”
and refers to the condition of the cave. It is tr4
“double cave” (rd dirdoby omrpraiov, t6 diplotin
spélaion) in the LXX in Gen 23 17. The name is
applied to the ground in Gen 23 19; 49 30; 50
13, and to the cave in Gen 23 9; 25 9. In Gen
23 17 we have the phrase “the field of Ephron,
which was in [the] Machpelah.”

The cave belonged to Ephron the Hittite, the
son of Zohar, from whom Abraham purchased it

for 400 shekelsof silver (Gen 23 8-16).
1. Scrip- _—_—It is described as “before,” i.e. “to the
tural Data E. of’? Mamre (ver 17) which (ver 19)

is described as the same as Hebron
(see, too, 26 9; 49 30; 60 13). Here were buried
Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and
Leah. (Cf however the curious variant tradition in
Acts 7 16, “Shechem”’ instead of ‘“Hebron.”’)

Jos (BJ, IV, ix, 7) speaks of the monuments
(mnémeia) of Abraham and his posterity which ‘‘are
shown to this very time in that small city [i.e. in


Maxelp,


Machpelah
Magadan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1960


Hebron]; the fabric of which monuments are of the
most excellent marble and wrought after the most

excellent manner’; and in another
2. Tradition place he writes of Isaac being buried
Regarding by his sons with his wife in Hebron


the Site where they had a monument belonging
to them from their forefathers (Avi, I,
xxii, 1). The references of early Christian writers


to the site of the tombs of the patriarchs only
very doubtfully apply to the present buildings
and may possibly refer to Ramet el-Khalil (see
Mamre). Thus the Bordeaux Pilgrim (333 AD)
mentions a square enclosure built of stones of great
beauty in which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were
buried with their wives. Antonius Martyr (c 600)
and Arculf (698) also mention this monument.
Mukaddasi speaks (c 985) of the strong fortress
around the tombs of the patriarchs built of great
squared stones, the work of Jinns, i.e. of super-
natural beings. From this onward the references
are surely to the present site, and it is difficult
to believe, if, as good authorities maintain, the
great buttressed square wall enclosing the site is
work at least as early as Herod, that the earlier
references can be to any other site. It is certain
that the existing buildings are very largely those
which the Crusaders occupied; there are many full
references to this place in mediaeval Moslem writers.
The Haram at Hebron, which present-day tradi-
tion, Christian, Jewish and Moslem, recognizes as
built over the cave of Machpelah, is


3. The one of the most jealously guarded sanc-
Haram at tuaries in the world. Only on rare
Hebron occasions and through the exercise of


much political pressure have a few
honored Christians been allowed to visit the spot.
The late King Edward VII in 1862 and the present
King George V, in 1882, with certain distinguished
scholars in their parties, made visits which have
been chiefly important through the writings of their
companions—Stanley in 1862 and Wilson and
Conder in 1882. One of the latest to be accorded
the privilege was C. W. Fairbanks, late vice-presi-
dent of the United States of America. What such
visitors have been permitted to see has not been of
any great antiquity nor has it thrown any certain
light on the question of the genuineness of the site.

The space containing the traditional tombs is a
great quadrangle 197 ft. in length (N.W. to 8.E.)
and 111 ft.in breadth (N.E. to8.W.). It is enclosed
by a massive wall of great blocks of limestone,
very hard and akin to marble. The walls which
are between 8 and 9 ft thick are of solid masonry
throughout. At the height of 15 ft. from the ground,
at indeed the level of the floor within, the wall is
set back about 10 in. at intervals, so as to leave
pilasters 3 ft. 9 in. wide, with space between each
of 7 ft. all round. On the longer sides there are 16
and on the shorter sides 8 such pilasters, and there
are also buttresses 9 ft. wide on each face at each
angle. This pilastered wall runs up for 25 ft.,
giving the total average height from the ground
of 40 ft. The whole character of the masonry is so
similar to the wall of the Jerus Haram near the
“wailing place” that Conder and Warren considered
Oa it must belong to that period and be Herodian
work.

The southern end of the great enclosure is occu-
pied by a church—probably a building entirely of
the crusading period—with a nave and two aisles.
The rest is a courtyard open to the air. The
cenotaphs of Isaac and Rebecca are within the
church; those of Abraham and Sarah occupy
octagonal chapels in the double porch before the
church doors; those of Jacob and Leah are placed
in chambers near the north end of the Haram.
The six monuments are placed at equal distances


along the length of the enclosure, and it is probable
that their positions there have no relation to the
sarcophagi which are described as existing in the
cave itself.

It is over this cave that the chief mystery hangs.
It is not known whether it has been entered by

any man at present alive, Moslem or
4. The Cave otherwise. While the cave was in the

hands of the Crusaders, pilgrims and
others were allowed to visit this spot. ‘Thus Rabbi
Benjamin of Tudela, writing in 1163 AD, says that
‘Sf a Jew comes, who gives an additional fee to the
keeper of the cave, an iron door is opened, which
dates from the times of our forefathers who rest
in peace, and with a burning candle in his hand
the visitor descends into a first cave which is empty,
traverses a second in the same state and at last
reaches a third which contains six sepulchres—
those of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and of Sarah,
Rebecca and Leah, one opposite the other. ....
A lamp burns in the cave and upon the sepulchre
continually, both night and day.” The account
reminds us of the condition of many Christian tomb-
shrines in Pal today.

It would appear from the description of modern
observers that all entrance to the cave is now closed;
the only known approaches are never now opened
and can only be reached by breaking up the flags of
the flooring. Through one of the openings—which
had a stone over it pierced by a circular hole 1 ft.
in diameter—near the northern wall of the old
church, Conder was able by lowering a lantern to
see into a chamber some 15 ft. under the church.
He estimated it to be some 12 ft. square; it had
plastered walls, and in the wall toward the 8.E.
there was a door which appeared like the entrance
to a rock-cut tomb. On the outside of the Haram
wall, close to the steps of the southern entrance
gateway is a hole in the lowest course of masonry,
which may possibly communicate with the western
cave. Into this the Jews of Hebron are accustomed
to thrust many written prayers and vows to the
patriarchs.

The evidence, historical and archaeological seems
to show that the cave occupies only the south end
of the great quadrilateral enclosure under part only
of the area covered by the church. See HEBRON.


Lrreratuns.—PEF, III, 333-46; PEFS, 1882, 197;
1897, 53; 1912, 145-150; HDB, III, art. ‘‘Machpelah,”
by Warren; Stanley, SP and Lecis_on the Jewish Church;
‘Pal under the Moslems,’ PEF; Pilgrim Text Soc. pub-


licatlons.
E. W. G. Masterman
MACONAH, ma-ki’na: AV Mekonah (q.v.).


MACRON, ma’kron (Mékpov, Mékran): Ptolemy
Macron who had been appointed by Ptolemy
Philometor VI governor of Cyprus and deserted to
Antiochus Epiphanes, king of Syria (2 Macc 10
12 ff). Under Antiochus he was governor of Coele-
Syria and Phoenicia (8 8). In 1 Macc 3 38 and
2 Macc 4 45 he is called “Ptolemy the son of
Dorymenes.” At first he was a fierce and cruel
enemy of the Jews and was one of those chosen by
Lysias to destroy Israel and reduce Judas Maccabee
(ib). Later he apparently relented toward the
Jews (2 Macc 10 12), fell into disfavor with An-
tiochus Eupator, before whom he was accused by the
king’s friends, and was so galled by being constantly
called traitor that he ended his life with poison (2
Mace 10 13). S. ANneus


MAD, MADNESS (29m, halal, 930, shagha';
pavla, mania): These words, and derivatives from
the same roots are used to express various condi-
tions of mental derangement. Though usually tré
“mad,” or “madness,” they are often used for
temporary conditions to which one would scarcely


«-ENOTAPH OVER TOMB OF SARAH IN MOSQUE OF HEBRON ABOVE


CAVE OF MACHPELAH


1961


.THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Machpelah
Magadan


apply them today except as common colloquial
inaccuracies. The madness coupled with folly in
Eeel is rather the excessive frivolity
1. Inthe and dissipation on the part of the idle
OT rich (so in 117; 2 2-12; 7 25; 9 3; 10
13). The insensate fury of the wicked
against the good is called by this name in Ps 102 8.
In Dt 28 28-34 it is used to characterize the state
of panic produced by the oppression of tyrannical
conquerors, or (as in Zee 12 4) by the judgment of
God on sinners. This condition of mind is meta-
phorieally called a drunkenness with the wine of
God’s wrath (Jer 25 16; 61 7). The same mental
eondition due to terror-striking idols is called
“madness” in Jer 50 38. The madman of Prov
26 18 is a malicious ee who carries his frivolous
jest to an unreasonable length, for he is responsible
for the mischief he causes. The ecstatic condition
of one under the inspiration of the Divine or of evil
spirits, such as that described by Balaam (Nu 24
3f), or that which Saul experienced (1 § 10 10),
is compared to madness; and conversely in the
Near East at the present day the insane aresupposed
to be Divinely inspired and to be peculiarly under
the Divine protection. This was the motive which
led David, when at the court of Achish, to feign
madness (1 S 21 13-15). It is only within the last
few years that any provision has been made in Pal
for the restraint even of dangerous lunaties, and there
are many insane persons wandering at large there.

This association of madness with inspiration is
expressed in the name “this mad fellow” given to
the prophet who came to anoint Jehu, which did
not necessarily convey a disrespectful meaning (2 K
911). The true prophetic spirit was, however, dif-
ferentiated from the ravings of the false prophets by
Isaiah (44 25), these latter being called mad by
Jeremiah (29 26) and Hosea (9 7). :

The most interesting case of real insanity recorded
in the OT is that of Saul, who, from being a shy,
self-conscious young man, became, on his exaltation
to the kingship, puffed up with a_megalomania,
alternating with fits of black depression with homi-
cidal impulses, finally dying by suicide. The cause
of his madness is said to have been an evil spirit
from God (1 S 18 10), and when, under the influ-
ence of the ecstatic mood which alternated with
his depression, he conducted himself like a lunatic
(19 23 f), his mutterings are called “‘prophesyings.”’
The use of music in hig case as a remedy (

16 16) may be eompared with Elisha’s use of the
same means to produce the prophetic eestasy (2 K
3 15).

The story of Nebuchadnezzar is another history
of a sudden accession of insanity in one puffed up
by self-eonceit and excessive prosperity. His de-
lusion that he had become as an ox is of the same
nature as that of the daughters of Proeyus recorded
in the Song of Silenus by Virgil (Hcl. vi.48). ;

In the NT the word “lunatic” (seléniazémenot)
(AV Mt 4 24; 17 15) is correetly rendered in

RV “epileptic.” Undoubtedly many
2. Inthe of the demoniacs were persons suffer-
NT ing from insanity. The words “mad
or “madness” occur 8 t, but usually
in the sense of paroxysms of passion, excitement
and foolishness. Thus in Acts 26 11 Paul says
that before his conversion he was “exceedingly
mad” (emmainémenos) against the Christians. In
1 Cor 14 28, those who “speak with tongues” in
Christian assemblies are said to appear mad to the
outsider. Rhoda was called ‘‘mad” when she ap-
nounced that Peter was at the door (Acts 12 15).
The madness with which the Jews were filled when
Our Lord healed the man with the withered hand
is called dnoia, which is literally senselessness (Lk
6 11), and the madness of Balaam is ealled para-


phronia, “‘being beside himself”’ (2 Pet 2 16). Paul
is aceused by Festus of having beeome deranged
by overstudy (Acts 26 24). It is still the belief
among the fellahin that lunatics are people inspired
by spirits, good or evil, and it is probable that all
persons showing mental derangement would natur-
ally be described as ‘“‘possessed,” so that, without
entering into the vexed question of demoniacal
posse any cases of insanity cured by Our

ord or the apostles would naturally be elassed in
the same category. See also Lunatic.

ALEX. MAcCALisTER

MADAI, mad’é-i, ma’di (“TA, mddhay). See

MEpEs,


MADIABUN, ma-di’a-bun (Mafiafotv, Madia-
botin, AV). See EmMapaBun. i


MADIAN, m4’di-an (AV Jth 2 26; Acts 7 29
AV). See Mivran.


MADMANNAH, mad-man’a (7220, madh-
mannah; B, Mayaplp, Macharim, A, BedeByvé,
Bedebénd [Josh 15 31]; B, Mappnvé, Marmeénd,
A, Mafunvé, Madménd [1 Ch 2 49]): This town
lay in the Negeb of Judah and is mentioned with
Hormah and Ziklag. It is represented in Josh 19
5, ete, by Beth-mareaboth. Umm Deimneh, 12
miles N. of Beersheba, has been proposed on ety-
mological grounds (PEF, ITI, 392, 399, Sh XXTV).


MADMEN, mad’men (jaa, madhmén; kal
moto. matoeror, kat patisin padsetat): An un-
identified town in Moab against which Jer prophe-
sied (48 2). The play upon the words here suggests
a possible error in transcription: gam madhmén
tiddémi, “Also, Madmen, thou shalt be sileneed.”
The initial M of ‘‘Madmen” may have arisen by
dittography from the last letter of gam. We should
then point Dimon, which of course is Dibon.


MADMENAH, mad-mé'na (390A, madhménah;
MaseBynva, Madebénd): A place mentioned only in


Isaiah’s description of the Assyr advance upon
Jerus (10 31). It is not identified.


MADNESS, mad’nes. See Man, Mavnzss.


MADON, m&’don (j1%2, madhon; B, Mappdv,
Marrhén, A, Maéév, Madén [Josh 11 1], B, Map-
pod, Marméth, A, Mapdv, Marén [Josh 12 19]):
A royal city of the Canaanites named along with
Hazor of Galilee. £l-Medineh, ‘‘the city,” on the
heights W. of the Sea of Galilee, with which it
might possibly be identified, probably dates only
from Moslem times. It seems likely that the
common confusion of the Heb “1 for 1 has ceeurred,
and that we should read ‘Maron.’ The place
may be then identified with Metron, a village with
ancient ruins and rock tombs at the foot of Jebel
Jermuk, a little to the N.W. of Safed. W. Ewine


MAELUS, mé-é’lus (A, Méndos, Mdélos, B,
MiAndos, Milélos): One of those who at Esdras’
request put away his foreign wife (1 Esd 9 26=
“Mijamin”’ in the || Ezr 10 25).


MAGADAN, mag’a-dan, ma-ga’dan (Mayaédv,
Magadén; the reading of TR, MaySadé [AV],
Magdald, is unsupported): This name appears
only in Mt 165 39. In the || passage, Mk 8 10,
its place is taken by Dalmanutha. From these
two passages it is reasonable to infer that ‘the
borders of Magadan’’ and _‘‘the parts of Dalma-
nutha” were contiguous. We may perhaps gather
from the narrative that they lay on the western


Magbish
Magic, Magician


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1962


shore of the Sea of Galilee. After the feeding of
the 4,000, Jesus and His disciples came to these
parts. Thence they departed to “the other side”
(Mk 8 13), arriving at Bethsaida. This is gen-
erally believed to have been Bethsaida Julias, N.E.
of the sea, whence He set out on His visit to Caes-
area Philippi. In this case we might look for Dal-
manutha and Magadan somewhere S. of the Plain
of Gennesaret, at the foot of the western hills.
Stanley (SP, 383) quotes Schwarz to the effect
that a cave in the face of these precipitous slopes
bears the name of Teliman or Talmanutha. If this
is true, it points to a site for Dalmanutha near ‘Ain
el-Fuliyeh. Magadan might then be represented
by el-Mejdel, a village at the S.W. corner of the
Plain of Gennesaret. It is commonly identified
with Magdala, the home of Mary Magdalene, but
without any evidence. The name suggests that
this was the site of an old Heb mighdal, “tower” or
“fortress.” The village with its ruins is now the


ber of that tribe. It was one of them, Bardiya,
who pretended to be Smerdis and raised the rebel-
lion against Cambyses. Rabh Maghin


1. Origi- Jer 39 3 does not mean “Chief Magus,”
nally a but is in Assyr Rab mugi (apparently
Median “commander” ; cf rab mugi sa narkabtt,
Tribe “commander of chariots”), having no


connection with “Magus’’ (unless per-
haps Magians were employed as charioteers, Media
being famous for its Nisaean steeds). The invest-
ment of the Magi with priestly functions, possibly
under Cyrus (Xen. Cyrop. viii), but probably much
later, was perhaps due to the fact that Zoroaster
(ZarathuStra) belonged, it is said, to that tribe.
They guarded the sacred fire, recited hymns at dawn
and offered sacrifices of haoma-juice, etc. Herodotus
(i.1382) says they also buried the dead (perhaps
temporary burial is meant as in Vendiddd, Farg.
viii). They were granted extensive estates in Media
for their maintenance, and the ééhravans and other


Macpara (Looxine To THE N.B.).


property of the German Roman Catholics. The
land in the plain has been purchased by a colony of
Jews, and is once more being brought under culti-
vation. ;

The identification with Magdala is made more
probable by the frequent interchange of 1! for n,
e.g. Nathan (Heb), Nethel (Aram.). W. Ewine


MAGBISH, mag’bish (332, maghbish; B,
MayeBds, Magebés, A, MaoBels, Maabeis): An
unidentified town in Benjamin, 156 of the inhabit-
ants of which are said to have returned from exile
with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 30). It does not appear
in Nehemiah’s list (7 33). LX X (B), however, has
Magebos. The name is probably identical with
ag “one who sealed the covenant’? (Neh
10 20).


MAGDALA, mag’da-la.


MAGDALENE, mag’da-lén, mag-da-lé’né. See
Mary, III.


MAGDIEL, mag/di-cl (ON"192, maghd?’al; Gen
36 43, A, MeroSunA, Metoduél; 1 Ch 1 54, A, Maye-
Suir, Mageduél, B, MeSuqd, Meduél): One of the
“dukes” of Edom.


MAGED, ma’ged. See Maxsp.


MAGI, ma’ji, THE (Méyo., Mdgoi [Mt 2 1.7.16,
“Wise-men,”’” RV and AV, ‘Magi’? RVm]): Were
originally a Median tribe (Herod. 1.101); and in
Darius’ Inscriptions Magush means only a mem-


See Macapan.


priests mentioned in the Avesta may have been of
their number, though only once does the word
“Magus” occur in the book (in the compound
Méghu-thbish, ““Magus-hater,’’ Yasna, \xv.7, Geld-
ner’s ed). The Magi even in Herodotus’ time had
gained a reputation for “magic” arts (cf Acts 13
6.8). They also studied astrology and astronomy
(rationes mundani motus et siderum [Amm. Marc.,
xxiii.6, 32]), partly learned from Babylon.
These latter studies explain why a star was used to
lead them to Christ at Bethlehem, when Our Lord
was less than two years old (Mt 2 16).
2. The Magi No reliable tradition deals with the
at Beth- country whence these particular magi
lehem came. Justin Martyr, Tertullian and
Epiphanius fancied that they came
from Arabia, founding their opinion on the fact
that “gold, frankincense and myrrh” abounded in
Yemen. But the text says they came not from
the 8. but from the E. Origen held that they
came from Chaldaea, which is possible. But
Clement of Alexandria, Diodorus of Tarsus, Chry-
sostom, Cyril of Alexandria, Juvencus, Prudentius
and others are probably right in bringing them from
Persia. Sargon’s settlement of Israelites in Media
(c 730-728 BC [2 K 17 6]) accounts for the large
Heb element of thought which Darmesteter recog-
nizes in the Avesta (SBE, IV, Intro, ch vi). Me-
dian astronomers would thus know Balaam’s
prophecy of the star out of Jacob (Nu 24 17).
That the Jews expected a star as a sign of the birth
of the Messiah is clear from the tractate Zohar of
the Geméré and also from the title “Son of the
Star” (Bar Kakhebha) given to a pseudo- Messiah


1963


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Magbish
Magic, Magician


(180-35 AD). Tacitus (Hist. v.13) and Suetonius
(Vesp. iv) tell us how widespread in the East at
the time of Christ’s coming was the expectation
that “at that time men starting from Judaea would
make themselves masters of things” (cf Virgil,
Ecl.. iv). All this would naturally prepare the
Magi to follow the star when it appeared. See also
AstroLtocy; AsTronomy; DivinaTion: Maaic;
WisE MEN; ZoRoOASTRIANISM.


Lirerature.—Herodotus; Amm. Mar-
cellinus; Strabo; Spiegel, "Altpersische Keilinschrifien
ooldner. Avesta; Muss-Arnolt, Assyr Dict.; BDB


Xenophon;
W. Sr. Crain Tisnanu
MAGI, STAR OF. See Star or THE Macri.


MAGIC, maj’ik, MAGICIAN, ma-jish’an:
I. Derinrrion
I. Division or tHe Sussect
1. Magic as Impersonal
2. Magic as Personal
III. Maoic anp RELIGION
IV. Maoic in tae Bisie
‘1. Hostility to Magic
2. Potency of Magical Words
3. Influence of Charms
V. Maaicat Terms Usep 1N THE BIBLE
. Divination
. Sorcery
. Enchantment
Amulets
. Incantation
. Repeated Utterances
. Impostors
. Witchcraft
LITERATURE

_The word comes from a Gr adj. (uayiKc}, ma-
giké) with which the noun réxvn, téchné, “art,” is
understood. The full phrase is “magical art”
(Wisd 17 10). But the Gr word is derived from
the magi or Zarathustran (Zoroastrian) priests.
Magic is therefore historically the art practised in
Persia by the recognized priests of the country.
It is impossible in the present article, owing to exi-
gencies of space, to give a full account of this im-
portant subject and of the leading views of it which
have been put forth. The main purpose of the
following treatment will be to consider the subject
from the Bib. standpoint.

I. Definitian.—In its modern accepted sense
magic may be described as the art of bringing about
results beyond man’s own power by superhuman
agencies. In the wide sense of this definition
divination is but a species of magic, i.e. magic used
as a means of securing secret knowledge, esp. a
knowledge of the future. Divination and magic
bear a similar relation to prophecy and miracle
respectively, the first and third implying special
knowledge, the second and fourth special power.
But divination has to do generally with omens, and
it is better for this and other reasons to notice the
two subjects—magic and divination—apart, as is
done in the present work. ;

II. Division of the Subject.—There are two kinds
of magic: (1) impersonal; (2) personal. In the

first, magic is a species of crude science,
1. Magic as for the underlying hypothesis is that
Impersonal there are forces in the world which

can be utilized on certain conditions,
incantations, magical acts, drugs, ete. The magi-
cian in this case connects what on a very slender
induction he considers to be causes and effects,
mainly on the principle of post hoc ergo propter hoc.
He may not know much of the causal agency; it
is enough for him to know that by performing some
act or reciting some formula (see CHARM) or carry-
ing some object (see AMULET) he can secure some
desired end. Frazer (Golden Bough?, I, 61) says:
“Magic is a kind of savage logic, an elementary
species of reasoning based on similarity, contiguity
and contrast.” But why does the savage draw
conclusions from association of ideas? There must


DNA PON


be an implied belief in the uniformity of Nature or
in the controlling power of intclligent beings.

In personal magic, living, intelligent, spiritual
beings are made the rcal agents which men by in-

cantations, etc, influence and cven
2. Magic control. The magical acts may in an
as Personal advanced stage include sacrifice, the

incantations become prayer.

Impersonal magic is regarded by most anthro-
pologists, including E. B. Tylor and J. Frazer, as
more primitive than the second and as a lower form
of it. This conclusion rests on an assumption that
human culture is always progressive, that the
movement is uniformly onward and upward. But
this law does not always hold. The religion of
Israel as taught in the 8th cent. BC stands on a
higher level ethically and intellectually than that
taught in the writings of Haggai, Zechariah and
Ecclesiastes centuries later. Among the ancient In-
dians, the Rig Veda occupies much loftier ground
than the much later Atharva Veda.

HI. Magic and Religion.—Personal magic in its
higher forms shades off into religion, and very
commonly the two exist together. It isthe practice
to speak of sacrifice and prayer as constituting ele-
ments of the ancient and modern religions of India.
But it is doubtful whether either of these has the |
same connotation that it bears in the Jewish and
Christian Scriptures. J. Frazer (Golden Bough?,
I, 67 ff) says that where the operation of spirits is
assumed (and ‘‘these cases are exceptional’’), magic
is “tinged and alloyed with religion.” Such an
assumption is, he admits, often made and the
present writer thinks it is generally made, for even
the operation of the Jaws of association implies it.
But Frazer concludes from various considerations
that “though magic is .... found to fuse and
amalgamate with religion in many ages and in
many lands, there are some grounds for thinking
that this fusion is not primitive.” It is of course
personal magic to which religion stands in closest
relations. As soon as man comes to see in the
beings by whose power marvels are wrought, per-
sonalities capable of emotions like himself and
susceptible to persuasion, his magical art becomes
an intelligent effort to propitiate these superior
beings and his incantations become hymns and
prayers. In all religions, Jewish, Moslem, Chris-
tian or pagan, when the act or prayer as such is
held to produce certaim results or to secure certain
desired boons, we have to do with a species of magic.
The word “‘religion”’ is inapplicable, unless it includes
the idea of personal faith in a God or gods whose
favor depends on moral acts and on ritual acts only
in so far as they have a voluntary and ethi-
cal character. If it be granted that magic, the
lower, precedes religion, the higher, this does not
necessarily negative the validity of the religious
concept. Mature knowledge is preceded by ele-
mentary impressions and beliefs which are sub-
jective without objective correspondences. But
this higher knowledge is none the less valid for its
antecedents. If it can be proved that the Chris-
tian or any other religion has become what it is by
gradual ascent from animism, magic, ete, its valid-
ity is not by this destroyed or even impaired.
Religion must be judged according to its own proper
evidence. But see Lf, end.

IV. Magic in the Bible.—The general remarks
made‘on the Bible and divination in Divination,

V, have an equal application to the
1. Hostility attitude of the Bible toward magic.
to Magic This attitude is distinctly hostile, as

it could not but be in documents pro-
fessing to inculcate the teaching of the ethical and
spiritual religion of Israel (see Dt 18 10f; 2 K
21 6; 2 Ch 33 6, etc). Yet it is equally clear that


Magic, Magician
Mahalath


the actual power of magic is acknowledged as
clearly as its illegitimacy is pointed out. In P’s
account of the plagues (Ex 7-11) it is assumed
that the magicians of Egypt had rea] power to per-
form superhuman feats. They throw their rods
and they become serpents; they turn the waters of
the Nile into blood. It is only when they try to
produce gnats that they fail, though Aaron had
succeeded by Yahweh’s power in doing this and
thus showed that Yahweh’s power was greatest.
But that the magicians had power that was real
and great is not so much as called in question.

Among the ancient Semites (Arabs, Assyrians,
Hebrews, etc) there was a strong belief in the po-

tency of the magical words of blessing
2. Potency and of curse. The mere utterance of
of Magical such words was regarded as enough
Words to secure their realization. That the

narrator of Nu 22-24 (J) ascribed
to Balaam magical power is clear from the narra-
tive, else why should Yahweh be represented as
transferring Balaam’s service to the cause of Israel?
We have other Bib. references to the power of the
spoken word of blessing in Gen 12 3; Ex 12 32;
Jgs 17 2; 2S 21 3, and of curse in Gen 27 29;
Jgs 6 23; Job 3 8 (cf the so-called Imprecatory
. Psalms, and see Century Bible, “Ps,’’ vol II, 216).
On the prevalence of the belief among the Arabs,
see the important work of Goldziher, Abhand-
lungen zur arabischen Philologie, Theil J, 23 ff.

In Gen 30 14 (J) we have an example of the be-
lief in the power of plants (here mandrakes) to stir

iv up and strengthen sexual love, and
3. Influence we read in Arab. lit. of the very same
of Charms superstition in connection with what is
called Yabruh, almost certainly the
same plant. Indeed one of the commonest forms in
which magic appears is as a love-charm, and as this
kind of magic was often exercised by women, magic
and adultery are frequently named together in the
OT (see 2 K 9 22; Nah 3 4; Mal 3.5; and cf
Ex 22 18 [17], where the sorceress [AV ‘‘witch”’|
is to be condemned to death). We have an in-
stance of what is called sympathetic magic (for a
description of which see Jevons, Intro to Hist of
Religion, 28 ff, and Frazer, Golden Bough?, I, 49 ff)
in Gen 30 37 %f. Jacob placed before the sheep and
goats that came to drink water peeled rods, so
that the pregnant ones might bring forth young
that were spotted and striped. The teraphim
mentioned in Gen 31 19ff and put away. with
wizards during the drastic reforms of Josiah (2 K
23 24; cf Zec 10 2) were household objects sup-
posed capable of warding off evil of every kind.
The Babylonians and Assyrians had a similar cus-
tom. We read of an Assyr magician that he had
statues of the gods Lugalgira and Alamu put on
each side of the main entrance to his house, and in
consequence he felt perfectly impregnable against
evil spirits (see Tallquist, Assyr. Besch, 22).

In Isa 3 2 the kdgém (‘“‘magician” or ‘“‘diviner’’)
is named along with the knight warrior, the judge,
prophet and elder, among the stays and supports
of the nation; no disapproval is expressed or im-
plied with regard to any of them. Yet it is not
to be denied that in its essential features pure
Yahwism, which enforced personal faith in a pure
spiritual being, was radically opposed to all magical
beliefs and practices. The fact that the Hebrews
stood apart as believers in an ethical and spiritual
religion from the Sem and other peoples by which
they were surrounded suggests that they were Di-
vinely guided, for in_other respects—art, philoso-
phy, etc—this same Heb nation held a lower place
than many contemporary nations.

V. Magical Terms Used in the Bible.-—Many
terms employed in the OT in reference to divina-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1964


tion have also a magical import. See Divinarion,
VII. For a fuller discussion of Bib. terms con-
nected with both subjects, reference may be made
to T. Witton Davies, Magic, Divination and Demon-
ology among the Hebrews and Their Neighbours, 44 ff,
78 ff; see also arts. ‘Divination’ and “Magic” in
EB, by the present writer.

Here a few brief statements are all that can be
attempted. Kesem (QQ), usually rendered div-
ination” (see Nu 28 23), has pri-
marily a magical reference (Fleischer),
though both Wellhausen (Reste des
arabischen Heidenthums*, 133, n.5) and
W. Robertson Smith (Jour. Phil., XIII, 278) hold
that its first use was in connection with divination.
The Arab. vb. (‘‘to exorcise”) and noun (“an oath’’)
have magical meanings. But it must be admitted
that the secondary meaning (“divination’’) has
almost driven out the other. See under I, where it
is held that at bottom magic and divination are


one. .
The vb. kadshaph (AW5), RV “to practise sorcery,”
comes, as Fleischer held, from a root denoting ‘‘to
have a dark appearance,” to look
2. Sorcery gloomy, to be distressed, then as a
suppliant to seek relief by magical
means. The corresponding nouns kashsha@ph and
m‘kashshéph are rendered “sorcerer” in EV.
Lahash com), EV “enchantment,” etc (see Isa
3 3, n*bhin lahash, RV “the skilful enchanter”), is
connected etymologically with nahash,
3. Enchant- “‘a serpent,’’ the n and J often inter-
ment changing inSem. Lehash is, therefore,
as might have been expected from this
etymology, used specifically of serpent charming
(see Jer 8.17; Eccl 10 11; cf m*lakash [WT2%)]
in Ps 68 5 [6], EV ‘“charmer’’).
Hebher (1373) occurs in the plural only (Isa 47
9.12, EV “enchantments”). It comes from a root
meaning ‘‘to bind,” and it denotes
4. Amulets probably amulets of some kind carried
on the person to ward off evil. It
seems therefore to be the Bib. equivalent of the
Talmudic k’miat (PAP), lit.=‘‘something bound,”
from kéma‘ (¥"2p), “to bind.”
Shihar (WW) (isa 47 11) seems to have an
etymological connection with the principal Arab.
word for “magic” (sthrun), and is ex-
5. Incan- _ plained by the great majority of recent
tation commentators following J. H. Michaelis
(Hitzig, Ewald, Dillmann, Whitehouse
in Century Bible, etc) as meaning “‘to charm away”
(by incantations). So also Tg, Rashi, JH and JD,
Michaelis, Eichhorn, etc.
The vb. battologé5 (Barrodoyéw) in Mt 6 7 (=
“say not the same thing over and over again’) re-
fers to the superstitionthat the repeated


1. Divina-
tion


6. Utter- utterance of a word will secure one’s
ances Re- wish. In India today it is thought
peated that if an ascetic says in one month the


: name of Radha, Krishna or Rom 100,-
000 times, he cannot fail to obtain what he wants
(see 1 K 18 26). See Reprririon.
The term géétes (yénres), RV “impostors,”’ AV
“seducers,”’ is used of a class of magicians who
uttered certain magical formulae in
7. Impos- a deep, low voice (cf the vb. godd
tors [yodw], which = “to sigh,” “to utter
Ow moaning tones’). Herodotus
(ii.33) says that there were persons of the kind in
Egypt, and they are mentioned also by Euripides
and Plato.
_.Paul in Gal 6 20 classes with uncleanness,
idolatry, etc, what he calls pharmaketa (pappaxela),
AV “witchcraft,” RV “sorcery.” The word has


1965


reference first of all to drugs used in exercising the’


magical art.


8. Witch-
craft


Note the name Simon Magus, which
=Simon the magician (Acts 8 9f),
and Bar-Jesus, whom Luke calls a
magician (ud-yos, mdgos, EV “sorcerer’’)
and ta whom he gives also the
proper name Elymas, which is really the Arab.
‘alim =“learned,” and so one skilful in the magical
art. See also under AMULET; CHaRM; Demon-
OLOGY; WITCHCRAFT. ;

Literatvre.—A very full bibliography of the subject
will be found in T. Witton Davies Ease ‘Divination
and Demonology among the Hebrews and Their Neighbours,
xi-xvi. See also the lit. under Divination and in
addition to the lit. cited in the course of the foregoing
art., note the following: A. Lehmann, Aberglaube und
Zauberet?, 1908; A. C. Haddon, Magic and Fetishism,
1906; Blau, Das altjudische Zauberwesen, 1898; Smith,
‘Witchcraft In the OT,’ Bib. Soc., 1902, 23-35; W. R.
Halliday, Gr Divination; A Study of Its Methods and
Principles, London, Macmillan (important) aud the
valuable art. on *‘Magic’’ by N. W. Thomas in the Enc
Brit, and also the relevant arts. in the Bible dictionaries.

T. Wirron Davrzs

MAGISTRATE, maj’is-trat (ODW, shephat, cor-
responding to OPW, shdphat, ‘‘to judge,” “to pro-
nounce sentence”’ [Jgs 18 7]): Among the ancients,
the terms corresponding to our “magistrate” had
a much wider signification. “Magistrates and
judges” (O77) DYQEW, shéphetim w-dhayyanim)
should be tr? “judges and rulers’ (Ezr 7 25).
D339, s‘ghdnim, ‘“rulers’”’ or “nobles,” were Bab
magistrates or prefects of provinces (Jer 51 23.28.
57; Ezk 23 6). In the time of Ezra and Nehe-
miah, the Jewish magistrates bore the same title
(Ezr 92; Neh 216; 4 14; 13 11). The Gr
dpxwr, drchén, “magistrate” (Lk 12 58; Tit 3 1
AV), signifies the chief in power (1 Cor 2 6.8) and
“ruler”? (Acts 4 26; Rom 18 3).

The Messiah is designated as the ‘prince [archén] of
the kings of the earth’? (Rev 1 5 AV), and by the same
term Moses is designated the judge and leader of the
Hebrews (Acts 7 27.35). The wide application of this
term is manifest from the fact that it is used of magis-
trates of any kind, e.g. the high pricst (Acts 23 5);
civil judges (Lk 12 58; Acts 16 19); ruler of the
synagogue (Lk 8 41; Mt 9 18.23; Mk § 22); per-
sons of standing and authority among the Pharisees and
other sects that appear in the Sanhedrin (Lk _ 14 1; Jn
31; Acts 3 17). The term also designates Satan, the
prince or chief of the fallen angels (Mt 9 34; Eph 2 2).

In the NT we also find orpatiyés, stratégés, em-
ployed to designate the Rom praetors or magis-
trates of Philippi, 2 Rom colony (Acts 16 20.
22.35.36.38). A collective term for those clothed
with power (Eng. “the powers’’), éovglat, exou-
siai, is found in Lk 12 11 AV; Rom 13 2.3; Tit
31. The “higher powers” (Rom 13 1) are all
those who are placed in positions of civil authority
from the emperor down. eee

In early Heb history, the magisterial office was
limited to the hereditary chiefs, but Moses made
the judicial office elective. In his time the ‘heads
of families’ were 59 in number, and these, together
with the 12 princes of the tribes, composed the
Sanhedrin or Council of 71. Some of the scribes
were intrusted with the business of keeping the
genealogies and in this capacity were also regarded
as magistrates. Frank E. Hirscu


MAGNIFICAL, mag-nif‘i-kal Ou, gddhal, in
Hiph. “‘to make great’): Old form retained from
Genevan VS in 1 Ch 22 5; in ARV “magnificent.”


MAGNIFICAT, mag-nif'i-kat: The name given
to the hymn of Mary in Lk 1 46-55, commencing
“My soul doth magnify the Lord.’ Three old
Lat MSS substitute the name “Elisabeth” for
“Mary’’ in ver 46, but against this is the authority
of all Gr MSS and other Lat VSS. The hymn,
modeled in part on that of Hannah in 1S 2 1 ff,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Magic, Magician


is peculiarly suitable to the circumstances of Mary,
and plainly could not have been composed after
the actual appearance and resurrection of Christ.
Its early date is thus manifest.


MAGNIFY, mag’ni-fi (Hiph. of 51H, gadhal;
peyadive, megalind, “to make great,” “extol,”
“celebrate in praise’): Used esp. of exaltation of
the name, mercy, and other attributes of God (Gen
19 19; 25 7 26, Ps 36 27; 40 16; 70 4; Lk
1 46; Acts 10 46); of God’s “word” (Ps 138 2);
or of Christ (Acts 19 17; Phil 1 20). Men also
can be “magnified” (Josh 4 14; 1 Ch 29 25, etc).
In Rom 11 18, ‘magnify mine office,” the word
(Gr dozdzd) is changed in RV to “glorify.”


MAGOG, mAa’gog (A132, maghigh; Maydy,
Magég): Named among the sons of Japheth (Gen
10 2; 1 Ch 1 5). Ezekiel uses the word as equiva-
lent to “land of Gog” (Ezk 38 2; 39 6). Jos
identifies the Magogites with the Scythians (Ant,
I, vi, 1). From a resemblance between the names
Gog and Gyges (Gugu), king of Lydia, some have
suggested that Magog is Lydia; others, however,
urge that Magog is probably only a variant of Gog
(Sayce in HDB). In the Apocalypse of John,
Gog and Magog represent all the heathen oppo-
nents of Messiah (Rev 20 8), and in this sense
these names frequently recur in Jewish apocalyptic
literature, Joun A. Lrzs


MAGOR-MISSABIB, ma’gor-mis’a-bib ("30
A°20%A, maghér missabhibh, ‘terror on every side”):
A name given by Jeremiah to Pashhur ben Immer,
the governor of the temple, who had caused the
praphet to be beaten and set in the stocks (Jer 20
3). The same expression is used (not as a proper
name) in several other passages (Ps 31 13; Jer 6
25; 20 10; 46 5; 49 29; Lam 2 22). -


MAGPIASH, mag’pi-ash. See Maasisu.


MAGUS, mé’gus, SIMON. See Simon Macus;
Maat; Maarc.


MAHALAH, ma-ha'la, mi‘ha-la (mera, mahlah;
RV has the correct form MAHLAH): A descendant
of Manasseh (1 Ch 7 18).


MAHALALEL, ma-ha'la-lel (ON5270, mahdlal’al;
AV Mahalaleel, ma-ha'la-lé-el, ma-hal’a-lél):

(1) Son of Cainan, the grandson of Seth (Gen 6
12; 1 Ch 1 2).

(2) The ancestor of Athaiah, one of the children


of Judah who dwelt in Jerus after the return from
exile (Neh 11 4).


MAHALATH, ma’ha-lath (rorya, mahdlath) :

(1) In Gen 28 9 the name of a wife of Esau,
daughter of Ishmael, and sister of Nebaioth, called
in 36 8, BasemateH (q.v.). The Sam, however,
throughout ch 36 retains “Mahalath.” On the
other hand, in 26 34 Basemath is said to be “the
daughter of Elon the Hittite,’ probably a con-
fusion with Adah, as given in 36 2, or corruption
may exist in the lists otherwise.

(2) One of the 18 wives of Rehoboam, a grand-
daughter of David (2 Ch 11 18).

(8) The word is found in the titles of Ps 568 (RV
“set to Mahalath’’) and Ps 88 (RV “set to Maha-
lath Leannoth,” m “for singing’). Probably some
song or tune is meant, though the word is taken by
many to denote a musical instrument. Heng-
stenberg and others interpret it as indicating the
subject of the Pss. See Psaums, James ORR


Mahali
Maimed


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1966


MAHALI, mé’ha-li.


MAHANAIM, ma-ha-na/im (D722, makdnayim;
the Gr is different in every case where the name
occurs, B and A also giving variant forms; the dual
form may be taken as having arisen from an old


locative ending, as, e.g. in Dew, yrashalalylim,
from an original now , yrishalém. In Gen 32


See Manu.


21 mahdneh is evidently a || form and should be ;


rendered as a proper name, Mahaneh, i.e. Maha-
naim): The city must have been one of great strength.
It lay E. of the Jordan, and is first mentioned in
the history of Jacob. Here he halted after parting
from Laban, before the passage of the Jabbok (Gen
32 2), ‘“‘and the angels of God met him.” Possibly
it was the site of an ancient sanctuary. It is next
noticed in defining the boundaries of tribal territory
E. of the Jordan. It lay on the border of Gad and
Manasseh (Josh 13 26.30). It belonged to the
lot of Gad, and was assigned along with Ramoth
in Gilead to the Merarite Levites (21 38; 1 Ch 6
80—the former of these passages affords no justi-
fication to Cheyne in saying [£B, s.v.] that it is
mentioned as a “city of refuge’). The strength
of the place doubtless attracted Abner, who fixed
here the capital of Ishbosheth’s kingdom. Saul’s
chivalrous rescue of Jabesh-gilead was remembered
to the credit of his house in these dark days, and
the loyalty of M. could be reckoned on (2 S 2 8,
etc). To this same fortress David fled when en-
dangered by the rebellion of Absalom; and in the
“forest’’ hard by, that prince met his fate (2 8 17
24, etc). It was made the center of one of Solo-
mon’s administrative districts, and here Abinadab
the son of Iddo was stationed (1 K 4 14). There
seems to be a reference to M. in Cant 6 13 RY.
If this is so, here alone it appears with the article.
By emending the text Cheyne would read: “What
do you see in the Shulammite? A narcissus of the
valleys.”

It is quite clear from the narrative that Jacob,
going to meet his brother, who was advancing from
the S., crossed the Jabbok after leaving M. It is
therefore vain to search for the site of this city 8.
of the Jabbok, and Conder’s suggested identifica-
tion with some place near el- Buker‘a, EB. of es-Salt,
must be given up.

On the N. of the Jabbok several positions have
been thought of. Merrill (Hast of the Jordan, 433
ff) argues in favor of Khirbet Saleikhat, a ruined
site in the mouth of Wddy Saleikhat, on the north-
ern bank, 3 miles E. of Jordan, and 4 miles N. of
Wady *Ajlin. From its height, 300 ft. above the
plain, it commands a wide view to the W.andS. One
running ‘“‘by the way of the Plain” could be seen a
great way off (28 18 23). This would place the
battle in the hills to the 8. near the Jordan valley.
Ahimaaz then preferred to make a détour, thus
securing 2 level road, while the Cushite took the
rough track across the heights. Others, among
them Buhl (GAP, 257), would place M. at Mihneh,
a partly overgrown ruin 9 miles E. of Jordan, and
4 miles N. of ‘Ajldn on the north bank of Wady
Mahneh. This is the only trace of the ancient
name yet found in the district. It may be assumed
that M. is to be sought in this neighborhood.
Cheyne would locate it at ‘Ajlin, near which rises
the great fortress Kal‘aier-Rabad. He supposes
that the ‘wood of Mahanaim” extended as far as
Mihneh, and that “the name of Mihneh is really an
abbreviation of the ancient phrase.”” Others would
identify M. with Jerash, where, however, there are
no remains older than Gr-Rom times.

Objections to either ‘ Aglan or Mihneh are: (1)
The reference to “this Jordan” in Gen 32 10,
which seems to show that the city was near the


river. It may indeed be said that the great hollow
of the Jordan valley seems close at hand for many
miles on either side, but this, perhaps, hardly meets
the objection. (2) The word kikkar, used for
“Plain” in 2 § 18 23, seems always elsewhere to
apply to the “circle’’ of the Jordan. Buhl, who
identifies M. with Mihneh, yet cites this verse
(GAP, 112) as a case in which kikkar applies to the
plain of the Jordan. He thus prescribes for
Ahimaaz a very long race. Cheyne sees the diffi-
culty. The hattle was obviously in the vicinity
of M., and the nearest way from the “wood” was
by the 12), kikkar, “or, since no satisfactory ex-
planation of this reading has been offered by the >I? -
nahal, that is to say, the eager Ahimaaz ran along
in the wady in which, at some little distance, M.
lay’”’ (EB, s.v.). The site for the present remains
in doubt. W. Ewina


MAHANEH-DAN, m@ha-ne-dan (77729, ma-
hdnéh-dhan; wapepBodh Adv, parembolé Dén): ‘This
place is mentioned twice: in Jgs 13 25 (AV “the
camp of Dan’’), and Jgs 18 12. In Mahaneh-dan,
between Zorah and Eshtaol, the spirit of the Lord
began to move Samson. Here the 600 marauders
of Dan, coming from Zorah and Eshtaol, encamped
behind Kiriath-jearim. It has been thought that
these two statements contradict each other; or at
least that they cannot both apply to the same place.
But if we accept the identification of Zorah with
Surah, and of Eshtaol with Eshu', which there seems
no reason to question; and if, further, we identify
Kiriath-jearim with Kiirbet Erma, which is at
least possible, the two passages may be quite recon-
ciled. Behind Kiriath-jearim, that is W. of Khir-
bet Erma, runs the Vale of Sorek, on the north bank
of which, about 2 miles apart, stand Zorah and
Eshtaol; the former 34 miles, the latter 2} miles
fron Khirbet Erma. No name resembling Mahaneb-
dan has yet been recovered; but the place may have
lain within the area thus indicated, so meeting the
conditions of both passages, whether it was a per-
manent settlement, or derived its name only from
the incident mentioned in 18 12. W. Ewine


MAHARAI, ma-har’é-i, ma/ha-ri (109, ma-
héray, ‘“impetuous’): One of David’s “braves”
(2 8 23 28; 1 Ch 11 30; 27 13). He was one
of the 12 monthly captains of David’s administra-
tion, and took the 10th month in rotation. He
was of the family of Zerah, and dwelt in Netophah
in Judah.


MAHATH, ma/hath (MA, makath, “snatch-
ing’; Mé, Méth):

(1) One of the Kohathites having charge of the
“service of song” in David’s time, son of Amasai
(1 Ch 6 35). Possibly the same as Ahimoth
(ver 25). He seems also to be the same as the per-
son named in 2 Ch 29 12 during Hezekiah’s time,
though it is probable there is some confusion in the
narrative. He is there represented as taking part
in the new covenant of Hezekiah and the cleansing
of the Lord’s house.

(2) One of the overseers of the temple under
Conaniah and Shimei (2 Ch 31 13); three pas-
sages of Scripture give the name, but it is difficult
to individuate these because the genealogy identi-
fies the two first named (1 Ch 6 35; 2 Ch 29 12),
while the chronology seems to divide them—one
in David’s day, the other in Hezekiah’s. It is not,
however, impossible to identify the man of 2 Ch
29.12 with him of 2 Ch 3113. Possibly the
genealogy has been mistakenly repeated in 2 Ch
29 12, HEnry WALLACE


1967


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mahali
Maimed


MAHAVITE, ma/ha-vit (2°73, mahdwim, ‘vil-
lagers’): The description given to Eliel, one of
David’s warrior guard (1 Ch 11 46), perhaps to
distinguish him from the Eliel in. the next verse.
MT is very obscure here.


MAHAZIOTH, ma-ha‘zi-oth, ma-ha’zi-dth
(PAN, mahdzi’ oth, “‘visions”’): One of the
14 sons of Heman the Kohathite in the temple
choir. ‘He was leader of the 23d course of musi-


cians whose function was to blow the horns” (1 Ch
25 4.30).


MAHER-SHALAL-HASH-BAZ, ma’‘hér-shal'al-
hash’baz (72 OM S20 “mA, maher shalal hash baz,
“the spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth’’): A symbolic
name given to Isaiah’s son to signify the sharp


destruction of Rezin and Pekah by the Assyr power
(Isa 8 1.3). Cfthe Gr idea of Nemesis.


MAHLAH, ma’la (M252, mahlah, “sickness” or
“song,’”’ etymology doubtful):

(1) Eldest of Zelophehad’s 5 daughters (Nu 26
33; 27 1). As Zelophehad, grandson of Manassch,
had no sons, the daughters successfully claimed their
father’s inheritance. The law was altered in their


favor on condition that they married into their:


father’s tribe. They agreed and married their
cousins (Nu 36 11). The whole chapter should
be read and compared with Josh 17 3 ff, because
the decision became a precedent.

(2) Another (AV “Mahalah’’), same Heb name
as above, daughtcr of Hammoleketh, grand-
daughter of Manasseh (1 Ch 7 18).

: Henry WALLACE

MAHL, ma’li O27, mahi, “a sick or weak
one’):

(1) A son of Merari (Ex 6 19, AV Mahali; Nu
3 20), grandson of Levi and founder of the Leviti-
cal family of Manurtzs (q.v.).

(2) A son of Mushi, Mahli’s brother, bears the
game name (1 Ch 6 47; 23 23; 24 30). Cf Ezr 8
18 and 1 Esd 8 47.


MAHLITES, mé’lits ("2177 , molt): Descendants
of Mahli, son of Merari (Nu 3 33; 26 58). These
Mahlites appear to have followed the example of the
daughters of Zelophehad, mutatis mutandis. (See
Mauuau; had the name become the description of a
practice?) ‘They married the daughters of their
uncle Eleazar (1 Ch 23 21.22).


MAHLON, ma’lon (porra, mahlén, “invalid’’):
Ruth’s first husband (Ruth 1 2.5; 49.10). In
the latter passage is further evidence of the un-
willingness to allow a family connection or inher-
itance to drop (see Manian; Maui). Note that
David’s descent and that of his “Greater Son”
come through Ruth and Boaz (Ruth 4 22).


-MAHOL, ma‘bol (24772, mahél, “dance”; cf
Sima 7a, bené-mahal, “sons of dance’): The
father of the 4 sages reputed next in wisdom to
Solomon (1 K 4 31). Their names were Ethan,
Heman, Chalcol, Darda.


MAHSEIAH, méa-sé'ya, ma-si’a (MOMS, mah-
geydh, “Jeh a refuge’): Grandfather of Baruch
(Jer 32 12) and of Seraiah (Jer 61 59). The
name (not to be confused with Maasz1au [q.v.] as
AV has done even in the above passages) is spelt
“Maaseas” (q.v.) in Bar 1 1.


MAJANNAS, mi-an’as (Madwas, Maidnnas;
AV Maianeas): One of the Levites who taught


the law for Esdras (1 Esd 9 48)=Maaseiau (q.v.)
in Neh 8 7.


MAID, mad, MAIDEN, mad"n: Used in AV in
the sense of a girl or young female; of an unmarried
woman or virgin, and of a female servant or hand-
maid. Thus it translates several Heb words:
(1) The more generic word is W792, na‘drah, “girl,”
fem. form of the common “W3, na‘ar, “boy” (18
911; 2K 5624; Est 24.7ff; Job 41 5; Am
27). In several places masc. form "93, na‘ar,
with fem. form of vb. rendered “damsel” (Gen
24 14.16.28.55; 34 3.12; Dt 22 15); cf 4 mais,
hé pats (Lk 8 51.54); see also raidlexy, paidiské,
diminutive (Sir 41 22; Mk 14 66.69; Lk 12 45;
ropdcwwv, kordsion, LXX for né‘arah, “maid,” in
Mt 9 24f with Job 6 12f; Susvs 15.19). (2) The
Heb 1099, ‘almah, also rendered “maid,” refers to a
woman of marriageable age (Ex 2 8; Prov 30 19),
whether married or not, whether a virgin or not.
The same word is tr¢ ‘‘virgin’”’ in several places
(Gen 24 43 AV; Cant13; 68; Isa 7 14).
(8) The word nena, bethilah, a common Heb word
for “virgin,” a chaste woman (LXX apédvos,
parthénos), is frequently rendered ‘‘maid’’ and
‘maiden” (Ex 22 16; Jgs 19 24; 2 Ch 36 17;
Ps 78 63; 148 12; Jer 51 22; Lam 6 11; Ezk
96; 44 22; Zec 917; cf Dt 22 14.17, having
“the marks [tokens] of virginity’’); mbna, bethi-
lim, rendered “maid.’”? See Vrramn. (4) Two Heb
words covering the idea of service, handmaid, hand-
maiden, and in numerous passages so rendered:
(a) mak, ’amah, tr? “maid” (Gen 30 3; Ex 2 5;
21 20.26; Lev 25 6; Ezr 2 65; Job 19 15; Nah
27); (0) MDW, shiphhah, “a family servant,” “a
handmaid,’”’ so rendered in numerous passages
(“maid,” “maiden,” Gen 16 2ff; 29 24.29; 30 7.9.
10.12.18; Isa 24 2; Ps 123 2; Eccl 2 7). In AV
they are variously trd “maid,” “handmaid,” ete.
(5) The rather rare word &8pa, hdbra, ‘‘favorite
slave,” is rendered “maid” in Jth 10 2.5; 13 9; 16
23; Ad Est 15 2.7. (6) dovdy, dorlz, “female slave,”
in AV Jth 12 49 (RV “servant’’).

Maidservant means simply a female slave in the
different positions which such a woman naturally
occupies. They were the property of their masters;
sometimes held the position of concubines (Gen 31
33); daughters might be sold by their fathers into
this condition (Ex 21 7). It is regrettable that
no uniform tr was adopted in AV. And in RV cf
Tob 3 7; Jth 10 10; Sir 41 22.


“Maidservants’” replaces ‘maidens’? of AV in
Lk 12 45. Cf Job 81 13.
Enwarp Bacsy PoLitarp
MAIL, mal. See Armor.


MAIMED, mam’d (PJ, haric; KvAdbs,
kullés, avamnpos, andpéros): The condition of
being mutilated or rendered imperfect as the result
of accident, in contrast to congenital malforma-
tion. An animal thus affected was declared to be
unfit to be offered in sacrifice as a peace offering
(Lev 22 22); although under certain conditions
a congenitally deformed animal might be accepted
as a free-will offering, apparently the offering of a
maimed animal was always prohibited (vs 23.24).
The use of such animals in sacrifice was one of the
charges brought against the Jews of his time by
Malachi (1 8-14). The word is also used to denote
those who were so mutilated. Among those made
whole by Our Lord in Galilee were the maimed as
well as the halt (Mt 16 30).

Figuratively the casting off of any evil habit or
distracting condition which interferes with the
spiritual life is called ‘‘maiming” (Mt 18 8; Mk 9


Mainsail
Malachi


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1968


43); with this may be taken the lesson in Mt 19
12. In these passages “maimed” (kullos) is used of
injuries of the upper limb, and chdélos of those affect-
ing the feet, rendering one halt. Hippocrates,
however, uses kullos for a deformation of the legs
in which the knees are bent so far outward as to
render the patient lame; while he applies the term
chalos as a generic name for any distortion, and in
one place uses it to describe a mutilation of the
head (Prorrhetica, 83). The maimed and the halt
are among the outcasts who are to be brought into
the gospel feast according to the parable (Lk 14
13-21). ALEX. MACALISTER


MAINSAIL, man’sal. See Surps anp Boats.


MAKAZ, ma’/kaz (VP, makag): One of the
cities of the 2d of the 12 districts or prefectures
which supplied victuals for Solomon (1 K 4 9).
It is associated with Shaalbim, Beth-shemesh and
Elon-beth-hanan, all three probably identical
with cities mentioned (Josh 19 41.42) as on the
border of Dan. Cheyne (2B, II, col. 2906) sug-
gests that Makaz may be identical with Mpsarcon
(q.v.) in the latter list.


MAKE, mak, MAKER, mak’ér (WY, ‘asah,
JQ, nathan, OTD, sam; workw, poiéd, rlOynwi,
tithémt, cabloryp, kathistémi) : ““Make’’

1. As Used is a frequently used word, meaning
inthe OT “to create,” “construct,” ‘‘cause,”
“constitute,” etc, and represents dif-

ferent Heb words. It is very often in AV (L) the
tr of ‘dsah, “to do,’ “make,” etc, usually in
the sense of constructing, effecting. In Gen 1
7.16.25.31, ete, it is used of the creation; of the
creation of man in the likeness of God (6 1); of
the ark (6 14); of a feast (21 8); of the tabernacle
and all the things belonging to it (Ex 25 8, etc);
of idols (Isa 2 8; Jer 2 28, etc); (2) of nathan
(lit. “to give’’), chiefly in the sense of constituting,
appointing, causing; of a covenant (Gen 9 12;
17 2); of Abraham as the father of many nations,
etc (17 5.6); of Ishmael as a great nation (17 20);
of Moses as a god to Pharaoh (Ex 7 1); of judges
and officers (Dt 16 18); of laws (Lev 26 46, etc);
it has the meaning of “to cause’ (Ex 18 16; 23
27; Nu 5 21; 1S 9 22; Ps 106 46); (3) sam,
“to set,” “put,” “lay,” has a similar significance:
of Abraham’s seed (Gen 13 16; 32.12); Joseph
lord of all Egypt (459; ef Ex2 14; Dt 1 13;
10 22); (4) shith, with same meaning, occurs (2 S
22 12, “He made darkness pavilions round about
him”; 1 K 11 34; Ps 18 11; 21 6). Other words
are ‘ébhadh (Aram.); “tomake,” “do,” (Jer 10 11;
Dnl 3 1); ‘admadh, “to set up” (2 Ch 11 22; 26
5; Neh 10 32); ‘agabh, ‘“‘to labor,” etc (Job 10 8,
AVm “took pains about me’’); banah, “‘to build up”
(Gen 2 22; 1 K 22 39); bard’, “to prepare,”
“create” (Nu 16 30; Ps 89 47); ydacagh, “to set
up” (Job 17 6; Jer 51 34); ydcar, “to form,”
“constitute” (Ps 74 17; 104 26); pa‘al, ‘to work,”
“make” (Ex 16 17; Ps 7 15); words with special
meaningsare: pakadh, ‘‘to give a charge” (1 11
28; 2 K 26 23); kdrath, “to cut,” or “prepare,”
“to naake a covenant or league’ (Gen 16 18; Ex
24 8; Josh 9 16); kashar, “to bind together,”
“to make a conspiracy’ (2 K 12 20; 14 19);
parac, “to break forth,” “to make a breach” (2 8
68; 10Ch13 11; 1613); Jlabhén, “to make
brick”’ (Gen 11 3); labhabh (denom. of l¢bhibhah),
“to make cakes’ (28 13 6.8); malakh, ‘to make
a king” (1 S 8 22; 12 1); among obsolete and
archaic words and phrases may be mentioned,
‘What makest thou in this place?’ (Jgs 18 3),
RV “doest’’; “made” for “pretend” (2 § 13 5.6),


RV “feign,” “feigned”; “made as if’? (Josh 8 15;
9 4), so RV; ‘anake for him’ (Ezk 17 17), RV
“help him’’; ‘“make mention” (Jer 4 16); “make
mention of? (Gen 40 14; Ps 87 4); “make ac-
count” (Ps 144 3); “make an end” (Jgs 3 18;
16 17); “make an end”’ is also “‘to bring to nought,”
“to destroy” (Isa 38 12); ‘make riddance’ (Lev
23 22), RV ‘wholly reap.” In 1 Mace 16 22,
we have “to make him away” as tr of apolésai
autén, RV “destroy.”

Maker is the tr of ‘asah (Job 4 17; Ps 95 6), of
yacar (Isa 45 9.11; Hab 2 18 bis), of harash, “grav-
er’ (Isa 45°16), of pa‘al (Job 36 3; Isa 1 31,
or pa‘al).

In the NT the chief word for “make” is poied,
“to do,” “make,” ete (Mt 33; Jn 2 16; 6B 15);

of kathistémi, “to set down,” “to ap-
2. As Used point’ (Mt 24 45.47; Rom 5 19); of
inthe NT  tithémi, “to set,” “lay” (Mt 22 44; Mk

12 36); of diatithémi, “to set or lay
throughout”’ (Acts 3 25; He 8 10; 10 16); of
didimi, “to give’ (2 Thess 3 9; Rev 3 9); of
eimi, “to be” (Mk 12 42); of epiteléa, “to com-
plete’ (He 8 5; Gal 3 3, “make perfect,’ RVm
“make an end’); of kataskeudzd, “to prepare
thoroughly” (He 9 2, RV ‘“‘prepared”); of ktiza,
“to make,” “found” (Eph 2 15); of plérophoréa,
“to bear on fully” (2 Tim 4 5, “make full proof
of thy ministry,” RV “fulfil”); dozdzé, ‘‘to make
honorable or glorious” (2 Cor 3 10); of peritrépa
(eis manian), “to turn round to raving” (Acts 26
24, “doth make thee mad,’”’ RV “is turning thee
mad,” m “Gr turneth thee to madness”); of em-
poretomai, ‘‘to traffic,” “cheat” (2 Pet 2 3, “make
merchandise of you’’); of eirénepoiéa, “to make
peace’’ (Col 1 20); of sumbdllé, “to throw together”
(Lk 14 31; “to make war,” RV “goeth to en-
counter’); “made” is frequently the tr of gino-
mai, “to become,” “begin to be” (Mt 43; 9 16;
Mk 2 21.27; Jn 13 [thrice]. 10, “The world was
made through him,” ver 14, “The word was made
flesh,” RV “became flesh”; 29, water “made
wine,” RV “now become wine,” m “that it had
become”; 8 33, “made free’; Rom 13, RV
“born”; Gal 3 138, RV “having become a curse for
us”; 4 4, RV “born of a woman,” etc; Phil 2 7,
‘Swag made in the likeness of men,’ RVm “Gr be-
coming in”; 1 Pet 2 7, etc).

In addition to the changes in RV already noted may
be mentioned, for ‘‘maketh collops" (Job 15 27)
‘gathered fat’’; for ‘‘set us in the way of his steps”
(Ps 85 138), ‘‘make his footsteps a way to walk in’: for
‘did more grievously afflict her'’ (Isa 9 1), ‘‘hath made
it glorious"; for ‘‘shall make him of quick understand-
ing” (lsa 11 3), ‘‘his delight shall be in"’; for ‘‘make
sluices and ponds for fish'’ (Isa 19 10), ‘‘they that work
for hire,'’ m ‘‘or make dams": for ‘‘ye that make men-
tion of the Lord” (Isa 62 6), ‘‘ye that are Jeh's remem-
brancers'’; for “he shall confirm the covenant’? (Dnl
9 27), ‘‘he shall make a firm covenant’’: for ‘‘maketh
my way perfect” (2 8S 22 33), “guideth the perfect in
his way’’ (see margin); for ‘‘the desire of a man is his
kindness’’ (Prov 19 22), ‘that which maketh a man to
be desired’’; for ‘maketh intercession” (Rom 11 2),
‘‘pleadeth”; for ‘‘hath made us accepted” (Eph 1 6),
‘‘treely bestowed on us,’’ m ‘‘wherewith he endued us”:
for ‘‘made himself of no reputation" (Phil 2 7). ‘‘emp-
tied himself"’; for ‘“‘spoil you”? (Col 2 8), “maketh
spoil of you"; for ‘‘is the enemy of God" (Jas 4 4),
‘‘maketh himself’'; for (‘‘worketh abomination or


[maketh] a lie’ (Rev 21 27), ‘‘maketh [m ‘‘doeth’’] an
abomination and a lie’’; we have ‘‘hecome" for “made”


ae aeeae Lk : aie 3), jjibecame” om 10 20; 1
or , bra); ecoming in’’ for ‘bei at
oS Pa? g eing made


W. L. Waker
MAKEBATES, mak’bits: This is the pl. of the
word makebate, which means “one who stirs up
strife.” It occurs only in AVm of 2 Tim 3 3 and
Tit 2 3 as an alternative tr of ddBorau, didboloi,
piles AV renders ‘false accusers,” and RV “slan-
erers.


1969


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mainsail
Malachi


MAKED, ma’ked (Maxé8, Makéd, MaxéB, Makéb):
A strong city E. of the Jordan, not yet identified.
It is named along with Bosor, Alema and Casphor
(1 Mace 6 26). In ver 36, AV reads ‘“Maged.”


MAKER, ma’kér. See Maxe.


MAKHELOTH, mak-hé'loth, mak-hé'loth
(bapa, makhéloth, “assemblies”): A desert camp


of the Israelites between Haradah and Tahath (Nu
83 25.26). See Wannrnrines or IsRAEL.


MAKKEDAH, ma-ké'da (VTP, makkedhah;
Maxnié, Makédd): A Canaanite royal city which
Joshua captured, utterly destroying the inhab-
itants, and doing to the king as he had done unto
the king of Jericho (Josh 10 28; 12 16). It lay
in the Shephelah of Judah (15 41). It was bronght
into promiuence by the flight thither of the 5 kings
of the Amorites who, having united their forces for
the destruction of Gibeon, were themselves defeated
and pursned by Joshua (ch 10). Seeing their
danger, the men of Gibeon sent to the camp at Gil-
gal beseeching Joshua to save and help them. That
energetic commander marched all night with his
full strength, fell upon the allies at Gibeon, slew
them with a great slaughter, chased the fugitives
down the valley by way of Beth-horon, and smote
them unto Azekah and unto Makkedah. It was
during this memorable pursuit that in response to
Joshua’s appeal:

“Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon;

And thou, Moon, in the valley of Aijalon,”
the sun stayed in the midst of heaven, and hasted
not to go down a whole day, until the nation had
avenged themselves of their enemies.

The 5 kings sought refuge in the cave at Makke-
dah, where, by Joshua’s orders, they were blocked
in with great stones, until the slanghter of the fugi-
tives should be completed. Then the royal prison-
ers were brought out, and, after the chiefs of Israel
had set their feet upon their necks, Joshua slew
them and hanged them on five trees until sunset.
This is an illustratiou of the old practice of impaling
enemies after death. The bodies were then cast
into the cave where they had sought to hide, and
great stones were rolled against the entrance.

The flight of the allies was past Beth-horon and
Azekah to Makkedah. Azekah is not ideutified,
but it is named with Gederoth, Beth-dagon and
Naamah (Josh 16 41). These are probably rep-
resented by Katrah, Dajan and Na‘aneh, so that
in this district Makkedah may be sought. The
officers of the Pal Exploration Fund agree in sug-
gesting el-Mughar, “the cave,” on the northern
bank of Wady es-Surar, about 4 miles from the sand
duneson theshore. There are traces of old quarry-
ing and many rock-cut tombs with loculi. “The
village stands on a sort of promontory stretching
into the valley . . . . divided into three plateaus;
on the lower of these to the 8. is the modern village,


el-Mughar, built in front of the caves which are.


cut out of the sandstone” (Warren). In no other
place in the neighborhood are caves found. The
narrative, however, speaks not of caves, but of
“the cave,” as of one which was notable. On the
other hand the events narrated may have lent dis-
tinction to some particular cave among the many.
“The cave’ would therefore be that associated
with the fate of the 5 kings. No certainty is
possible. W. Ewina


MAKTESH, mak’tesh, THE (W329, ha-makh-
tésh, “the mortar’; cf Jgs 16 19, “the mortar,”
EV “hollow place that ism Lehi’): A quarter of
Jerus so named, it is supposed, on account of the


configuration of the ground and associated (Zeph
1 10.11) with the “fish gate” and Misunen (q.v.)
or “second quarter.’ Most authorities think it
was in the northern part of the city, and many con~
sider that the name was derived from the hollowed-
out form of that part of the Tyropceon just N. of
the walls, where foreign merchants congregated;
others have suggested a hollow farther W., now
occupied by the muristan and the three long
bazaars. E. W. G. Masterman


MALACHI, mal’a-ki:


1. Name of the Prophet
2. The Prophet’s Times
3. Contents
4. Style
5. Message
LirERATURE
The last book of the OT. Nothing is known of
the person of Malachi. Because his name does not
occur elsewhere, some scholars indeed
1, Name of doubt whether “Malachi” is intended
the Prophet to be the personal name of the prophet.
But none of the other prophetic books
of the OT is anonymous. The form "28>", mal-
’akhi, signifies “my messenger’; it occurs again in
31; cf27. But this form of itself would hardly
be appropriate as a proper name without some
additional syllable such as *1, Yah, whence mal-
*akhiah, ie. “messenger of Yabweh.” Haggai, in
fact, is expressly designated ‘‘messenger of Yahweh”
(Hag 1 13). Besides, the superscriptions _pre-
fixed to the book, in both the L aud the Vulg,
warrant the supposition that Malachi’s full name
ended with the syllable F2. At the same time the
LXX tr® the last clause of 1 1, “by the hand of his
messenger,’ and the Tg reads, “by the hand of my
angel, whose name is called Ezra the scribe.”
Jerome likewise testifies that the Jews of his day
ascribed this last book of prophecy to Ezra (V.
Praef. in duodecim Prophetas). But if Ezra’s naine
was originally associated with the book, it would
hardly have been dropped by the collectors of the
prophetic Canon who lived only a century or two
subsequent to Ezra’s time. Certain traditions
ascribe the book to Zerubbabe]l and Nehemiah;
others, still, to Malachi, whom they designate as a
Levite and a member of the “Great Synagogue.”
Certain modern scholars, however, on the basis of
the similarity of the title (1 1) to Zec 9 1; 12 1,
declare it to be anonymous; but this is a rash con-
clusion without any substantial proof other than
supposition. The best explanation is that of Pro-
fessor G. G. Cameron, who suggests that the ter-
mination of the word “Malachi” is adjectival, and
equivalent to the Lat angelicus, signifying ‘one
charged with a message or mission” (a missionary).
The term would thus be an official title; and the
thought would not be unsuitable to one whose
message closed the prophetical Canon of the OT,
and whose mission in behalf of the church was so
sacred in character (1-vol HDB).
Opinions vary as to the prophet’s exact date,
but nearly all scholars are agreed that Malachi
prophesied during the Pers period,


2. The and after the recoustruction and dedi-
Prophet’s cation of the second temple in 516
Times | BC (cf Mal110; 31.10). The


prophet speaks of the people’s ‘“‘gov-
ernor’ (Heb pehah, Mal 1 8), as do Haggai and
Nehemiah (Hag i1; Neh 6 14; 12 26). The
social conditions portrayed are unquestionably
those also of the period of the Restoration. More
specifically, Malachi probably lived and labored
during the times of Ezra and Nehemiah. Serious
abuses had crept into Jewish life; the priests had
become lax and degenerate, defective and inferior


Malachi
Male


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1970


sacrifices were allowed to be offered upon the
temple altar, the people were neglecting their
tithes, divorce was common and God’s covenant
was forgotten and ignored; just such abuses as
we know from the Book of Neh were common in his
day (cf Neh 3 5; 5 1-13). Yet, it is doubtful
whether Malachi preached during Nehemiah’s
active governorship; for in Mal 1 8 it is implied
that gifts might be offered to the “governor,”
whereas Nehemiah tells us that he declined all such
(Neh 5 15.18). On the other hand, the abuses
which Malachi attacked correspond so exactly
with those which Nehemiah found on his 2d visit
to Jerus in 432 BC (Neh 13 7 ff) that it seems
reasonably certain that he prophesied shortly before
that date, ic. between 445:and 432 BC. As Dr.
J. M. P. Smith says, “The Book of Mal fits the
situation amid which Nehemiah worked as snugly
as a bone fits its socket’? (ICC, 7). That the
prophet should exhort the people to remember the
law of Moses, which was publicly read by Ezra in
the year 444 BC, is in perfect agreement with this
conclusion, despite the fact that Stade, Cornill and
Kautzsch argue for a date prior to the time of Ezra.
On the other hand, Nagelsbach, Kéhler, Orelli,
Reuss and Volck rightly place the book in the
period between the two visits of Nehemiah (445—
432 BC).

The book, in the main, is composed of two ex-

tended polemics against the priests (1 6—2 9) and

the people (2 10—4 3), opening with
8. Contents a clear, sharp statement of the

prophet’s chief thesis that Jeh still
loves Israel (1 2-5), and closing with an exhorta~
tion to remember the Law of Moses (4 4-6). After
the title or superscription (1 1) the prophecy falls
naturally into seven divisions:

(1) 1 2-5, in which Malachi shows that Jeh still
loves Israel because their lot stands in such marked
contrast to Edom’s. They were temporarily dis-
ciplined; Edom was forever punished.

(2) 1 6—2 9, a denunciation of the priests, the
Levites, who have become neglectful of their sacer-
dotal office, indifferent to the Law, and unmindful
of their covenant relationship to Jeh.

(3) 2 10-16, against idolatry and divorce. Some
interpret this section metaphorically of Judah as
having abandoned the religion of his youth (ver 11).
But idolatry and divorce were closely related. The
people are obviously rebuked for literally putting
away their own Jewish wives in order to contract
marriage with foreigners (ver 15). Such marriages,
the prophet declares, are not only a form of idolatry
(ver 11), but a violation of Jeh’s intention to pre-
serve to Himself a ‘‘godly seed”’ (ver 15).

(4) 2 17—8 6, an announcement of coming
judgment. Men are beginning to doubt whether
there is longer a God of justice (ver 17). Malachi
replies that the Lord whom the people seek will
suddenly come, both to purify the sons of Levi and
to purge the land of siuners in general. The na-
tion, however, will not be utterly consumed (3 6).

(5) 3 7-12, in which the prophet pauses to give
another concrete example of the people’s sins:
they have failed to pay their tithes and other dues.
Accordingly, drought, locusts, and famine have
ensued. Let these be paid and the nation will
again prosper, and their land will become ‘‘a delight-
some land.”

(6) 3 13—4 8, a second section addressed to the
doubters of the prophet’s age. In 2 17, they had
said, “Where is the God of justice?” They now
murmur: “It is vain to serve God; and what
profit is it that we have kept his charge?” The
wicked and the good alike prosper (3 14.15). But,
the prophet replies, Jeh knows them that are His,
and a book of remembrance is being kept; for a


day of judgment is coming when the good and the
evil will be distinguished; those who work iniquity
will be exterminated, while those who do righteously
will triumph.

(7) 4 4-6, a concluding exhortation to obey the
Mosaic Law; with a promise that Elijah the prophet
will first come to avert, if possible, the threatened
judgment by reconciling the hearts of the nation
to one another, i.e. to reconcile the ideals of the old
to those of the young, and vice versa.

Malachi was content to write prose. His Hebrew
is clear and forceful and direct; sometimes almost

rhythmical. His figures are as nu-
4, Style merous as should be expected in the
brief remnants of his sermons which
have come down to us, and in every case they are
chaste and beautiful (1 6; 3 2.3.17; 4 1-3). His
statements are bold and correspondingly effective.
The most original feature in his style is the lecture-
like method which characterizes his book through-
out; more particularly that of question and answer.
His style is that of the scribes. It is known as the
didactic-dialectic method, consisting first of an
assertion or charge, then a fancied objection raised
by his hearers, and finally the prophet’s refutation
of their objection. Eight distinct examples of this
peculiarity are to be found in his book, each one
containing the same clause in Heb, ‘‘Yet ye say”
(1 2.6.7; 2 14.17; 3 7.8.13). This debating style
is esp. characteristic of Malachi. Ewald called
it “the dialogistic’’ method. Malachi shows the
influence of the schools (cf his use of “also’’ and
“again” in 1 13; 2 18, which is equivalent to our
“firstly,” “secondly,” etc).

Malachi’s message has a permanent value for us

as well as an immediate value for his own time. He

was an intense patriot, and accord-
5. Message ingly his message was clean-cut and

severe. His primary aim was to
encourage a disheartened people who were still
looking for Haggai’s and Zechariah’s optimistic
predictions to be fulfilled. Among the lessons of
abiding value are the following: (1) That ritual
is an important element in religion, but not as an
end in itself. Tithes and offerings are necessary,
but only as the expression of sincere moral and
deeply spiritual life (1 11). (2) That a cheap
religion avails nothing, and that sacrifices given
grudgingly are displeasing to God. Better a temple
closed than filled with such worshippers (1 8-10).
(3) That divorce and intermarriage with heathen
idolaters thwarts the purpose of God in securing
to Himself a peculiar people, whose family life is
sacred because it is the nursery of a “‘godly seed”
(2 15). (4) That there is eternal discipline in the
Law. Malachi places the greatest emphasis upon
the necessity of keeping the Mosaic Law. The
priests, he says, are the custodians and expounders
of the Law. At their mouth the people should
seek knowledge. ‘To undervalue the Law is easy;
to appraise it is a much harder task’? (Welch).
With Malachi, no less than with Christ Himself,
not one jot or tittle should ever pass away or
become obsolete.

LiteRAture.—Driver, ‘‘Minor Prophets,'’ II, New-
Century Bible (1906); G. A. Smith, ‘The Book of the
Twelve Prophets,'’ Expositor's Bible (1898); Dods, Post-
Exilian Prophets: ‘‘Hag,"’ ‘‘Zec,"’ ‘‘Mal''; ‘‘Handbooksfor
Bible Classes’; J. M. P. Smith, TCC (1912). Among the
numerons otber comms. on Mal may be mentioned: Ei-
selen (1907), Marti (1903), Nowack (1903), Orelli (1908),
Wellhansen (1898), Van Hoonacker (1908) and Iscpeccul
(1908). Tbe varicus Intros to the OT should also be
consulted, notably those by Driver (1910), Strack (1906),
Wildeboer (1903), Gautier (1906), Cornill (1907), Konig
(1893); and the arts. entitled ‘‘Malachi'' in the various
Dicts. and Bible Enes: e.g. in HB (1902), by C. C.


Torrey; in HDB (1901), by ‘A.C. Welch; in 1-vol HDB
(1909), by G. G. Cameron; and RE (1905), by Velck.


Grorce L. Ropinson


1971


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Malachi
Male


MALACHY, mal’a-ki: Another form of the name
of the prophet ‘“‘Malachi’” (q.v.), found in RV and
AV of 2 Esd 1 40.


MALCAM, mal’kam (235%, malkaim, “their
king’; AV Malcham):

(1) A chief of the Benjamites, son of Shaharaim
(1 Ch 8 9).

(2) The name of an idol as well as the possessive
pronominal form of 72%, melekh, “king” (2 8 12
30 RVm; Jer 49 1.3 [LXX Melchél]; Zeph 1 5).
In Am 1 15 it appears to be best tr¢ “their king,”
asin both AV and RV. Only a careful examination
of the context can determine whether the word is
the proper name of the idol (Moloch) or the 3d
personal possessive pronoun for king. The idol is
also spelt ‘“Milcom” and “Molech.”’


MALCHIAH, mal-ki’a. See Maucamaag.


MALCHIEL, mal’ki-el (8°25, malki’al, “God
is king’): Grandson of Asher (Gen 46 17; Nu
26 45; 1 Ch 7 31).


MALCHIELITES, mal’ki-el-its C>N°D31, mal-
kV élt): Descendants of Malchiel (Nu 26 45).


MALCHIJAH, mal-ki’ja (mba , malkiyah, “Teh
is king’; MeAxetas, Melcheias, with variants):

(1) A Levite, descendant of Gershom, of those
whom David set over the “service of song’ in the
worship (1 Ch 6 40).

; (2) The head of the 5th course of priests (1 Ch
49).

(3) One of the laymen who had taken “strange
wives” during the exile (Ezr 10 25); the “Mel-
chias” of 1 Esd 9 26.

(4) Another of the same name (Ezr 10 25; two
in same verse). Called “‘Asibias” in 1 Esd 9 26.

(5) Another under the same offence, son of Harim
(Ezr 10 31). ‘‘Melchias” in 1 Esd 9 32.

(6) One of the “repairers’’ who helped with the
“tower of the furnaces” (Neh 3 11).

(7) Son of Rechab ruler of Beth-hacccrem, re-
pairer of the dung gate (Neh 3 14).

(8) A goldsmith who helped in building the walls
of Jerus (Neh 3 31).

(9) One of those at Ezra’s left hand when he read
the law (thongh possibly one of the above [Neh
8 4}. In1 Esd 9 44 ‘‘Melchias.”

(10) One of the covenant signatories (Neh 10 3).

(11) The father of Pashhur (Neh 11 12; Jer 21
1; 38 1).

”(12) ae a singer at the dedication of the
walls of Jerus under Ezra and Nehemiah (Neh 12


42).

ti3) carw732"2, malkiyahi, as above with u end-
ing): Son of Ham-melech (or, as 1 K 22 26; 2 Ch
98 7 translate it, “king’s son’’). Jeremiah was cast
into his dungeon or pit (Jer 38 6). wen

AV spells ‘““Malchiah”’ or “Malchijah” indiffer-
ently with ‘““Melchiah” in Jer 21 1; ERV has ‘‘Mal-
chiah” in Jer 21 1; 38 1.6, elsewhere ‘‘Malchijah’;
ARV has ‘‘Malchijah”’ throughout.

Henry WALLACE

MALCHIRAM, mal-ki’ram (07732, malkiram,
“uplifted king’): Son of Jeconiah, descendant of
David (1 Ch 3 18).


MALCHI-SHUA, mal-ki-shoo’a (91023, mal-
kisha*, “my king saves’): One of the sons of Saul
(1 8 14 49; 31 2, AV “Melchishna’; 1 Ch 8 33;
9 39). He was slain by the Philis with his brothers
atthe battle of Gilboa (1 Ch 10 2; 1 8 31 2).


MALCHUS, mal’kus (MéAxos, Mdlchos, from
729, melekh, i.e. “counsellor” or “king’’): The
name of the servant of the high priest Caiaphas
whose right ear was smitten off by Simon Peter at
the arrest of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane
(eof Mt 26 51; Mk 14 47; Lk 22 50; Jn 18 10).
It is noteworthy that Luke “the physician’’ alone
gives an account of the healing of the wound (Lk
22 51). As Jesus “touched his ear, and healed him,”
the ear was not entirely severed from the head.
The words of Jesus, ‘‘Suffer ye thus far,’’ may have
been addressed either to the disciples, i.e. “Suffer ye
that I thus far show kindness to my captors,” or to
those about to bind him, i.e. asking a short respite to
heal Malchus. They were not addressed directly to
Peter, as the Gr form is pl., whereas in Mt 26 52;
Jn 18 11, where, immediately aftcr the smiting
of Malchus, Jesus does address Peter, the sing. form
is used; nor do the words of Jesus there refer to the
healing but to the action of his disciple. A kins-
man of Malchus, also a servant of the high priest,
was one of those who put the questions which made
Peter deny Jesus (Jn 18 26). C. M. Kerr


MALE, mal ([1] 127, zakhar, "21, 2akhar, “727,
zakhir [jf meaning “to stand out,” “‘to be promi-
nent,” here a physiological differentiation of the sex,
as TOP), n*kebhah, “female,” q.v.]; [2] WN, 'ish,
lit. “man”; [8] by circumlocution, only in the books
of S and K, “Pa PMV, mashtin bekir; otpav
apas Totxov, ourdn pros toichon, which RV euphem-
istically renders “man-child” [1 8 25 22.34; 1 K
14 10]): Gesenius has rightly pointed ont that this
phrase designates young boys, who do not as yet
wear clothes, of whom the above description is
accurate, while it does not apply in the case of
adults, even in the modern Orient. We know this
from the statement of Herod. ii.35, relating to Egypt,
and from Jgs 8 24; 18 243. The Gr tr® these
words with dpoyy, drsén, &ppyv, drrhén, while 1 Macc
5 28.51 has the adj. dpoenxés, arsenikés.

The above words (the phrase mashtin bekir ex-
cepted) are used promiscuously of animals and men,
eg. “Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee
seven and seven, the male [’%sh] and his female,
of the birds also of the heavens, seven and seven,
male [zakhar] and female” (Gen 7 2.3). A careful
distinction was made in the use of male and female
animals in the rules concerning sacrifice; in some
offerings none but males were allowed, in others
females were permitted along with the males (Lev
3 6). The same distinction was made in the val-
uation of the different sexes (Gen 32 14.15; Lev
27 5). Certain priestly portions were permitted
to the Levites or the male descendants of Aaron for
food, while women were not permitted to partake
of the same (Nu 18 10.11).

As arule Jewish parents (as is now common in
the Orient) preferred male children to daughters.
This is seen from the desire for male progeny (1 8
1 8-18) and from the ransom paid for firstborn sons
to Jeh (Ex 18 12; Lk 2 23). It was reserved to
the NT to proclaim the equality of the sexes, as it
does of races and conditions of men: ‘‘There can
be neither Jew nor Greek, there can be neither
bond nor free, there can be no male and female; for
ye all are one man in Christ Jesus’ (Gal 3 28).
See Woman.

Among the prominent sins of oriental peoples, ‘‘the
abominations of the nations which Jeh drove out before
the children of Israel'’ was one of the most heinous char-
acter, that of sodomy, against which God’s people are
repeatedly warned. The Gr expression for the devotee
of this vice is a compound noun, dpcevoxoirys, arseno-


kottés, lit. ‘‘he who lies with man,” the abuser of him-
self with mankind, the sodomite (1 Cor 6 9), while the


Heb wp. kadhésh, lit. means the (male) devotee of las-


Malefactor
Mamre


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1972


civious and licentious idolatry (Dt 23 17; 1 K 14 24;
15 12; 22 46; 2 K 23 7; Job 36 14).
. L. E. Luerrme

MALEFACTOR, mal-é-fak’tér (kaxorotds, kako-
poids, “‘a bad doer,” i, ‘“evildoer,’” ‘criminal’;
Kaxotpyos, kakourgos, ‘a wrongdoer’): The former
occurs in Jn 18 30 AV, the latter, which is the
stronger term,in Lk 28 32.39. The former describes
the subject as doing or making evil, the latter as
creating or originating the bad, and hence desig-
nates the more energetic, aggressive, initiating
type of criminality.


MALELEEL, ma-lé’lé-el, mal’é-lé] (MadedefA,
Maleleél, AV): Gr form of ‘“Mahalalel” (Lk 3 37);
RV ‘Mahalaleel.”’


MALICE, mal’is, MALIGNITY, ma-lig’ui-ti
(xaxla, kakia, wovnpss, ponérés, Kkaxondea,
kakoétheia): ‘Malice,’ now used in the sense of
deliberate ill-will, by its derivation means badness,
or wickedness generally, and was so used in Older
Eng. In the Apoc it is the tr of kakia, “evil,”
“badness” (Wisd 12 10.20; 16 14; 2 Macc 4 50,
RV “wickedness’); in Ecclus 27 30; 28 7, we
have “malice” in the more restricted sense as the tr
of ménis, ‘“‘confirmed anger.” In the NT “malice”
and “maliciousness” are the tr of kakia (Rom 1
_ 29a; 1 Cor & 8; 14 20; Col 2 8); malicious is the
tr of ponéros, “evil” (8 Jn ver 10, RV “wicked”’); it
also occurs in Ad Est 13 4.7, ver 4, ‘malignant”’;
Wisd 1 4, RV “that deviseth evil”; 2 Macc 5 23;
malignity occurs in Rom 1 29b as the tr of kakoé-
theia, “evil disposition”; ‘maliciously,’ Sus vs
43.62; 2 Mace 14 11, RV “having ill will.”

W. L. WaLKER

MALLOS, mal’os. See Matius.

MALLOTHI, mal’S-thi, ma-l6’thi (M439, malla-
thi, “my discourse”): Son of Heman, a Kohathite
singer (1 Ch 6 33; 25 4). The song service in
the house of the Lord was apportioned by David
and the captains of the host to the 3 families of
Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun (1 Ch 25 1). Their
place in the “courses” was, however, settled by
“lot”? (1 Ch 25 8.9). Mallothi was one of He-
man’s 17 children—14 sons and 3 daughters (1 Ch
25 5)—and was chief of the 19th course of twelve
singers into which the temple choir was divided
(1 Ch 26 26). Henry WALLACE


MALLOWS, mal’sz.


MALLUCH, mal’uk (7732, mallakh, “coun-
sellor’’):

(1) A Levite of the sons of Merari, ancestor of
Ethan the singer (1 Ch 6 44; ef ver 29).

(2) Son of Bani, among those who had foreign
wives (Ezr 10 29). He is a descendant of Judah
(1 Ch 9 4) and is the Mamuchus of 1 Esd 9 30.

(8) A descendant of Harim, who married a
foreign wife (Ezr 10 32).

(4) (5) Two who sealed the covenant with Ne-
hemiah (Neh 10 4.27).

(6) Possibly the same as (4). One of the priests
who returned with Zerubbabel (Neh 12 2). Doubt-
less the Melicu of ver 14m. Henry WALLACE


MALLUCHI, mal’i-ki (°292%, mallakhi, “my
counsellor”): A family of priests that came over
with Zerubbabel (Neh 10 4; 12 14). May be
the patronymic Mauuucn, (4) (q.v.).


MALLUS, mal’us (Madhés, Mallés; AV Mal-
los): A city in Cilicia, the inhabitants of which
along with those of Tarsus, revolted from An-


See SALT-worr.


tiochus Epiphanes in protest against his action in
giving them to his concubine, Antiochis (2 Macc
4 30). The ancient name was Marlos. The river
Pyramos divides about 10 miles from the sea, one
branch flowing to the W., the other to the E. of the
low range of hills along the coast on which stands
Kara-Tash. Mallus stood on a height (Strabo,
675) to the E. of the western arm, a short distance
from the shore. The site is a little W. of Kara-
Tash, where inscriptions of Antiocheia and Mallus
have been found. Tarsus lay about 35 miles to the
N.W. The two cities were rivals in trade. The
position of Mallus with her harbor on the shore
gave her really no advantage over Tarsus, with her
river navigable to the city walls. The fine wagon
road over the mountain by way of the Cilician
Gates opened for her easy access to the interior,
compared with that furnished for Mallus by the
old caravan track to the N. by way of Adana.
This sufficiently explains the greater prosperity
of the former city. W. Ewrna


MALOBATHRON, mal-o-bath’ron: RVm sug-
gests that this tr may he right instead of Bether
in the phrase "WHA WW, haré bether (Caut 2 17).
But this spice never grew wild in Pal, and so could
hardly have given its name to a mountain, or
mountain range. The name Bether ought there-
fore to be retained, notwithstanding Wellhausen
(Prol.2, 415). The spice is the leaf of the Cassia
lignea tree.


MALTANNEUS, mal-ta-n@’us (Madravvaios,
Maltannaios, B and Swete; ’AAravvatos, Aliannatos,
A and Fritzsche—the M being perhaps dropped
because of the final M in the preceding word; AV
Altaneus): One of the sons of Asom who put away
his “strange wife’ (1 Esd 9 33)=‘Mattenai”’ in
Ezr 10 33. :


MAMAIAS, ma-ma’yas. Sce Samaras, (3).


MAMDAI, mam’dai, mam’di (B, May6&at,
Mamdat, A, MavSal, Mandat): One of those who
consented to put away their “strange wives’’ at
Esdras’ order (1 Esd 9 384)=AV ‘“Mabdai” = “Be-
naiah” in Ezr 10 35.


MAMMON, mam’un (Mapevés, Mamédnds): A
common Aram. word (7122, mamén) for riches, used
in Mt 6 24 and in Lk 16 9.11.18. In these pas-
sages mammon merely means wealth, and is called
“unrighteous,” because the abuse of riches is more
frequent than their right use. In Lk 16 13 there
is doubtless personification, but there is no proof
that there was in NT times a Syrian deity called
Mammon. The application of the term in Mt is
apparent and requires no comment. In Lk,
however, since the statement, ‘‘Make to yourselves
friends out of the mammon of unrighteousuess,”
follows as a comment on the parable of the Unjust
Steward, there is danger of the inference that
Jesus approved the dishonest conduct of the steward
and advised His disciples to imitate his example.
On the contrary, the statement is added more as
a corrective against this inference than as an appli-
cation. ‘Do not infer,’ He says, ‘that honesty in
the use of money is a matter of indifference. He
that is unfaithful in little is unfaithful in much.
So if you are not wise in the use of earthly treasure
how can you hope to be intrusted with heavenly
treasure?’ The commendation is in the matter
of foresight, not in the method. The steward
tried to serve two masters, his lord and his lord’s
creditors, but the thing could not be done, as the
sequel shows. Neither can men serve both God


1973


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Malefactor
Mamre


and riches exalted as an object of slavish servitude.
Wealth, Jesus teaches, does not really belong to
men, but as stewards they may use wealth pru-
dently unto their eternal advantage. Instead of
serving God and mammon alike we may serve God
by the use of wealth, and thus lay up treasures
for ourselves in heaven. Again, the parable is not
to be interpreted as teaching that the wrong of dis-
honest gain may be atoned for by charity. Jesus
is not dealing with the question of reparation. The
object is to point out how one may best use wealth,
tainted or otherwise, with a view to the future.
RussEtt Bensamin MILLER
MAMNITANEMUS, mam-ni-ta-né’mus (Mapu-
ravainos, Mamniténaimos, B, Maptitévaipos, Mam-
titdnaimos, AV Mamnitanaimus): 1 Esd 9 34,
where it represents the two names Mattaniah and
Mattenai in the || Ezr 10 37, which probably rep-
resent only one person. It must be a corruption
of these names. The Aldine gives a still more
corrupt form, Mapyparavatuos, Mamnimatanatimos.


MAMRE, mam’ré (N79, mamré’; LXX
MapBpf, Mambré):
(1) In Gen 14 24 Mamre is mentioned as the
name of one of Abraham’s allies, who in ver 13 is
described as the Amorite, brother of
1. Biblical Eshcol and Aner. The name of the
Data grove of trees is evidently considered
as derived from this sheikh or chief-
tain. The “oaks” (‘‘terebinths’) of Mamre where
Abram pitched his tent. (Gen 14 13; 18 1) are de-
_ scribed (18 18) as “in Hebron.” Later on Macz-
PELAH (q.v.) is described as “before,” i.e. “to the E.
of Mamre” (Gen 23 17; 25 9; 49 30; 50 13), and
Mamre is identified with Hebron itself (23 19).
While Mamre has always been looked for in the
vicinity of Hebron, the traditions have varied
greatly, determined epparently by the


2. Tradi- presence of a suitable tree. The one
tional site which has a claim on grounds other
Sites than tradition is that called Kh. and


‘Ain Nimreh (lit. the “ruin” and
“spring” of “the leopard”), about 4 mile N.N.W. of
modern Hebron. The word Nimreh may be a sur-
vival of the ancient Mamre, the name, as often
happens, being assimilated by a familiar word.
Thesite is a possible one, but, beyond this, the name
has not much to commend it. ; !
Tradition has centered round three different sites
at various periods: (1) The modern tradition points
to a magnificent oak (Quercus ilex, Arab. Sindian),
14 miles W.N.W. of the modern city, as the tere-
binth of Abraham; its trunk has a girth of 32 ft.
Tt is now in a dying condition, but when Robinson
visited it (BR, II, 72, 81) it was in fine condition;
he mentions a Mohammedan tradition that this was
“Abraham’s oak.” Since then the site had been
bought by the Russians, a hospice and church have
been erected, and the tradition, though of no an-
tiquity, has become crystallized. (2) The second
tradition, which flourished from the 16th cent. down
to the commencement of the 19th cent., pointed to
the hill of Deir el Arba‘in (see Hzpron) as that of
Mamre, relying esp., no doubt, in its inception on the
identity of Mamre and Hebron (Gen 23 19). A
magnificent terebinth which stood there was pointed
outasthat of Abraham. The site agrees well with
the statement that the cave of Machpelah was ‘‘be-
fore,” i.e.to the BE. of Mamre (Gen 23 17, etc). (3)
The third and much older tradition, mentioned in
several Christian writers, refers to a great terebinth
which once stood in an inclosure some 2 miles N.
of Hebron, near the road to Jerus. It is practically
certain that the site of this inclosure is the strange
Ramet el- Khalil. This is an inclosure some 214
ft. long and 162 ft. wide. The inclosing walls are


made of extremely fine and massive masonry and
are 6 ft. thick; the stones are very well laid and
the jointing is very fine, but the building was evi-
dently never completed. In one corner is a well—
Bir el- Khaltl—lined with beautiful ashlar masonry,
cut to the curve of the circuniference.

It is probable that this inclosuresurrounded a mag-
nificent terebinth; if so, it was at this spot that


Scala about 1 inch to 4 mile,


Sketch Map of the Environs of Hebron to Show the
Various Proposed Sites of Mamre.


before the days of Constantine a great annual fair
was held, attended by Jews, Christians and heathen
who united to pay honor to the sacred tree, while
the well was on the same occasion illuminated, and
offerings were made to it. Similar customs sur-
vive today at several shrines in Pal. Constantine
suppressed these “‘superstitions,”’ and built a church
in the neighborhood, probably the so-called ‘‘Abra-
ham’s house,” Beit {brahim of today. The tree
which stood here is apparently that mentioned by
Jos (BJ, IV, ix, 7) as having continued “‘since
the creation of the world.” At this inclosure, too,
Jewish women and children were sold at auction
after the suppression of the revolt of Bar Cochba.
Whatever the origin of the veneration paid to this
terebinth—now long centuries dead and gone—
early Christian tradition associated it with Abra-
ham and located Mamre here. This tradition is
mentioned by Jerome (4th cent.), by Eucherius
(6th cent.), by Areulphus (700 AD) and by Benja-
min of Tudela (1163 AD). Among the modern
Jews it is looked upon as the site of “‘Abraham’s
oak.” It is probable that the view that Abraham
was connected with this tree is one attached to it
much later than its original sanctity F it was origi-
nally one of the many “holy trees’ of the land
venerated by primitive Sem religious feeling, and
the nearness of Hebron caused the Bible story to
be attached to it. Judging from the Bible data, it
appears to be too far from Hebron and Machpelah
to suit the conditions; the site of Mamre must
have been nearer to Deir el Arba‘in, but it has
probably been entirely lost sinve very early times,

For a very good discussion about Mamre see


Mamuchus
Man of Sin


Mambré by Le R. P. Abel des Fréres Précheurs in
the Conférences de Saint Etienne, 1909-10 (Paris).
(2) An Amorite chief, owner of the “oaks” men-
tioned above (Gen 14 13.24).
E. W. G. MasterMan
MAMUCHOS, ma-mut’kus (Mépovxos, Mdémou-
chos): One of those who put away their “strange
wives” (1 Esd 9 30); identical with “Malluch” in
Ezr 10 29. ;


MAN. See AnrHROPOLOGY.


MAN, NATURAL, nat’ii-ral, nach’u-ral (uxiKds
aivOpwmos, psuchikds dnthropos): Man as he is by
nature, contrasted with man as he becomes by grace.
This phrase is exclusively Pauline.

I. Biblical Meaning.—The classical passage in
which it occursis1 Cor 2 14 AV: “But the natural
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God:
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned.”
In his anthropology Paul uses four groups of de-
scriptive adjs. in contrasted pairs: (1) the old man
and the new man (Rom 6 6; Eph 4 22; Col 3 9;
Eph 2 15; 4 24; Col 3 10); (2) the outward
man and the inward man (2 Cor 4 16; Rom 7 22;
Eph 3 16); (3) the carnal man and the spiritual
nian (Rom 8 1-14; 1 Cor 3 1.3.4); (4) the nat-
ural man and the spiritual man (2 Cor 2 14;
3 3.4; Eph 2 3; 1 Cor 2 15; 3 1; 14 37; 15 46;
Gal 6 1). A study of these passages will show
that the adjs. “old,” “outward,” “carnal,” and
‘natural’ describe man, from different points of
view, prior to his conversion; while the adjs. “new,”
“inward” and “spiritual” describe him, from differ-
ent points of view, after his conversion. To elu-
cidate the meaning, the expositor must respect these
antitheses and let the contrasted words throw light
and meaning upon each other.

The “‘old man” is the “natural man’’ considered
chronologically—prior to that operation of the Hely

Spirit by which he is renovated into
1. The Old the “new man.”


Man The old house is the house as it was

before it was remodeled; an old garment
Is the garment as it was before it was re-fashioned;
and the ‘told man” is man as he was before he was
regeoerated and sanctified by the grace of the Spirit.
“Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin''(Rom 6 6 AV). Herethe''old man” is called
the ‘body of sin,"’ as the physical organism is called
the body of the soul or spirit, and is to be crucified”
aod ‘‘destroyed,"’ in order that man may no longer be
the ‘servant of sin."’ ‘' Put off concerning the former
conversation the old man, which is corrupt... . . Put
on the new man, which after God is created in right-
eousness and true holiness’ (Eph 4 22.24 AV). Here
the ''old man’’ is said to be ‘“‘corrupt,'’ and we are
called upon to ‘put it off." The figure is that of
putting off old clothes which are unclean, and_ putting
on those garments which have come from the wash
clean and snowy white. We have the same idea, in
different language and with a slightly different im-
agery, in Col 3 9.10.

When Paul calls the ‘‘natural man" the “old man,”
and describes it as the ‘‘body of sin"’ which is ‘‘ corrupt”
in its nature and ‘'deeds,"’ and tells us that it must be
‘‘erucified"' and ‘'destroyed” and “put off"' in order
that we may ‘‘not serve sin,'' but may have “righteous-
ness'’ and ‘true holiness’’ and ‘“‘knowledge"' and the
‘image"’ of God, we get some conception of the moral
meaning which he is endeavoring to convey by these
contrasts (Gal § 19-24). He has reference to that _sin-
‘ul nature in man which is as old as the individual, as
old as the race of which he is a member, which must be
graciously renovated according to that gospel which he
preached to Corinthians, Colossians, Ephesians, Romans
and all the world. See OLtnp Man; Man, New, I, 3.


The apostle also establishes a contrast between
“the inward man” and ‘‘the outward man.”
“Though our outward man is decaying,

2. The Out- yet our inward man is renewed day
ward Man by day” (2 Cor 4 16). Now what
sort of man is the ‘outward man” as

contrasted with the “inward man’? In Gr, the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1974


éx6-anthrépos is set over against the ésd-anthropos.
See Ourwarp Man.

“The contrast here drawn between the ‘outward’
and the ‘inward man,’ though illustrated by the con-
trast in Rom 7 22 between_the ‘law in the members’
and ‘the inner man,’ and in Eph 4 22; Col 3 9 between
‘the old_man' and ‘the new man’ is not precisely the
same. Those contrasts relate to the difference between
the sensual and the moral nature, ‘the flesh’ and _ ‘the
spirit’; this to the difference between the material and
the spiritual nature’ (Stanley, in loc.).

“The outward man” is the body, and “the in-
ward man’’ is the soul, or immaterial principle in
the human make-up. As the body is wasted by the
afflictions of life, the soul is renewed; what is death
to the body is life to the soul; as afflictions depoten-
tiate man’s physical organism, they impotentiate
man’s spiritual principle. That is, the.afflictions of
life, culminating in death itself, have diametrically
opposite effects upon the body and upon the soul.
They kill the one; they quicken the other.

“The inward man” is the whole human nature
as renewed and indwelt and dominated by the Spirit
of God as interpenetrated by the spirit of grace. As
the one is broken down by the adverse dispensations
of life, the other is upbuilt by the sanctifying dis-
cipline of the Spirit.

There is another Pauline antithesis which it is
necessary for us to interpret in order to understand

what he means by the “natural man.”


3. The It is the distinction which he draws
Carnal between the “carnal mind” and the
Man “spiritual mind.” The critical refer-


ence is Rom 8 1-14. In this place
the “carnal mind” is identified with the “law of
death,” and the “spiritual mind” is identified with
the “law of the Spirit.” These two “laws” are two
principles and codes: the one makes man to be at
“enmity against God” and leads to “death”; the
other makes him the friend of God, and conducts to
“life and peace.” The word ‘carnal’ connotes
all that is fallen and sinful and unregenerate in
man’s nature. In its gross sense the “carnal’’ sig-
nifies that. which is contrary to nature, or nature
expressing itself in low and bestial forms of sin.
The “natural man” is the “old man,” the “out~
ward man,” the ‘‘carnal man’’—man as he is by
nature, as he is firstborn, contra-


4. The distinguished to man as he is changed
Natural by the Spirit, as he is second-born or
Man regenerated. There is an “old” life,


an “outward” life, a “carnal” life, a
“natural” life, as contrasted with the “new” life, the
“inward” life, the “spiritual” life, the “gracious”
life. The “natural man” is a bold and vivid per-
sonification of that depraved nature which we in-
herit from Adam fallen, the source and seat of all
actual and personal transgressions.

I. Theological Meaning.—We know what we
mean by the nature of the lion, by the nature of the
lamb. We are using perfectly comprehensible
language when we speak of the lion as naturally
fierce, and of the lamb when we say he is naturally
gentle. We have reference to the dominant dis-
positions of these animals, that resultant of their
qualities which defines their character and spon-
taneity. So we are perfectly plain when we say
that man is naturally sinful: We are but saying
that sinfulness is to man what fierceness is to the |
lion, what gentleness is to the lamb. The “natu-
ral man”’ is a figure of speech for that sinful human
nature, common to us all. It is equivalent to the
theological phrases: the “sinful inclination,” the
‘evil disposition,” the “apostate will,” “original
sin,” “native depravity.” It manifests itself in
the understanding as blindness, in the heart as
hardness, in the will as obstinacy. See Man, New.

Rospert ALEXANDER WEBB


1975


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mamuchus
Man of Sin


MAN, NEW (véos or kawwds GvOpwros, néos or
kainés anthropos): Generally described, the “new
man’’ is man as he becomes under the transforming
power of the Holy Spirit, contrasted with man as
he is by nature. The phrase has (1) its Bib., and
(2) its theological, meanings.

£, Biblical Meaning.—There are four Bib. con-
trasts which must be considered as opposites: (1)
the “‘old man” (palaiés anthrépos) and the “new
man” (neos or kainos anthropos); (2) the “outward
man” (érd-anthropos) and the “inward man’ (ésd-
anthrépos) ; (3) the“‘carnalman”’ (sarkikés anthropos)
and the “spiritual man” (pneumatikés anthropos);
(4) the “natural man” (psuchikés anthropos) and
the “spiritual man’ (pneumatikés anthrépos).
These are not four different sorts of men, but four
different sorts of man. Take up these antitheses
in their reverse order, so as to arrive at some clear
and impressive conception of what the Bib. writer
means by the ‘‘new man.”

_ The “spiritual man” is a designation given
IM opposition to the “carnal man” and to the
“natural man” (Rom 8 1-14; 1 Cor
1. The 215; 3 1.3.4; 2 14; 3 11; 14 37; 15
Spiritual 46; Gal 61; Eph 2 3). All three
Man of these terms are personifications of
human nature. The “carnal man’”’ is
human nature viewed as ruled and dominated by
sensual appetites and fleshly desires—as ener-
gized by those impulses which have close association
with the bodily affections. The “natural man’’ is
human nature ruled and dominated by unsanctified
reason—those higher powers of the soul not yet
influenced by Divine grace. The “spiritual man”
is this same human nature after it has been seized
upon and interpenetrated and determined by the
Holy Spirit. The word “spiritual” is sometimes
used in a poetic and idealistic sense, as when we
speak of the spirituality of beauty; sometimes in a
metaphysical sense, as when we speak of the spirit-
uality of the soul; but in its prevalent Bib. and
evangelical sense it is an adj. with the Holy Spirit
as its noun-form. The spiritual life is that life of
which the Holy Spirit is the author and preserver;
and the “spiritual man” is that nature or character
in man which the Holy Spirit originates, preserves,
determines, disciplines, sanctifies and glorifies.

The “inward man” is a designation of human
nature viewed as internally and centrally regen-

erated, as contrasted with the “out-


2. The ward man” (2 Cor 4 16; Rom 7 22;
Inward Eph 3 16). See Man, Ovtwarp.
Man This phrase indicates the whole human


nature conceived as affected from
within—in the secret, inside, and true springs of
activity—by the Holy Spirit of God. Such a
change—regeneration—is not superficial, but a
change in the inner central self; not a mere external
reformation, but an internal transformation. Grace
operates not from the circumference toward the
center, but from the center toward the circum-
ference, of life. The product is a man renovated in
his “inward parts,” changed in the dynamic center
of his heart. . A
The “new man” is an appellation yielded by the
contrasted idea of the ‘old man” (Rom 6 6; Eph
4 22;Col 3 9; Eph 2 15; 4 24; Col 3
3. The New 10). The “old” is “corrupt” and ex-
Man presses itself in evil “deeds”; the “new”
possesses the ‘‘image of God” and is
marked by “knowledge,” “righteousness,” and
“holiness.” There are two Gr words for “new’—
neos and kainos. The former means new in the
sense of young, as the new-born child is a young
thing; the latter means “new” in the sense of
renovated, as when the house which has been rebuilt
is called a new house. The converted man is “new”


(neo-anthrépos) in the sense that he is a ‘“‘babe in
Christ,” and ‘new’ (kaino-anthrdpos) in the sense
that his moral nature is renovated and built over
again.

In the NT there are 5 different vbs. used to ex-
press the action put forth in making the ‘‘old man”
a “new man.” (1) In Eph 2 10 and 4 24, he is
said to be ‘‘created” (ktizd), and in 2 Cor 6 17 the
product is called a “new creature’ (kainé kisis),
a renovated creature. Out of the “old man’ the
Holy Spirit has created the “new man.” (2) In
1 Pet 1 3.23 and elsewhere, he is said to be “‘begotten
again” (anagenndo), and the product is a “‘babe in
Christ” (1 Cor 3 1). The “old man’ thus becomes
the ‘new man” by a spiritual begetting: his pater-
nity is assigned to the Holy Ghost. (3) In Eph 2 5
and elsewhere, he is said to be ‘quickened’ (zdopozéo),
and the product is represented as a creature which
has been made “alive from the dead”? (Rom 6 13).
The “‘old man,” being ‘dead in trespasses and sins’
(Eph 2 1), is brought forth from his sin-grave by
a spiritual resurrection. (4) In Eph 4 23 he is
represented as being made “young” (ananedd), and
the product is a child of the Spirit at the commence-
ment of his religious experience. The “old man,”
dating his history back to the fall in Eden, has
become, through the Spirit, a young man in Christ
Jesus. (5) In 2 Cor 4 16 and in Rom 12 2, he
is said to be ‘renovated’ (anakainéd). The ‘‘old
man’ is renovated into the “new man.” Sinful
human nature is taken by the Spirit and morally
recast. :

Hl. Theological Meaning.—The “new man’’ is
the converted, regenerated man. The phrase has
its significance for the great theological doctrine of
regeneration as it expands into the broad work of
sanctification. Is the sinner dead? Regeneration
is a new life. Is holiness non-existent in him? Re-
generation is a new creation. Is he born in sin?
Regeneration is a new birth. Is he determined by
his fallen, depraved nature? Regeneration is a
spiritual determination. Is he the subject of carnal
appetites? Regeneration is a holy appetency.
Is he thought of as the old sinful man? Regenera-
tion is a new man. Is the sinful mind blind? Re-
generation is a new understanding. Is the heart
stony? Regeneration is a heart of flesh. Is the
conscience seared? Regeneration is a good con-
science. Is the will impotent? Regeneration is
a new impotentiation. The regenerated man is a
man with a new governing disposition—a “new
man,” an “inward man,” a “spiritual man.”

(1) The “new man’—the regenerate man—is
not a theological transubstantiation: a being whose
substance has been supernaturally converted into
some other sort of substance.

(2) Heis not a scientific transmutation: a species
of one kind which has been naturally evolved into
a species of another kind.

(3) He is not a metaphysical reconstruction: a
being with a new mental equipment.

(4) He is an evangelical convert: an “old man”
with a new regnant moral disposition, an “outward
man” with a new inward fons et origo of moral life;
a “natural man” with a new renovated spiritual
heart. Sce Man, Narvrat; REGENERATION.

RosBerTt ALEXANDER WEBB

MAN OF SIN (6 Gv@pwqos ris dpaprias, ho

Gnthropos tés hamartias; many ancient authorities

read, “man of lawlessness,” dvoptas,
1. The anomias): The name occurs in Paul’s
Pauline remarkable announcement in 2 Thess
Description 2 3-10 of the manifestation of a colos-

sa] anti-Christian power prior to the
advent, which some of the Thessalonians had been
misled into thinking of as immediately impending
(ver 2). That ‘day of the Lord,” the apostle de-


Man of Sin
Manasseh


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1976


clares, will not come till, as he had previously
taught them (ver 5), there has first been a great
apostasy and the revelation of “the man of sin”
(or “of lawlessness”; cf ver 8), named also “the son
of perdition” (ver 3). This “lawless one” (ver 8)
would exalt himself above all that is called God,
or is an object of worship; he would sit in the
temple of God, setting himself forth as God (ver 4).
For the time another power restrained his manifes-
tation; when that was removed, he would be re-
vealed (vs 6.7). Then “the mystery of lawlessness,”’
which was already working, would attain its full
development (vs 7.8). The coming of this ‘man
of sin,” in the power of Satan, would be with lying
wonders and all deceit of unrighteousness, whereby
many would be deceived to their destruction (vs
9.10). But only for a season (ver 6). Jesus would
slay (or consume) him with the breath of His
mouth (cf Isa 11 4), and bring him to nought by
the manifestation of His coming (ver 8).
Innumerable are the theories and speculations
to which this Pauline passage has given rise (a
very full account of these may be seen
2. The in the essay on “The Man of Sin”
Varying In- appended to Dr. J. Eadie’s posthu-
terpreta- mous Comm. on Thess, and in Liine-
tions mann’s Comm., 222ff, ET). (1)
There is the view, favored by “‘mod-
erns,” that the passage contains no genuine pre-
diction (Paul “‘could not know” the future), but
represents a speculation of the apostle’s own, based
on Dnl 8 23 ff; 11 36 ff, and_on current ideas of
Antichrist (see ANTICHRIST; BztzaL; cf Bousset,
Der Antichrist, 93 ff, etc). This view will not sat-
isfy those who believe in the reality of Paul’s
apostleship and inspiration. (2) Some connect the
description with Caligula, Nero, or other of the
Rom emperors. Caligula, indeed, ordered suppli-
cation to be made to himself as the supreme god
and wished to set up his statue in the temple of
Jerus (Suet. Calig. xxii.383; Jos, Ant, XVIII,
viii). But this was long before Paul’s visit to
Thessalonica, and the acts of such a madman could
not furnish the basis of a prediction so elaborate
and important as the present (cf Liinemann and
Bousset). (3) The favorite Protestant interpre-~
tation refers the prediction to the papacy, in whom,
it is contended, many of the blasphemous features
of Paul’s representation are unmistakably realized.
The ‘‘temple of God” is here understood to be the
church; the restraining power the Rom empire;
“the man of sin” not an individual, but the per-
sonification of an institution or system. It is diffi-
cult, however, to resist the impression that the
apostle regards “the mystery of lawlessness” as
culminating in an individual—a personal Anti-
christ—and in any case the representation out-
strips everything that can be conceived of as even
nominally Christian. (4) There remains the view
held by most of the Fathers, and in recent times
widely adopted, that “the man of sin” of this pas-
sage 13 an individual in whom, previous to the ad-
vent, sin will embody itself in its most lawless and
God-denying form. The attempts to identify this
individual with historical characters may be set
aside; but the idea is not thereby invalidated.
The difficulty is that the apostle evidently con-
ecives of the manifestation of the “man of sin” as
taking place, certainly not immediately, but at no
very remote period—not 2,000 years later—and
as connected directly with the final advent of Christ,
and the judgment on the wicked (cf 1 7-9), with-
out apparently any reference to a ‘millennial’
period, either before or after.
It seems safest, in view of the difficulties of the
passage, to confine one’s self to the general idea it
embodies, leaving details to be interpreted by the


actual fulfilment. There is much support in Scrip-
ture—not least in Christ’s own teaching (cf Mt 13
30.37-43; 24 11-14; Lk 18 8)—for


3. The the belief that before the final triumph
Essential of Christ’s kingdom there will be a
Idea period of great tribulation, of decay of


faith, of apostasy, of culmination of
both good and evil (‘Let both grow together until the
harvest,” Mt 18 30), with the seeming triumph for
the time of the evil over the good. There will be
a crisis-time—sharp, severe, and terminated by a
decisive interposition of the-Son of Man (‘‘the
manifestation of his coming,” RVm “Gr presence”),
in what precise form may be left undetermined.
Civil law and government—the existing bulwark
against anarchy (in Paul’s time represented by the
Rom power)—will be swept away by the rising
tide of evil, and lawlessness will prevail. It may
be that impiety will concentrate itself, as the pas-
sage says, in some individual head; or this may
belong to the form of the apostle’s apprehension
in a case where “‘times and seasons” were not yet
fully revealed: an apprehension to be enlarged by
subsequent revelations (see REVELATION, Boox oF),
or left to be corrected by the actual course of God’s
providence. The kernel of the prediction is not,
any more than in the OT prophecies, dependent
on its literal realization in every detail. Neither
does the final manifestation of evil exclude partial
and anticipatory realizations, embodying many
of the features of the prophecy. See THessaio-
nians, Seconp Epistxs to, [II. James ORR


MAN OF WAR. See War.
MAN, OLD. See Man, New; Orn Man.


MAN, OUTWARD. See Man, Natura; Ovr-
warp Man,


MAN, SON OF. See Son or Man.


MANAEN, man’s-en (Mavayjv, Manaén, Gr form
of Heb name “Menahem,” meaning “consoler’’):
Manaen is mentioned, with Barnabas, Saul and
others, in Acts 13 1, as. one of the “prophets and
teachers” in the recently founded gentile church
at Antioch, at the time when Barnabas and Saul
were “separated” by Divine call for their mission-
ary service. He is further described as ‘‘the foster-
brother [stimtrophos] of Herod the tetrarch” (ie.
Heron Antipas [q.v.]). He was probably brought
up and educated with this Herd: and his brother
Archelaus. An earlier glimpse of Christian influ-
ence in Herod’s court is afforded by Joanna, the
wife of Herod’s steward Chuzas, among the holy
women who ministered to Jesus (Lk 8 8). Manaen
may have been related to the older Manaen, the
Essene, who, Jos tells us, foretold the greatness of
Herod the Great, and was afterward treated by
Herod as his friend (Ant, XV, x, 5). His position
in the church at Antioch was evidently an influ-
ential one, whether he himself ranked among the
“prophets,” or perhaps only among the “teachers.”

JAMES ORR

MANAHATH, man’a-hath (M39, manahath;
Maxavaél, Machanathi): ;

(1) A place to which certain Benjamites, victims,
apparently, of intra-tribal jealousy, were carried
captive (1 Ch 86). Of this town the Mana-
hathites were probably natives. It is possibly
denoted by Manocho which LXX adds to the list
of towns in Judah (Josh 15 59). This place is
named along with Bether (Bittir). Thename seems
to be preserved in that of Maléha, a large village not
far from Bitttr, S.W. of Jerus. The change of | to
nm, and vice versa, is not uncommon. The same
place may be intended by Menuhah (Jgs 20 43


1977


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Man of Sin
Manasseh


RVm), where AV reads “with ease,” and RV “at
their resting-place.”

(2) One of the sons of Shobal, the son of Seir
the Horite (Gen 36 23; 1 Ch 1 40), the “name-
father” of one of the ancient tribes in Mt. Seir,
afterward subdued and incorporated in Edom.

W. Ewine

MANAHATHITES, man’a-hath-its (MMA,
menthoth [1 Ch 2 52], IIA, manahit [ver 54];
B, Mavaié, Ménaid, A, *Appavl®, Ammantth [ver
52], B, Madaéel, Malathei, A, Mavé8, Mandth,
[ver 54]; AV Manahethites): These men were the
inhabitants of Manahath. They were descendants
of Caleb, one-half being the progeny of Shobal, and
the other of Salma. In ver 52 RV transliterates
“Menuhoth,”’ but Manahathites is preferable.


MANAHETHITES, man-a-hé’'thits, ma-na/heth-
Its. See MANAHATHITEs.


MANASSEAS, man-a-sé’as (Mavaccijas, Ma-
nasséas): One of those who had married “strange
wives” (1 Esd 9 31); ‘“‘Manasseh” of Ezr 10 30.


MANASSEH, ma-nas’e (M022, m*nashsheh,
“causing to forget’; cf Gen 41 51; Mav[vjacc4,
Man[n]assé):

(1) The firstborn of Joseph by Asenath, daughter
of Poti-phera, priest of On. See next article.

(2) The tribe named from Manasseh, half of
which, with Gad and Reuben, occupied the E. of
Jordan (Nu 27 1, etc). See next article.

(3) The ‘Manasseh” of Jgs 18 30.31 AV is
really an intentional mistake for the name Moses.
A small niin (n) has been inserted over and between
the first and second Heb letters in the word Moses,


thus MW for M4. The reason for this is that
the individual in question is mentioned as priest
of a brazen image at Dan. His proper name was
Moses. It wasfelt to be adisgrace that such a
one bearing that honored name should keep it intact.
The insertion of the nin hides the disgrace and,
moreover, gives to the person a name already too
familiar with idolatrous practices; for King Manas-
seh’s 55 years of sovercignty were thus disgraced.

(4) King of Judah. Bes separate article.

_ ©) Son of Panaru-moaB (q.v.), who had mar-
ried a foreign wife (Ezr 10 30). Manaseas in
1 Esd 9 31.

(6) The Manasses of 1 Esd 9 33. A layman of
the family of Hashum, who put away his foreign
wife at Ezra’s order (Ezr 10 33).

In RV of Mt 110 and Rev 7 6 the spelling
“Manasseh” is given for AV ‘Manasses.” he
latter is the spelling of the husband of Judith (Jth
8 2.7; 10 3; 16 22.23.24); of a person named in the
last words of Tobit and otherwise unknown (Tob
14 10), and also the name given to a remarkable
prayer probably referred to in 2 Ch 33 18, which
Manasseh (4) is said to have uttered at the end
of his long, unsatisfactory life. See Manassss,
Prayer or. In Jgs 12 4, RV_ reads “Manasseh”’
for AV ‘“Manassites.”’ Henry WALLACE


MANASSEH: Following the Bib. account of
Manasseh (patriarch, tribe, and territory) we find
that he was the elder of Joseph’s two
sons by Asenath, the daughter of
Poti-phera, priest of On (Gen 41 51).
The birth of a son marked the climax
‘of Joseph’s happiness after the long bitterness of his
experience. In the joy of the moment, the dark
years past could be forgotten ; therefore he called the
name of the firstborn Manasseh (‘‘causing to for-
get’’), for, said he, God hath made me to forget all
my toil. When Jacob was near his end, Joseph


1. Son of
Joseph


| Tribes in


brought his two sons to his father who blessed
them. Himself the younger son who had received
the blessing of the firstborn, Jacob preferred Eph-
raim, the second son of Joseph, to M. his elder
brother, thus indicating the relative positions of
their descendants (Gen 48). Before Joseph died
he saw the childrén of Machir the son of M. (50
23). Machir was born to M. by his concubine, an
Aramitess (1 Ch 7 14). Whether he married
Maacah before leaving for Egypt is not said. She
was the sister of Huppim and Shucpily: Of M.’s
personal life no details are recorded in Scripture.
Acccording to Jewish tradition he became steward
of his father’s house, and acted as interpreter be-
tween Joseph and his brethren.
At the beginning of the desert march the number
of M.’s men of war is given at 32,200 (Nu 1 34f).
At the 2d census they had increased
2. The to 52,700 (26 34). Their position in
the wilderness was with the tribe of
the Wilder- Benjamin, by the standard of the tribe


ness and of Ephraim, on the W. of the taber-
Portion in nacle. According to Tg Pseudojon,
Palestine the standard was the figure of a boy,


with the inscription ‘‘The cloud of
Jeh rested on them until they went forth out of the
camp.” At Sinai the prince of the tribe was
Gamaliel, son of Pedahzur (Nu 2 20). The tribe
was represented among the spies by Gaddi, son of
Susi (18 11, where the name “tribe of Joseph”
seems to be used as an alternative). At the census
in the plains of Moab, M. is named before Ephraim,
and appears as much the stronger tribe (26 28 ff).
The main military exploits in the conquest of East-
ern Pal were performed by Manassites. Machi,
son of M., conquered the Amorites and Gilead (32
39). Jair, son of M., took all the region of Argob,
containing three score cities; these. he called by his
own name, ‘“Havvoth-jair” (82 41; Dt 3 4.14).
Nobah captured Kenath and the villages thereof
(Nu 32 42; Josh 17 1.5). Land for half the tribe
was thus provided, their territory stretching from
the northern boundary of Gad to an undetermined
frontier in the N., marching with Geshur and
Maacah on the W., and with the desert on the E.
The warriors of this half-tribe passed over with
those of Reuben and Gad before the host of Israel,
and took their share in the conquest of Western
Pal (Josh 22). They helped to raise the great
altar in the Jordan valley, which so nearly led to
disastrous consequences (22 10ff). Golan, the
city of refuge, lay within their territory.

The possession of Ephraim and Manasseh W. of
the Jordan appears to have been undivided at first
(Josh 17 16 ff). The portion which ultimately fell
to M. marched with Ephraim on the 8., with Asher
and Issachar on the N., running out to the sea on
the W., and falling into the Jordan valley on the
E. (47 7 ff). The long dwindling slopes to west-
ward and the flat reaches of the plain included
much excellent soil. Within the territory of Issa-
char and Asher, Beth-shean, Ibleam, Dor, Endor,
Taanach and Megiddo, with their villages, were
assigned to Perhaps the men of the West
lacked the energy and enterprise of their eastern
brethren. They failed, in any case, to expel the
Canaanites from these cities, and for long this grim
chain of fortresses seemed to mock the strength
of Israel (Josh 17 11 ff) :

Ten cities W. of the Jordan, in the portion of M.,
were given to the Levites, and 13 in the eastern
portion (Josh 215.6). | } .

M. took part in the glorious conflict with the host
of Sisera (Jgs 6 14). Two famous judges, Gideon
and Jephthah, belonged to this tribe. The men of
the half-tribe E. of Jordan were noted for skill and
valor as warriors (1 Ch 6 18.23f). Some menof


Manasseh
Manasses, Prayer


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1978


M. had joined David before the battle of Gilboa
(1 Ch 12 19). Others, all mighty men of valor,
and captains in the host, fell to him


3. Its on the way to Ziklag, and helped him
Place in against the band of rovers (vs 20 ff).
Later From the half-tribe W. of the Jordan
History 18,000 men, expressed by name, came


to David at Hebron to make him king
(ver 31); while those who came from the E. num-
bered, along with the men of Reuben and Gad,
120,000 (ver 37). David organized the eastern
tribes under 2,700 overseers for every matter per-
taining to God and for the affairs of the king (26
32). The rulers of M. were, in the W., Joel, son of
Pedaiah, and in the E., Iddo, son of Zechariah
(27 20.21). Divers of M. humbled themselves
and came to Jerus at the invitation of Hezekiah
to celebrate the Passover (2 Ch 30 11). Although
not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary, they ate the Passover. Pardon was
successfully sought for them by the king, because
they set their hearts to seck God (vs 18 ff).

Of the eastern half-tribe it is said that they went
a-whoring after the gods of the land, and m conse-
quence they were overwhelmed and expatriated by
Pul and Tiglath-pileser, kings of Assyria (1 Ch 5
25f). Reference to the idolatries of the western
half-tribe are also found in 2 Ch 31 1; 34 6.

There is a portion for M. in Ezekiel’s ideal picture
(48 4), and the tribe appears in the list m Rev
(7 6).

The genealogies in Josh 17 1ff; Nu 26 28-34;
1 Ch 2 21-23; 7 14-19 have fallen into confu-
sion. As they stand, they are mutually contra-
dictory, and it is impossible to harmonize them.

The theories of certain modern scholars who reject
the Bib. account are themselves beset with difficulties:
e.g. the name is derived from the Arab. nasa, ‘‘to injure
a tendon of the leg.” M., the Piel parse would thus be
the uname of a supernatural! being, of whom the infliction
of such an injury was characteristic. It is not clear
which of the wrestlers at the Jahbok suffered the injury.
As Jacob is said to have prevailed with gods and men,
the suggestion is that it was his antagonist who was
Jamed. ‘‘It would appear therefore that in the original
story the epithet Manasseh was a fitting title of Jacob
himself, which might be borue by his worshippers, as in
the case of Gad"' (ZB, s.v., par. 4).

It is assumed that the mention of Machir in Jgs § 14
definitely locates the Manassites at that time on the W.
of the Jordan. The raids by members of the tribe on
Eastern Pal must therefore have taken place long after
the days of Moses. The reasoning is precarious. After
the mention of Reuhen (vs 15.16), Gilead (ver 17) may
refer to Gad. It would be strange if this warlike tribe
were passed over (Guthe). Machir, then probably the
strongest clan, stands for the whole tribe, and may be
supposed to indicate particularly the noted fighters of
the eastern half.

In dealing with the genealogies, ‘‘the difficult name’’
Zelophehad must be got rid of. Among the suggestions
made is one by Dr. Cheyne, which first supposes the
existence of a name Salhad, and then makes Zelophehad
a corruption of this.

The genealogies certainly present difficulties, but other-
wise the narrative is intelligible and self-consistent with-
out resort to such questionable expedients as thase
referred to above.

W. Ewine


MANASSEH: A king of Judah, son and suc-
cessor of Hezekiah; reigned 55 years (2 K 21 1;
2 Ch 33 1), from ¢ 685 onward. His was one of
the few royal names not compounded with the name
of Jeh (his son Amon’s was the only other if, as an
Assyr inscription gives it, the full name of Ahaz
was Jehoahaz or Ahaziah); but it was no heathen
name like Amon, but identical with that of the elder
son of Joseph. Born within Hezekiah’s added 15
years, years of trembling faith and tender hope (cf
Isa 38 15f), his name may perhaps memorialize
the father’s sacred feelings; the name of his mother
Hephzibah too was used long afterward as the
symbol of the happy union of the land with its
loyal sons (Isa 62 4). All this, however, was long


forgotten in the memory of Manasseh’s apostate
career. ;

I. Sources of His Life.—The history (2 K 21
1-18) refers for “the rest of his acts” to “the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Judah,” but the body
of the account, instead of reading like state annals,
is almost entirely a censure of his idolatrous reign
in the spirit of the prophets and of the Deutero-
nomic strain of literature. The parallel history
(2 Ch 33 1-20) puts “the rest of his acts” “among
the acts of the kings of Israel,” and mentions his
prayer (a prayer ascribed to him isin the Apocrypha)
and “the words of the seers that spoke to him in the
name of Jeh.” This history of Ch mentions his
captive journey to Babylon and his repentance
(2 Ch 33 10-13), also his building operations in
Jerus and his resumption of Jeh-worship (vs 14-17),
which the earlier source lacks. From these sources,
which it is not the business of this article either to
verify or question, the estimate of his reign is to be
deduced. ; ae

Il. Character of His Reign.—During his reign,
Assyria, principally under Esar-haddon and Assur-

banipal, was at the height of its arro-
4. Political gance and power; and his long reign
Situation was the peaceful and uneventful lite
of a willing vassal, contented to count
as tributary king in an illustrious world-empire,
hospitable to all itsreligious and cultural ideas, and
ready to take his part in its military and other
enterprises. The two mentions of his name in
Assyr inscriptions (see G. A. Smith, Jerusalem, U,
182) hoth represent him in this tributary light.
His journey to Babylon mentioned in 2 Ch 33 11
need not have been the penalty of rebellion; more
likely it was such an enforced act of allegiance as
was perhaps imposed on all provincial rulers who
had incurred or would avert suspicion of disloyalty.
Nor was his fortification of Jerus after his return
less necessary against domestic than foreign aggres-
sion; the more so, indeed, as in so long and undis-
turbed a reign his capital, which was now practically
synonymous with his realm (Esar-haddon calls him
“king of the city of Judah”), became increasingly
an important center of wealth and commercial
prosperity. Of the specifie events of his reign,
however, other than religious, less is known than
of almost any other.
_ That the wholesale idolatry by which his reign
is mainly distinguished was of a reactionary and
indeed conservative nature may be
2. Reaction~- understood alike from what it sought
ary Idolatry to maintain and from what it had to
react against. On the one side was
the tremendous wave of ritual and mechanical
heathen cultus which, proceeding from the world-
centers of culture and civilization (cf Isa 2 6-8),
was drawing all the tributary lands, Judah with
the rest, into its almost irresistible sweep. M.,
it would seem, met this not in the temper of an ama-
teur, as had his grandfather Ahaz, but in the
temper of a fanatic. Everything old and new that
came to his purview was of momentous religious
value—except only the simple and austere demands
of pfophetic insight. He restored the debasing
cultus of the aboriginal Nature-worship which his
father had suppressed, thus making Judah revert
to the sterile Baal-cultus of Ahab; but his blind
eredence in the black arts so prevalent in all the
surrounding nations, imported the elaborate wor-
ship of the heavenly bodies from Babylon, invading
even the temple-courts with its numerous rites and
altars; even went to the horrid extreme of human
sacrifice, making an institution of what Ahaz had
tried as a desperate expedient. All this, which to
the matured prophetic sense was headlong wicked-
ness, was the mark of a desperately earnest soul,


1979


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Manasseh
Manasses, Prayer


seeking blindly in this wholesale way to propitiate
the mysterious Divine powers, his nation’s God
among them, who seemed so to have the world’s
affairs in their inscrutable control. On the other
side, there confronted him the prophetic voice of a
religion which decried all insincere ritual (‘wicked-
ness and worship,’ Isa 1 13), made straight de-
mands on heart and conscience, and had already
vindicated itself in the faith which had wrought
the deliverance of 701. It was the fight of the
decadent formal against the uprising spiritual; and,
as in all such struggles, it would grasp at any expe-
dient save the one plain duty of yielding the heart
to repentance and trust.

Meanwhile, the saving intelligence and integrity of
Israel, though still the secret of the lowly, was mak-
ing itselffeltin the spiritual movement
that Isaiah had labored to promote;
through the Pee influence of
literature and education the ““rem-
nant” was becoming a power to be reckoned with.
It is in the nature of things that such an inno-
vating movement must encounter persecution;
the significant thing is that already thane was 60
much to persecute. Persecution is as truly the
offspring of fear ag of fanaticism. M.’s persecution
of the prophets and their adherents (tradition hag
it that the aged Isaiah was one of his victims) was
from their point of view an enormity of wickedness.
To us the analysis is not quite so simple; it looks
also like the antipathy of an inveterate formal order
to a vital movement that it cannot understand.
The vested interests of almost universal heathenism
must needs die hard, and ‘‘much innocent blood”
was its desperate price before it would yield the
upper hand. To say this of M.’s murderous zeal
is not to justify it; it is merely to_concede its
sadly mistaken sincerity. It may well have seemed
to him that a nation’s piety was at stake,as if a
world’s religious culture were in peril.

The Chronicler, less austere in tone than the
earlier historian, preserves for us the story that,

like Saul of Tarsus after him, M. got
4, Return his eyes open to the truer meaning of
to Better things; that after his humiliation and
Mind repentance in Babylon he “knew that
Jeh he was God” (2 Ch 33 10-13).
He had the opportunity to see a despotic idolatry,
its evils with its splendors, in its own home; a first-
fruit of the thing that the Heb exiles were afterward
to realize. On his return, accordingly, he removed
the altars that had encroached upon the sacred pre-
cincts of the temple, and restored the ritual of the
Jeh-service, without, however, removing the high
places. It would seem to have been merely the
concession of Jeh’s right to a specific cultus of His
own, with perhaps a mitigation of the more offen-
sive extremes of exotic worship, while the tolera-
tion of the various fashionable forms remained
much as before. But this in itself was something,
was much; it gave Jeh His chance, so to say, among
rivals; and the growing spiritual fiber of the heart
of Israel could be trusted to do the rest. It helps
us also the better to understand the situation when,
only two years after M.’s death, Josiah came to
the throne, and to understand why he and his people
were so ready to accept the religious sanity of the
Deuteronomic law. He did not succeed, after all,
in committing his nation to the wholesale sway of
heathenism. M.’s reactionary reign was indeed
not without its good fruits; the crisis of religious
syncretism and externalism was met, and passed.
JoHN FRanKLIN GENUNG
MANASSES, ma-nas’éz (Mavacorjjs, Manassts,
Manassé) : ;
BS One ae had married _a “strange wife’ (1
Fsd 9 33)=‘‘Manasseh” of Ezr 10 33.


3. Perse~
cution


(2) The wealthy husband of Judith; died of sun-
stroke when employed at the barley harvest (Jth
8 21.7; 10 3; 16 22 ff).

(3) A person mentioned in Tob 14 10, who
“eave alms, and escaped the snare of death.” It
must be admitted that Manasses here is an awk-
ward reading and apparently interrupts the sense,
which would run more smoothly if Manasses were
omitted or Achiacharus read. There is great va-
riety of text in this verse. & (followed by Fritzsche,
Libri apoce. vet. Test Gr., 1871) reads en t6 poiésai me
eleémosiinén exélthen, where Manasses is omitted
and Achiacharus is understood as_ the subject.
Itala and Syr go a step further and read Achia-
charus as subject. But B (followed by Swete, AV
and RV) reads Manassés, which must be the correct
reading on the principle of being the most difficult.
Explanations have been offered (1) that Manasses
is simply the Heb name for Achiacharus, it not
being uncommon for a Jew to have a Gr and a
Heb name; (2) that on reading ’Audy, Amén,
Manasses was inserted for Achiacharus according
to 2 Ch 33 22 ff; (3) that M. here ig an incorrect
reading for Nasbas (Tob 11 18), identified by Grotins
with Achiacharus. ‘It seems impossible at present,
to arrive at a satisfactory explanation’ (Fuller,
Speaker’s Comm.). There is as great uncertainty
as to the person who conspired against Manasses:
*Audv, Amdn, in A, followed by AV and RV, who is
by some identified with the Haman of Est and
Achiacharus with Mordecai; ’Addéu, Addm, in B,
followed by Swete; Itala Nadab; Syr Ahab (Acab).

(4) A king of Judah (Mt 110AV, Gr form,
RV ‘“Manasseh’’), whose prayer forms one of the
apocryphal books. See Manasses, PRAYER OF.

(5) The elder son of Joseph (Rev 7 6, AV Gr
form, RV ‘“Manasseh”). ANGUS


MANASSES, THE PRAYER OF:


Name

. Canonicity and Position
. Contents

. Original Language
Authenticity

Author and Motive


Date
. Text and Versions

34 Greek

2) Latin
LirERATURE

The Prayer of Manasses purports to be, and may
in reality be, the prayer of that king mentioned in
2 Ch 33 13.18 f.

In Cod. A it is called simply “A Prayer of Manas-
ses,’ in the London Polyglot ‘‘A Prayer of Man-
asses, King of the Jews.” Its title
in the Vulg is ‘A Prayer of Manasses,
King of Judah, when He Was Held
Captive in Babylon.” In Baxter’s Apoc, Gr and
Eng. this Prayer appears at the end with the head-
ing “A Prayer of Manasses, son of Hzckias’’
(= Hezekiah).

The Greek church is the only one which has con-
sistently reckoned this Prayer as a part of its Bible.
Up to the time of the Council of Trent
(1545-63 AD), it formed a part of the
Vulg, but by that council it was rel-
egated with 3 and 4 (1 and 2) Esd to
the appendix (which included uncanon-
ical scriptures), “lest they should become wholly lost,
since they are occasionally cited by the Fathers and
arefoundin printed copies.” Yetit is wholly absent
from the Vulg of Sixtus V, though it is in the Ap-
pendix of the Vulg of Clement VIII. Its position
varies in MSS, VSS and printed editions of the
LXX. It is most frequently found among the odes
or canticles following the Psalter, as in Codd. A, T
(the Zurich Psalter) and in Ludolf’s Ethiopic
Psalter. In Swete’s LXX the Ps Sol followed by


GON DORE GONE


1. Name


2. Canon-
icity and
Position


Manasses, Prayer
Manifold


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1980


the odes (‘Q6a!, Odat), of which Pr Man is the 8th,


appear as an Appendix after 4 Mace in vol III. It


was placed after 2 Ch in the original Vulg, but in
the Romanist Vulg it stands first, followed by 3 and
4 (1 and 2) Esd in the apocryphal Appendix. It is
found in all MSS of the Armenian Bible, where, as
in Swete’s LXX, it is one of many odes. Though
not included in Coverdale’s Bible or the Geneva VS,
it was retained (at the close of the Apoc) in
Luther’s tr, in Mathew’s Bible and in the Bishops’
Bible, whence it passed into our EV.
According to 2 Ch 83 (cf 2 K 21) Manasseh
was exiled by the Assyrians to Babylon as a pun-
ishment for his sins. There he became
3. Contents penitent and earnestly prayed to God
for pardon and deliverance. God
answered his prayer and restored him to Jerus and
to the throne. Though the prayer is mentioned in
2 Ch 33 13.18f, it is not given, but this lack has
been supplied in the Pr Man of the Apoc. After an
opening invocation to the God of Abraham, Isaac,
Judah and their righteous seed, the Creator of all
things, most high, yet compassionate, who has
ordained repentance, not for perfect ones like the
patriarchs who did not need it, but for the like of
the person praying, there follows a confession of sin
couched for the most part in general terms, a prayer
for pardon and a vow to praise God forever if this
prayer is answered.
The bulk of scholars (Fritzsche, Reuss, Schiirer,
Ryssel, ete) agree that this Prayer was composed


in Gr. The Gr recension is written
4. Original in a free, flowing and somewhat
Language rhetorical style, and it reads like an


original work, not like a tr. Though
there are some Hebraisms, they are not more numer-
ous or striking than usually meet us in Hellenistic
Gr. It is of some importance also that, although
Jewish tradition adds largely to the legends about
Manasseh, it has never supplied a Heb VS of the
Prayer (see Text aNp Versions, VIII). On the
other hand, Ewald ( Hist. Isr, I, 186; IV, 217, n.5,
Ger. ed, IV, 217f), First (Gesch. der bibl. Lit., II,
399), Budde (ZAW, 1892, 39 ff), Ball (Speaker’s
Apoc) and others argue for a Heb original, per-
haps existing in the source named of 2 Ch 33
18f (see Ryssel in Kautzsch, Die Apoc des AT,
167).


Have we here the authentic prayer of Manasseh offered

under the circumstances described in 2 Ch 83? Ewald

and the other scholars named (see fore-

5. Authen- going section), who think the Prayer was
ticity


composed in Heb, say that we have
_.,probably here a Gr rendering of the Heb
original which the Chronicler saw in his source. Ball,
on the other hand, thongh not greatly opposed to this
view, is more convinced that the Heb original is to be
sought in a haggadic narrative concerning Manasseh.
Even if we accept the view of Ewald or of Ball, we still
desiderate evidence that this Heb original is the very
prayer offered by the king in Babylon. But the argu-
ments for a Gr original are fairly conclusive. Many
OT scholars regard the narrative of the captivity, prayer
and penitence of Manasseh as a fiction of the Chronicler‘s
imagination, to whom it seemed highly improper that this
wicked king should escape the punishment (exile) which
he richly deserved. So De Wette (inleitung), Graf
(Stud. u. Krit., 1859, 467-94, and Gesch. Biicher des AT,
174) and Néldeke (Schenkel’s Bibelwerk, ‘‘Manasse”).
Nothing corresponding to it occurs in the more literal
narrative of 2 21, an argument which, however, has
but littl weight. Recent discoveries of cunelform
inscriptions have taken off the edge of the most impor-
tant objections to the historicity of this part of Ch. See
Ball (op. cit., 361 ff) and Bissell (Lange's Apoc, 468).
The likeliest supposition is that the author of the Prayer
was an Alexandrian Jew who, with 2 Ch 33 before him,
desired to compose such a prayer as Manasseh was likely
to offer under the supposed circumstances. This prayer,
written in excellent Alexandrian Gr, is, as Fritzsche
points ont, an addition to 2 Ch 33, corresponding to the
pee of Mordecai and Esther added to the canonical
st (Ad Est 18 8—14 19), and also to the prayer
of Azarias (Three 1 2-22) and the Song of the Three
Young Men (Three 1 29-68) appended to the canonical
Book of Dnl.


That the author was an Alexandrian Jew is made
probable by the (Gr) language he employs and by
the sentiments he expresses. It is
6. The strange to find Swete (Expos T, I, 38 f)
Author and defending the Christian authorship of
His Motive this Prayer. What purpose could the
writer seek to realize in the composi-
tion and publication of the penitential psalm? In
the absence of definite knowledge, one may with
Reuss (Das AT, VI, 486f) suppose that the Jew-
ish nation was at the time given up to great un-
faithfulness to God and to gross moral corruption.
The lesson of the Prayer is that God will accept the
penitent; whatever his sins, and remove from the
natien its load of sufferings, if only it turns to
od.
Ewald and Fiirst (op. cit.) hold that the prayer
is at least as old as the Book of Ch (300 BC), since
it is distinctly mentioned, they say, in
7. Date 2 Ch 33 13.18 f. But the original form
was, as seen (cf 4 above), Gr, not Heb.
Moreover, the teaching of the Prayer is post-Bib.
The patriarchs are idealized to the extent that they
are thought perfect and therefore not needing for-
giveness (ver 8); their merits avail for the sinful
and undeserving (ver 1) (see Weber, Jud. Theologie,
292). The expressions “God of the Just” (ver 8),
“God of those who repent” (ver 13), belong to com-
paratively late Judaism. A period about the begin-
ning of the Christian era or (Fritzsche) slightly
earlier would suit the character (language and teach-
ing) of the Prayer. The similarity between the
doctrines implied in Pr Man and those taught in
apocryphal writings of the time confirms this con-
clusion. There is no need with Bertholdt to bring
down the writing to the 2d or 3d cent. AD. Fa-
bricius (Liber Tobit, etc, 208) dates the Prayer in
the 4th or 5th cent. AD, because, in his opinion,
its author is the same as that of the Apos Const
which has that date. But the source of this part
of the Apos Const is the Didaskalia (3d cent.), and
moreover both these treatises are of Christian origin,
me Prayer being the work of an Alexandrian
ew.
(1) The Greek text occurs in Codd. A, T (Psal-
terium Turicence 262, Parsons). Swete (OT in Gr,
III, 802-4) gives the text of A with
8. Text and the variations of T. It is omitted
Versions from the bulk of ancient MSS and edd
_, Of the LXX, as also from several mod-
em editions (Tischendorf, etc). Nestle (Septua-
ginta. Studien, 1899, 3) holds that the Gr text of
Codd. A, T, etc, has been taken from the Apos
Const or from the Didaskalia. The common view
is that it was extracted by the latter from the LXX.
(2) The Latin text in Sabatier (Bib. Sac. Lat, III,
1038) is not by Jerome, nor is it in the manner of the
Old Lat; its date is later.

_LITERATURE.—The outstanding literature has been
cited in the foregoing art. Reference may be made to
Howorth (‘Some Unconventional Views on the Text of
the Bible," PSBA, XX XI, 89 ff: he argues that the narra-
tive concerning Manasseh, including the Prayer in the


Apos Const, represents a portion of the t
ores Ser Pp e true LXX of


T. Witton Davizs
MANASSITES, ma-nas‘its (WIA, ménashshi;
6 Mavaco4, ho Manassé): Members of the tribe of
Manasseh (Dt 4 43; Jgs 124 AV; 2 K 10 33).


MAN-CHILD, man’child (ARV; “man child,”
ERV; notin AV; “pa PMD, mashtin bekir); The
expression is used with the meaning of “male,” but
is found only in the description of the extermination
of a whole family, where it is employed to express
every male descendant of any age. It occurs in 1
8 26 22.34; 1 K 14 10; 16 11; 21 21:2 kK 98.


1981


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Manasses, Prayer
Manifold


MANDRAKES, man’draks (O°N'7", dudha’im;
pavSpaydpas, mandragéras {Gen 30 14f; Cant 7
18]; the marginal reading ‘‘love apples” is due ta
the supposed connection of dadha@im with BY,
dédhim, “love’’): Mandrakes are the fruit of the
Mandragora officinarum, a member of the Solanaceae
or potato order, closely allied to the Atropa bella-


Mandrake (Mandragora oficinarum).


donna. It is a common plant all over Pal, flourish-
ing particularly in the spring and ripening about
the time of the wheat harvest (Gen 3014). The
plant has a rosette of handsome dark leaves, dark
purple flowers and orange, tomato-like fruit. The
root is long and branched; to pull it up is still con-
sidered unlucky (cf Jos, BJ, VI, vi, 3). The
fruit is called in Arab. baid el-jinn, the “eggs of the
jinn”; they have a narcotic smell and sweetish
taste, but are too poisonous to be used_as food.
They are still used in folklore medicine in Pal. The
plant was well known asan aphrodisiac by the an-
cients (Cant 7 13). E. W. G. MasTerMan


MANEH, man’e, or MINA, mi’na (712'2, maneh;
pra, mnd, “pound” [EV]): A weight containing 5U
shekels, according to Heb usage, but which varied
according to the standard adopted. Estimated on
the Phoen, or commercial, standard, it was equal
to 11,200 grains, or about 2 lbs. troy, or about
1.6 lbs. avoirdupois. This is probably the weight
intended in 1K 1017; Ezr 269 and Neh 7
71f (see WetcHTS AND MEasuREs). When used
in a monetary sense, the maneh of silver was worth
about £6 17s. or $34; the gold mdneh was equal to
about £102 10s. or $510. H. Porter


MANES, ma’néz (Mévys, Mdnés): One of those
who put away their “strange wives” (1 Esd 9 21).
It represents the two names Maaseiah and Elijah
of the || Ezr 10 21. The real equivalent is prob-
ably Maaseiah, Elijah being dropped. RVm and
AVm give Harim of Ezr 10 21 as identical—ap-
parently incorrectly, for the words “and of the sons
of Harim” (Ezr 10 21) are simply omitted. AV
blunders strangely here in reading Eanes after a
misprint Hdvys, Hdnés (for Mdvys, Ménés) in the
Aldine edition.


MANGER, man’‘jér (dérvy, phdiné): Properly
the place in a stall or stable where the food of cattle
is placed (in the OT ‘‘crib” [Job 39 9; Prov 14 4;
Isa 1 3]); thus also, apparently, in the narrative
of the nativity in Lk 2 7.12.16. In LXX, the Gr
word, representing different Heb words, has also
the extended meaning of “stall’’ (2 Ch 82 28;
Hab 3 17); thus also in Lk 13 15, where RVm has
“manger.” Old tradition says that Jesus was
born in a cave in the neighborhood of Bethlehem;
even so, a place for food tor cattle may have been
cut in the side of the rock. JAMES ORR


MANI, ma’nt (Mavi, Mant): Head of a family
(1 Esd 9 30)=“Bani” in Ezr 10 29, the form
which appears in 1 Bsd 6 12.


MANIFEST, man’i-fest, MANIFESTATION,
man-i-fes-ta’shun (bavepso, phaneréd, pavepds, pha-
nerés): ‘To manifest” is generally the tr of pha-
neroo, “to make apparent” (Mk 4 22; Jn 17 6;
Rom 8 21; 1 Tim 8 16, “God was manifest in the
flesh,’ RV “manifested”; 1 Jn 1 2 bis, etc); also
of phaneros, “manifest” (Acts 4 16; Rom 1 19;
1 Cor 8 13; 1 Jn 3 10, etc); “to make manifest’’
(phanerod) (Jn 1 31; Rom 16 26); of emphanizé,
“to make fully manifest” (Jn 14 21f); of emphanés,
“fully manifest” (Rom 10 20); of délos, ‘‘evident,”
tr “manifest” (1 Cor 16 27, RV ‘“evident”);
of ékdélos, ‘‘very evident”? (2 Tim 3 9, RV “evi-
dent’’); of prédélos, “evident beforehand” (1 Tim
6 25, RV “evident”’); of aphanés, is “not manifest”
(He 4 13, “There is no creature that is not mani-
fest in his sight’’); ‘‘manifest,’’ occurs once in the
OT as the tr of barar, “to clear,” “to purify” (Eccl
3 18, RV “prove”’); of phanerés (2 Mace 3 28,
RV “manifestly’”’).

Manifestation is the tr of apokdlupsis, “uncover-
ing’ (Rom 8 19, “the manifestation of the sons of
God,” RV “revealing”’); of phanérésis, ‘“mani-
festation” (1 Cor 12 7; 2 Cor 4 2).

RV has ‘manifest’’ for ‘‘shew’’ (Jn 7 4); ‘was mani-
fested’’ for ‘‘appeared’’ (Mk 16 12.14); ‘was mani-
fested to the,’’ for ‘‘shewed himself to his" (Jn 21 14);


‘‘he made manifest” for ‘‘appear’’ (2 Cor § 10; 7 12;
Rev 3.18); ‘‘ became manifest’’ for ‘‘ was made known”


“ _ W. L. Waker
MANIFESTLY, man’i-fest-li (ANNA, mar’ eh, “‘[in]
personal presence’): Has the meaning of “by di-
rect vision,” as in 1 Cor 13 12, ‘face to face,”
stating positively (Nu 12 8) what the next clause
states negatively, viz. “not in dark speeches.”
“Apparently” of AV is ambiguous.


MANIFOLD, man’i-fald (39, rabh; mavidos,
poikilos): ‘Manifold,’ which occurs only a few
times, is in the OT the tr of rabh, “many,” “‘abun-
dant’? (Neh 9 19.27; Am & 12, where it is equiva-
lent to “many”), and of rabhabh, “to multiply,”
“to increase’ (Ps 104 24, “O Jeh, how manifold
are thy works”); poikilos, properly, “many colored,”
“snotted,” “variegated,” 1s tr? “manifold”: 1 Pet
16m, “manifold temptations”; 4 10, ‘‘manifold
grace,” suggests variety, diverseness; polupoikilos
has this meaning more intensely (Eph 3 10, ‘‘the
manifold wisdom of God”). With this may be com-
pared a fine passage in Wisd 7 22, where it is said
that in Wisdom there is ‘‘an understanding spirit,
holy, one only [RV “alone in kind,” m “Gr sole-


Manius, Titus
Manslayer


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1982


born], manifold [polumerés}].”’ In like manner,
pollaplaston, “manifold more’’ (Lk 18 30), indicates
the varied elements of the reward of him who is
faithful to Christ. In Ecclus 61 3, we have “mani-
fold afflictions” (pletan). W. L. WaLker


MANIUS, m4’ni-us, TITUS, ti’tus (Tiros Mavis,
Titos Médnios, A, V and Syr; Mévawos, Médnlios,
Swete following A; Manilius, Itala and Vulg, AV
Manlius): Titus Manius and Quintus Memmius
were the legates of the Romans who carried a letter
unto the Jewish people consenting to the favorable
terms which Lysias, the captain of Antiochus,
granted to the Jews after his defeat, 163 BC (2
Macc 11 34). That the letter is spurious appears
from the facts (1) that it is dated in the 148th year
of the Seleucidian era adopted by the Jews and not,
after the Rom fashion, according to consulates;
(2) that it is also dated the same day as that of
Eupator—the 15th of the month Xanthicus; (3)
that the Jews had as yet no dealings with the
Romans; Judas first heard of the fame of the
Romans a year or two years later (1 Macc 8 1 ff),
after the death of Nicanor (7 47); (4) that no such
names are found among the Rom legati mentioned
by Polybius as sent to the East. If Manius is not
altogether a fabrication, it is difficult to decide
exactly who he is. The reading fluctuates between
“Manius” and ‘Manlius.’ About the same time
a T. Manlius Torquatus was sent by the Romans
on an embassy to Egypt to settle a quarrel between
Philometor and Euergetes II Physcon (Polyb.
xxxi.18; Livy xliii.11), but not to Syria, and his
colleague was Cn. Merula. Perhaps Manius
Sergius is intended, who with C. Sulpicius was sent
to investigate the state of Greece and to see what
Antiochus Epiphanes and Eumanes were doing
(165 BC) (Polyb. xxxi.9). But no such name as
Titus Manius or Manlius is otherwise found as
legate to Asia with a colleague Quintus Memmius.
See also Memmits. ANGUS


MANKIND, man-kind’: In Lev 18 22; 20 13,
the term is applied to mefi, as distinguished from
women; in Job 12 10, to the human race; in Jas
3 7, to the human nature.


MANLIUS, man’li-us, TITUS. See MANIUS,
TITUS.


MANNA, man’a (JS, man; pdvva, mdnna):
The Heb man is probably derived, as Ebers sug-
gests, from the Egyp mennu, “food.” In Ex 16 15,
we have a suggested source of the name, “They
said one to another, What is it?” ie. manhu, which
also means, ‘It is manna’ (see m). -

This substance is described as occurrmg in flakes
or small round grains, lit. “hoar frost” ; it fell with the

dew (Nu 119) and appeared when
1. OT the dew left the ground (Ex 16 14); “It
References was like coriander seed, white; and

the taste of it was like wafers made
with honey” (ver 31). In Nu 11 8, its taste is
described “‘as the taste of fresh oil,”’ m “‘cakes baked
with oil.” ‘And the children of Israel did eat the
manna forty years, until they came... . unto
the borders of the land of Canaan” (Ex 16 35).
It ceased the day after they ate the produce of the
land, unleavened cakes and parched grain, in the
plains of Jericho (Josh 5 10-12). Although an
important article of diet, it was by no means the
sole one as seems implied in Nu 21 5; there are
plenty of references (e.g. Ex 17 3; 245; 34 3;
Ley 8 2.26.31; 9 4; 1012; 24 5; Nu 7 13.19f,
etc) which show that they had other food besides.
The food was gathered every morning, “every man
according to his eating: and when the sun waxed


hot, it melted” (Ex 16 21); a portion of the
previous day’s gathering bred worms and stank if
kept (ver 20); on the 6th day a double amount was
gathered, the Sabbath portion being miraculously
preserved (vs 22-27). A pot—a golden one (He
9 4)—with an omer of manna was “laid up before
Jeh” in the tabernacle (Ex 16 33). Manna is re-
ferred to in Neh 9 20. It is described poetically as
“food from heaven’ and “bread of the mighty”
(Ps 78 24£); as “bread of heaven” (Ps 105 40);
and as “‘angels’ bread” (2 Esd 1 19; Wisd 16
20).

In Jn 6 31-63, Our Lord frequently refers to

“the manna” or “bread from heaven’ as typical
of Himself. St. Paul (1 Cor 10 3)
2. NT refers to it as “spiritual food,” and in
References Rev 2 17 we read, “To him that
overcometh, to him will I give of the
hidden manna.’” :

Manna, as might be expected, figures largely in
rabbinical lit. 11 was, it is said, adapted to the
taste of each individual who could by wishing taste
in the manna anything he desired (cf Wisd 16 21).
Manna is reserved as the future food of the right-
eous (cf Rev 2 17), for which purpose it is ground
in a mill situated in the third heaven (Hag 12);
Tan. Beshallah 22).

No substance is known which in any degree satisfies
all the requirements of the Scriptural references, hut

several travelers in the wilderness have
3. Natural Teper phenomena which suggest some
Explana- of the features of the miraculous manna.
~xp. (1) In the Peninsula of Sinai, on the
tions route of the children of Israel, a species
of tamarisk, named in consequence by
Ehbers Tammaris mannifera, is found to exude a sweet,
honey-like substance where its hark is pierced by an
iusect, Gossyparia mannifera. It collects upon the twigs
and falls to the ground. The Arahs who gather lt to
sell to pilgrims call it mann-es-samé, ‘‘ heavenly manna’’;
it is white at first but turns yellow; in the early morn-
ing it is of the consistency of wax hut when the sun is
hotit disappears. This suhstance occurs only after mid-
summer aud for 4 month or two at most.

(2) A second proposal is to identify manna with 4
lichen—Lecanora esculenta and allied species—which
grows in the Arabian and other deserts upon the lime-
stone. The older masses become detached and are
rolled about by the wind. When swept together by
sudden rain storms in the rainy season they may collect
in large heaps. ‘This lichen has heen used by the Arabs
in time of need for making bread. It is a quite reason-
ahle form of nourishment in the desert, esp. when eaten
with the sugary manna from the trees.

E. W. G. MasterMan

MANNER, man’ér, MANNERS, man’érz (134,
dabhar, JV, derekh, DEWA, mishpat; eos, éthos,

otrw, howtd): ‘Manner’ (probably
1. As Used from manus, “the hand,” mode of
inthe OT handling things, or acting) is in the

Bible in general equivalent (1) to
way, custom, habit, etc, (2) to kind or sort. There
are some special senses, however, and archaic
usages. It is frequently the tr of dabhar, ‘‘speak-
ing,” ‘‘word,” “thing” (Gen 18 25, “That be far
from thee to do after this manner” [i.e. in this way] }
32 19, “On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau’
[in this way]; 39 19, “After this manner [in this
way] did thy servant to me’; Ex 22 9, “every
manner of trespass” [every kind, sort, or way]; Dt
15 2; 18 17 27.30 bis); also of derekh, ‘‘way”
(Gen 19 31, “after the manner of all the earth”
[way]; 1S 21 5 AV “[the bread] is in a manner
common’’; ‘manner’ here might be taken as equiv-
alent to ‘‘way” or “measure,” but the passage is a
difficult one and the text uncertain; RV omits
“manner,” and in the text makes the reference to
be to the journey, not to the bread, but in m it has
“common [bread]”; Isa 10 24.26, ‘after the manner
of Egypt” [after the way or fate of Egypt]; so also
Am 4 10; 814, “the manner of Beer-sheba
liveth,” RV “the way,” m “manner,” the reference
here being to the religious way, or manner of wor-


1983


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Manius, Titus
Manslayer


ship); of mishpat, “judgment,” “ordinance,” hence
also “manner” or ‘‘custom” (Gen 40 13; Ex 21 9;
2K 17, “what manner of man” [sort or kind];
17 26 AV; 1 Ch 2419; Ezk 11 12, “after the
manners [RV “ordinances’”] of the nations’);
torah, “instruction,” “law,” is also tr’ “manner”
(28 7 19, “[is}] this the manner [m “law’] of
man, O Lord God?” RV “and this [too] after the
manner of men, O Lord Jeh,” m “and is this the
law of man, O Lord Jeh?’’). Other words are:
’orah, ‘path,’ “custom” (Gen 18 11); ddbher,
“leading,” ‘pasture’ (cf ‘“sheep-walk,’” ‘‘sheep-
fold”); Isa 6 17, ‘Then shall the lambs feed after
their manner,”’ RV ‘as in their pasture” (in Mic
2 12, the same word is tr? AV “fold,” RV “pas-
ture’); d°mith, “likeness” (Ezk 23 15); dath,
“law,” “sentence” (Est 2 12); hukkah, “statute,”
“custom” (Lev 20 23)in AV. In Nu 6 13 “with
the manner” is supplied to “taken” (in adultery).
“Manner” here is an old law-French phrase, “a
thief taken with the mainour’—that is, with the
thing stolen upon him in manu (in his hand) (Black-
stone, Comm., IV, xxiii), RV “in the act’ (cf Jn
8 4, “in the very act”); gam, “also” is tr4 (1 § 19
24) ‘an like manner,” RV “also.”
In Apoc, 2 Macc 4 13 AV, we have “increase of
heathenish manners,” RV ‘an extreme of Gr
fashions ° 6 9, the ‘“‘manners of the
2. As Used Gentiles,” RV ‘the Gr rites’; in 2
in the Apoc- Esd 9 19, AV and RV, ‘manners’
rypha appears in the sense of ‘morals’; ef
1 Cor 15 33, RV “EHvil companion-
ships corrupt good morals.”
In the NT various words and phrases are rendered
by “manner”; we have ethos, “custom,” “ i
“manner” (Jn 19 40; Acts 15 1
3. As Used RV “custom”); katd 6 etthés (Lk 4
Inthe NT 16, RV “as his custom was”); érépos,
a “turning,” “manner,” “way” (Jude
ver 7); hén trépon, “Sn which manner” (Acts 1 11);
hotitds, “thus,” “so,’’ “accordingly,” is “after this
manner,” “in likemanner” (Mt 6 9; Mk 13 29AV);
in Acts 15 23, “after this manner” stands in AV
for “by their hands,” RV “thus”; pds (Acts 20 18),
“after what manner’; agdgé, “course of life” (2
Tim 3 10, RV “conduct”); bidsis, “mode of life’’
(Acts 26 4); in 1 Cor 15 33, we have manners
in the moral sense, “Evil communications corrupt
good manners,” ARV “Evil companionships cor-
rupt good morals.” Acts 13 18 is mteresting
because of diversities of rendering; AV has “‘suffered
he their manners in the wilderness,”’ m “etropophéré-
sen, perhaps for etrophophérésen, bore, or fed them
as a nurse beareth or feedeth her child, Dt 1 31
(2 Mace 7 27) according to LXX, and so Chrysos-
tom’; ERV text, same as AV, m “Many ancient
authorities read ‘bear he them as a nursing father
in the wilderness.’ See Dt 131”; ARV (text)
“ag a nursing-father bare he them in the_wilder-
ness,” m ‘Many ancient authorities read ‘Suffered
he their manners in the wilderness.’ See Dt 9 7.”
The Gr words differ only by a single letter, and
authorities are pretty equally divided.


Among other changes RV has frequently “ ordinance’’
for manner" (Lev 5 10,etc) and ‘‘custom" (Ruth 4 7;
Jn 19 40; He 10 25, etc); ‘(manner of" Js introduce
(_ 8 48, etc); ‘manner of” and ‘‘manner" omitted
(Gen: 25 23; Ex 35 29, etc); ‘‘'what manner of house’’
for ‘‘where is the house" (Isa 66 1); “manner of life
for ‘‘conversation"’ (Gai 1 13; ee 4 22); “after the
manner of men” for ‘as aman" (Rom 8.5; 1 Cor 9 8);
“how to inquire concerning these things'’ (Acts 25 20)


for ‘‘of such manner of questions’; “‘in_an unworthy
manner.” ABV. for unworn Cor 11 27); ‘‘who'
for ‘what manner of man" (Mk 4 41; Lk 8 25, ‘'who


then is this?"’); in Lk 9 55, ‘‘ Ye know not what man-
ner of spirit ye are of" is omitted, with the m ‘‘Some
ancient authorities add and said, Ye know not what


manner of spirit ye are of."
W. L. Waker


MANOAH, ma-ni’a (9, mandth, “rest’’?): A
man of Zorah and of the family of the Danites.
M. was the father of Samson, and his life-story
is but imperfectly told in the history of the concep-
tion, birth and early life of his son. No children
had been born to M. and his wife, and the latter
was considered barren (Jgs 13 2). Finally it was
revealed to her by an angel of the Lord that she
would conceive and bear a child. She was cau-
tioned against strong drink and “unclean” food, for
her child was to be born and reared a Nazirite to the
end that he might save Israel out of the hands of the
Philis (13 3-5). That M. was a devout man
seems certain in view of the fact that, upon hear-
ing of the angel’s visit, he offered a prayer for the
angel’s return, in order that he and his wife might
be instructed as to the proper care of the child to
be born (13 8). The request was granted and the
angel repeated the visit and the instructions (13
9-13). M. with true hospitality would have the
guest remain and partake of food. The angel
refused, but commanded a sacrifice unto Jeh.
When M. had prepared the sacrifice and lit it on the
the altar, the angel ascended in the flame from the
altar and appeared no more (13 15-21). The child
was born according to the promise and was named
Samson. M. and his wife appear twice in the
narrative of Samson’s early life—once as they pro-
testingly accompanied him to sue for the hand of a
Phili woman of Timnah in marriage, and again
when they went with him to Timnah for the
wedding.

Jos richly embellishes this Scriptural narrative
concerning M., but offers no further light upon the
occupation or character of M. At the death of
Samson, his brothers went down to Gaza and
brought back the body and buried it by the side of
M. in the family tomb near Zorah (16 31). In
Samson Agonistes Milton gains dramatic effect by
having M. survive Samson and in deep sorrow
assist at his burial. C. E. Scoenx


MANSERVANT, man’sir-vant (729, ‘ebhedh):
A male slave; usually coupled with maidservant
or female slave (Gen 12 16; Ex 20 10; 158 8 16;
Job 31 13; Lk 12 45). See Szrvanr; SLAVE.


MANSION, man’shun (povh, moné, “abode’’):
In Jn 14 2, the word is used in the pl.: “In my
Father’s house are many mansions,’ RVm “abid-
ing places.”” The ideas conveyed are those of abun-
dance of room, and permanence of habitation, in
the heavenly world.


MANSLAYER, man’sla-ér (879, m*raceéh, from
MEq, racah [Nu 36 6.12]; av8poddvos, androphé-
nos [1 Tim 1 9]): A term employed with reference
to both premeditated and accidental or justifiable
killing. a the latter case, an asylum was granted
(Nu 36 6.12) until the death of the high priest,
after which the slayer was allowed to “return into
the land of his popresten (ver 28). The cases in
which the manslayer was to be held clearly immune
from the punishment imposed on wilful killing were:
(1) death by a blow in a sudden quarrel (Nu 36 22);
(2) death by anything thrown at random (Nu 36
22.23); (3) death by the blade of an axe flying from
the handle (Dt 19 5). Among the cases in which
one would be held responsible for the death of an-
other, is to be counted the neglectful act of building
a house without a parapet (Dt 22 8). ;

Manslaughter, as a modern legal term, is em-
ployed to distinguish unpremeditated killmg from
coldblooded murder, but formerly (2 Esd 1 26)
it was used in a more general sense. See Murvrr.

Frank E. Hirsca


Manstealing
Mark


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1984


MANSTEALING, man’stél-ing.
under ‘Kidnapping’; PunisHMENT.


MANTELET, man’tel-et, man’t’l-et, mant’let
(Nah 2 5). See Sreces, 4, (d).


MANTLE, man’t’l: Used 5 t of Elijah’s mantle
(VIN , ’addereth, 1 K 19 18.19; 2 K 2 8.13.14),
which was probably of hair. Found in pl. once
(Isa 3 22), where it (ma‘ataphath) is an upper wide
tunic with sleeves (k°théneth). See Dress; Ker-
CHIEF.


MANUSCRIPTS, man’i-skripts: In the broad-
est sense manuscripts include all handwritten records
as distinguished from printed records. In a nar-
rower sense they are handwritten codices, rolls
and folded documents, as distinguished from printed
books on the one hand and inscriptions, or engraved
documents, on the other. More loosely, but
commonly, the term is used as synonym of the codex.

The Heb and Gr manuscripts of the OT and NT,
respectively, form the primary sources for estab-
lishing the text or true original words of the respec-
tive authors. The subordinate sources, VSS and
quotations have also their text problem, and manu-
scripts of the VSS and of the church Fathers, and
other ancient writers who refer to Bib. matters,
play the same part in establishing the true words of
the VS or the writer that the Heb and Gr manu-
scripts play in establishing the original of Scripture.
For discussion of the textual aspects, see arts. on
Text anpD MSS or THE NT, TExtT oF THE OT, on VER-
SIONS, and esp. the Sepruaaint. For the material,
writing instruments, form of manuscripts, etc, see
Boox; and esp. the lit. under Wririna.

j E. C. Ricwarnson

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE OT. See LancuacgEs
aND TEXT OF THE OT.


MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NT.
AND MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NT.


MAOCH, ma’ok (J, ma‘okh, “oppressed,”
“bruised”): The same as Maacah (1 K 2 39).
The father of that Achish, king of Gath, with whom
David and his 600 sojourned under fear of Saul’s
treachery (1 S 27 2).


See CrIME,


See Trxt


MAON, mi‘on, MAONITES, mi’on-its, ma-
d’nits (JA, ma'én; B, Made, Madr, Maav, Madn,
A, Madv, Maén):

(1) A town in the mountain of Judah named along
with Carmel and Ziph (Josh 16 55). It appears
again as the home of Nabal, the great flockmaster
(1 S 26 2). In the genealogical list of 1 Ch 2,
Maon stands as the “son” of Shammai and the
‘father’ of Beth-zur (vs 44.45). This evidently
means that Shammai was the founder of Maon.
About a mile S. of el-Karmil, the ancient Carmel,
lies Tell Ma‘in, This may be confidently identified
with Maon, the radicals of the names being the same.
It suits the requirements of the narratives in other
respects, being near to Carmel, while the surround-
ing wilderness is still used as the wide pasture land
for multitudinous flocks. In this district, the
wilderness of Maon, David was hiding when his
whereabouts was betrayed to Saul by the men of
Ziph (1 § 23 24f), and only a timely raid by the
Philis delivered him out of that monarch’s hands
(vs 27 ff).

(2) (Madeéu, Madidm): Maon is named along
with the Zidonians and Amalck as having at some
time, not mentioned, oppressed Israel (Jgs 10 12).
The LXX “Midian” has been accepted by some
scholars as restoring the original text, since, other-


wise, the Midianites remain unmentioned. But
the Maonites are evidently identical with the
Meunim of 1 Ch 4 41 (RV), the pastoral people
destroyed by Hezekiah. In 2 Ch 201 AV, in-
stead of “other beside the Ammonites’ we must
read “some of the Meunim,” as associated with
the Ammonites in the battle with Jehoshaphat.
Against them also Uzziah was helped of God (2 Ch
26 7). ‘They are included among the inhabitants
of Mt. Seir (20 10.23), so that an Edomite tribe
is intended. It is natural to connect them with
Ma‘an, a place on the great pilgrimage road, and
now a station on the Damascus-Hejaz Railway, to
the S.E. of Petra. It undoubtedly represents an
ancient stronghold.

The Maonites appear in the lists of those who
returned from exile (Ezr 2 50, AV “Mehunim,”’
RV ‘‘Meunim”; Neh 7 52, ‘““Meunim”). These
may possibly be the descendants of prisoners taken
in the wars of Jehoshaphat and Uzziah, to whom
menial tasks may have been appointed in the temple
services. W. Ewina


MAR, mar: “To mar” means ‘‘to destroy,” “‘to
disfigure,” ‘to damage.” Job 30 13, ‘They mar
my path” (RVm “they break up”); Nah 2 2, “and
destroyed their vine’’ (AV “‘and marred their vine”);
cf Lev 19 27; 2 K 3 19; Isa 62 14; Jer 13 9.


MARA, m@’ra, mar’a (VA, maradh, bitter”):
The term which Naomi applies to herself on her
return from Moab to her native country (Ruth
1 20), Changed beyond recognition, she creates
astonishment among her former acquaintances, who
ask, “Is this Naomi?’ She replies, ‘‘Call me not
Naomi” (i.e. “pleasant” or ‘‘sweet”), but ‘‘call me
Mara” (ie. “bitter”). In the hight of her bitter
experience, and her present pitiable plight, the old
name has become peculiarly inappropriate.


MARAH, mf@’ra, mar’a (WA, marah, “bitter’”):
The first camp of the Israelites after the passage
of the Red Sea (Bx 16 23; Nu $3 8f). The
name is derived from the bitterness of the brackish
water. Moses cast a tree into the waters which
were thus made sweet (Ex°15 23). See WANDER-
INGS OF ISRAEL.


MARALAH, mar‘a-la (M9979, mar'alah; B,
Mapayed8a, Marageldd, A, Mapird, Marild): A
place on the western border of Zcbulun (Josh 19
11). Pesh renders Ramath ta'le’, “height of the fox.”
It is not identified.


MARANATHA, mar-a-nath’a, mar-an-i’tha (from
Aram. words, MON N29, marand’ 'athah, “Our
Lord cometh, or will come”; according to some,
“has come”; to others, “Come!” an invitation for
his speedy reappearance [cf Rev 22 20]; papavaed,
maranathd, or papav 404, mardn aihdé): Used in con-
nection with dvdéeza, andthema, “accursed” (1 Cor
16 22), but has no necessary connection therewith.
It was used by early Christians to add solemn em-
phasis to previous statement, injunction or adjura-
tion, and seems to have become a sort of watch.
word; possibly forming part of an early liturgy.


_MARBLE, mar’b’l (WW, shayish, WW, shash,
WW "DAN, 'abhné shayish, “stones of marble”
(1 Ch 29 2]; MIO] AT] Ww) uma mex,
ri¢path bahat wa-shésh w*-dhar w’-sdhareth, “a pave-
ment of red, and white, and yellow, and black
marble,” or, according to m, “a pavement of por-
phyry, and white marble, and alabaster, and stone
of blue color” [Est 1 6]; WW "TAD, ‘ammudhe


1985


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Manstealing
Mark


shésh, ‘pillars of marble’ [Est 16; Cant 5 15];
ef WW, shésh, AVm “silk” or RV “fine linen”
[Gen 41 42; Ex 26 4, etc]; DIDWW, shoshannim,
“lilies” [Cant 2 16, etc], apparently from a root
signifying ‘white’; pd&ppapos, mdrmaros, ‘marble”
{Rev 18 12]): Marble is properly crystalline lime-
stone, usually pure white or veined with black, the
former being in demand for statuary, while the
latter is used in architecture, esp. for floors and
pillars. True marble is not found in Pal, but is
obtained from Greece or Italy. Much of the stone
described as marble is non-crystalline limestone
capable of being smoothed and polished. White or
yellow stone of this character is abundant in Pal.
Non-crystalline rocks of other colors are also some-
times called marble. In the passage from Est cited
above (cfm), it is a question whether the reference
is to marble and other stones or to marble of differ-
ent colors. In 1 Ch 29 2, ‘marble stones’ are
mentioned among the materials brought together
by David for the building of the temple. In Est
1 6, pillars and a pavement of marble are features
of the palace of Ahasuerus. In Cant 5 15, the
various parts of the body of the “‘beloved” are
likened to gold, beryl, ivory, sapphire, and marble.
In Rev 18 12, marble occurs in the list of the
merchandise of Babylon. All these references imply
a costly stone, and therefore probably one imported
from other countries, and make it likely that true
crystalline marble is meant. ALFRED Ety Day


MARCH, march, MARCHES, m§arch’iz. See
Army; War.
MARCHESHVAN, mir-chesh’van. See Time.


MARCION, mir’shun, GOSPEL OF. See Apoc-


RYPHAL GOSPELS.
MARCUS, mir’kus. See Mark, Jonny.


MARDOCHEUS, miar-dé-ké’us
Mardochatos): :

(1) One of the Jewish leaders who accompanied
Zerubbabel on the return from Babylon to Judah
(1 Esd & 8, where it stands for ‘‘Mordecai” of Ezr
22 and Neh T 7). :

(2) Another form of Mordecai, the uncle of
Esther (Ad Est 10 4; 11 2.12; 12 1.4 ff; 16 13).


MARE, mir (([1] "O10, sasah, “steed,” AV “com-
pany of horses”; LXX 4 tres, hé hippos, “mare”
[Cant 1 9]; [2] D°PAW 23, bené ha-rammakhim,
“bred of the stud,’ AV and RVm “young drome-


daries” [Est 8 10]; cf Arab. Bey, ramakat,


“mare”): The word “mare” does not occur in EV,
but in Cant 1 9 we find sasah, the fem. of sas,
“horse,” and in Est 8 10, b°né ha-rammakhim is by
some tr4 “sons of mares.’ See CamEL; Horse.


MARESHAH, ma-ré’sha (MW, maréshah; B,
Balynodp, Bathésdr, A, Mapynod, Marésd): A town
in the Shephelah of Judah named with Keilah and
Achzib (Josh 15 44). It occupied such a position
that Rehoboam thought well to fortify it for the
protection of Jerus (2 Ch 11 8). In the valley
of Zephathah at Mareshah, Asa overwhelmed Zerah
the Ethiopian and his army, pursuing them _as far
as Gezer (2 Ch 14 9 ff). From M. came Eliezer
the prophet who denounced disaster upon the com-
mercial copartnery of Jehoshaphat and Ahaziah
(20 37). The place is mentioned in Mic (1 15).
M. was plundered and burned by Judas Macca-
baeus (Ant, XII, viii, 6; 1 Mace 5 66 RVm).
Hither Gorgias escaped, having been rescued from


(Map6ox atos,


the hands of Dositheus by a Thracian horseman
(2 Macc 12 35). It was taken by John Hyrcanus,
who allowed the inhabitants to remain on condi-
tion that they adopt circumcision and submit to
the Jewish law. This they did; and later John
avenged an injustice done to M. by the Samaritans.
It is then described as “a colony of Jews’ (Ani,
XIII, ix, 1; x, 2). The city was treated with favor
by Pompey (XIV, iv, 4). When the Parthians
invaded Judaea in support of Antigonus they
demolished M. (xiii, 9).

According to Onom, M. was 2 Rom miles from |
Eleutheropolis (Beit Jibrin). Until recently it was
thought that Khirbet Mir‘ash, where the old name
lingers, not far S.W. of Beit Jibrin, represented
the ancient city. The work of Dr. Bliss, however
(“Excavations in Pal,”’ PEF), shows that it must
be located at Tell Sandahannah, about a mile 8. of
Beit Jibrin. A series of remarkable tombs was
discovered here. From 1 Ch 2 42 we may perhaps
gather that Hebron was colonized by the men of
M. W. Ewina


MARIMOTH, mar’i-moth, mar’i-méth: An an-
cestor of Esdras (Ezra) (2 Esd 1 2), identical with
Meraioth (Ezr 7 3). In 1 Esd 8 2, it appears
also as ‘‘Memeroth” (AV “Meremoth”).


MARINER, mar’i-nér. See Suips anv Boars, LI,
2, (3); Lif, 2.


MARISA, mar'i-sa (Mapiod, Marisd): The Gr
form of MaresHau (q.v.)in 2 Mace 12 35.


MARISH, mar'ish (823, gebhe’; €dos, hélos): An
old form of ‘‘marsh,” found in AV, ERV Ezk 47 11
(ARV “marsh’’). Some (not all) edd of the AV Apoc


have retained this same spelling in 1 Macc 9 42.45
(RV “marsh”).


MARK, mirk: In the AV this word is used 22 t
as a noun and 26 t as a predicate. In the former
case it is represented by 5 Heb and 3 Gr words; in
the latter by 11 Heb and 2 Gr words. As a noun
it is purely a physical term, gaining almost a tech-
nical significance from the “mark” put upon Cain
(Gen 4 15 AV); the stigmata of Christ in Paul’s
tea (Gal 6 17); the ‘mark of the beast” (Rev

6 2).


As a vb. lt ls almost exclusively a mental process: e.g.
**to be attentive,"' ‘understand’: od bin (Job 18 2
AV), rightly rendered in RV “consider”; MW, shith,
**Mark ye well her bulwarks” (Ps 48 13), ie. turn the
mind to, notice, regard; “av. shadmar, i.e. observe,
keep in view; so Ps'37 37, ‘'Mark the perfect man";
ef Job 22 15 AV. This becomes a unique expression in
198 1 12, where Eli, noticing the movement of Hannah’s
llps in prayer, is said to have ‘‘marked her mouth.”
Jesus ‘‘marked’’ how invited guests chose out (é7éxw,
epéchd, i.e. “observed"’) the chief seats (Lk 14 7); so
oxoméw, skopé6 (Rom 16 17; Phil 3 17), '' Mark them,”
le. look at, signifying keen mental attention, i.e. scru-
tinlze, observe carefully. The only exceptions to this
mental signification of the vb. are two vs in the OT:
Isa 44.13, ““He marketh it out with a pencil’ (‘red
ochre,’ AV ‘‘line’’), and ‘‘with the compasses ,'’ where the
vb. Is ANT, ta'ar, ‘‘to delineate,’ “mark out'’; Jer 2
22, "Thine iniquity is marked fomD. kétham, ‘cut
(Le. engraved)] before me,” signifying the deep and inerad-
icable nature of sin. It may also be rendered ‘‘ written,"
as In indelible hieroglyphics.


As a noun the term ‘‘mark” may signify, accord-
ing to its various Heb and Gr originals, a sign, “a
target” an object of assault, a brand or stigma cut
or burnt in the flesh, a goal or end in view, a stamp
or imprinted or engraved sign.

(1) MIN,’ 6th, “asign”: Gen 4 15 AV, “The Lord
set a mark upon Cain” (ARV “appointed a sign’).
It is impossible to tell the nature of this sign.


Mark
Mark, Gospel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1986


Delitzsch thinks that the rabbins were mistaken
in regarding it as a mark upon Cain’s body. He
considers it rather ‘a certain sign which protected
him from vengeance,” the continuance of his life
being necessary for the preservation of the race.
It was thus, as the Heb indicates, the token of a
covenant which God made with Cain that his life
would be spared.

(2) N32, mattara’, “an aim,” hence a mark to
shoot at. Jonathan arranged to shoot arrows as
at a mark, for a sigu to David (1 S 20 20); Job
felt himself to be a target for the Divine arrows, i.e.
for the Divinely decreed sufferings which wounded
him and which he was called to endure (Job 16 12);
so Jeremiah, ““He hath set me as a mark for the
arrow” (Lam 3 12); closely akin to this is 7357,
miphga’, an object of attack (Job 7 20), where Job
in bitterness of soul feels that, God has become his
enemy, and says, ‘Why hast thou made me the
mark of hostile attack?’; ‘‘set me as a mark for
thee.” See TarceEt.

(3) Wi, faw, “mark” (Ezk 9 4.6). In Ezekiel’s
vision of the destruction of the wicked, the mark to
be set upon the forehead of the righteous, at Jeh’s
command, was, as in the case of the blood sprinkled
on the door-posts of the Israelites (Ex 12 22.23),
for their protection. As the servants of God (Rev
7 2.3)—the elect—were kept from harm by being
sealed with the seal of the living God in their fore-
heads, so the man clothed in linen, with a writer’s
inkhorn by his side, was told to mark upon their
foreheads those whom God would save irom judg-
ment by His sheltering grace. Taw also appears
(Job 31 35) for the attesting mark made to a
document (RV “‘signature,’”’ m “mark’’),

The letter ( in the Phoen alphabet and on the coins
of the Maccabees had the form of a cross (TJ). In
oriental synods it was_used as a signature by bishops
who could not write. The cross, as a sign of ownership,
was burnt upon the necks or thighs of horses and camels.
It may have been the ‘‘mark”’ set upon the forehead of
the righteous in Ezekiel's vision.

(4) 9p¥p, ka'dka‘, “a stigma’ cut or burnt.
The Israelites were forbidden (Lev 19 28) to
follow the custom of other oriental and heathen
nations in cutting, disfiguring or branding their
bodies.

The specific prohibition ‘‘not to print any marks
upon’’ themselves evidently has reference to the custom
of tattooing common among savage tribes, and in vogue
among both men and women of the lower orders in
Arabia, Egypt, and many other lands. It was intended
to cultivate reverence for and a sense of the sacredness of
the human body, as God's creation, known in the Chris-


tian era as the temple of the Holy Spirit. See also Cur
TINGS IN THE FLESH.


(5) cxords, skopés, something seen or observed
in the distance, hence a “goal.” The Christian
life seemed to St. Paul, in the intensity of his spirit-
ual ardor, like the stadium or race-course of the
Greeks, with runners stretching every nerve to
reach the goal and win the prize. ‘I press on
toward the goal [AV “‘mark”’] unto the prize” (Phil
3 14). The mark or goal is the ideal of life revealed
in Christ, the prize, the attainment and possession
of that life.

In Wisd 5 21 “they fly to the mark” is from
etoroxot, etistochoi, ‘with true aim” (so RY).

(6) oriypa, stigma, “a mark pricked or branded
upon the body.” Slaves and soldiers, in ancient
times, were stamped or branded with the name of
their master. Paul considered and called himself
the bondslave of Jesus Christ. The traces of his
sufferings, scourging, stonings, persecution, wounds,
were visible in permanent scars on his body (ct
2 Cor 11 23-27). These he termed the stigmata
of Jesus, marks branded in his very ficsh as proofs
of his devotion to his Master (Gal 6 17).


This passage gives no ground for the Romanist super-
stition that the very scars of Christ’s crucifixion were
reproduced in Paul’s hands and feet and side. It is
also ‘‘alien to the lofty self-consciousness”’ of these words
to find in them, as some expositors do, a contrast in
Paul’s thought to the scar of circumcision.

(7) xdpayua, chdragma, “a stamp” or “im-
printed mark.” ‘The mark of the beast” (pe-
culiar to Rev) was the badge of the followers of
Antichrist, stamped on the forehead or right hand
(Rev 13 16; ef Ezk 9 4.6). It was symbolic of
character and was thus not a literal or physical
mark, but the impress of paganism on the moral
and spiritual life. It was the sign or token of apos-
tasy. Asa spiritual state or condition it subjected
men to the wrath of God and to eternal torment
(Rev 14 9-11); to noisome disease (16 2); to the
lake of fire (19 20). Those who received not the
mark, having faithfully endured persecution and
martyrdom, were given part in the first resurrection
and lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years
(Rev 20 4). The ‘“‘beast’’ symbolizes the anti-
Christian empires, particularly Rome under Nero,
who sought to devour and destroy the early Chris-


tians. ‘
“bruise,” Sir 23 10 (RV


) pdrAwy, méblops,
Dwicut M. Pratr


(8
“bruise’”’); 28 17.


MARK, mark, JOHN: John (‘Iwdvvys, [ddnnés)
represents his Jewish, Mark (Mdpxos, Médrkos) his
Rom name. Why the latter was as-
1. Name sumed we do not know. Perhaps the
and Family aorist participle in Acts 12 25 may
be intended to intimate that it dated
from the time when, in company with Barnabas
and Saul, he turned to servicein the great gentile
city of Antioch. Possibly it was the badge of Rom
citizenship, as in the caseof Paul. The standing
of the family would be quite consistent with such
a supposition.

His mother’s name was Mary (Acts 12 12).
The home is spoken of as hers. The father was
probably dead. The description of the house (with
its large room and porch) and the mention of the
Gr slave, suggest a family of wealth. They were
probably among the many zealous Jews who,
having become rich in the great world outside,
retired to Jerus, the center of their nation and faith.
M. was ‘‘cousin” to Barnabas of Cyprus (Col 4 10)
who also seems to have been a man of means (Acts
4 36). Possibly Cyprus was also M.’s former home.

When first mentioned, M. and his mother are
already Christians (44 AD). He had been con-

verted through Peter’s personal influ-


2. His ence (1 Pet 6 13) and had already
History as won a large place in the esteem of the
Known brethren, as is shown by his being
from the chosen to accompany Barnabas and
NT Saul to Antioch, a little later. The


home was a resort for Christians, so
that M. had every opportunity to become ac-
quainted with other leaders such as James and
John, and James the brother of the Lord. It was
perhaps from the latter James that he learned the
incident of Mk 3 21 which Peter would be less likely
to mention.

His kinship with Barnabas, knowledge of Chris-
tian history and teaching, and proved efficiency
account for his being taken along on the first mis-
sionary journey as “minister”? (brnpérys, hupérétés)
to Barnabas and Saul (Acts 13 5). Just what that
term implies is not clear. Chase (HDB) conjectures
the meaning to be that he had been hupéretés, “‘at-
tendant” or hazza@n in the synagogue (cf Lk 4
20), and was known as such an official. Wright
(ET, February, 1910) suggests that he was to render
in newly founded churches a teaching service simi-
lar to that of the synagogue hazzdn. Hackett


1987


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mark
Mark, Gospel


thought that the kat of this verse implies that he pied He Ps zepresented ae pee pemalieg _in
7 1 yprus un B c ie dea oO arnabas (WDO was living
was to be doing the same kind of work as Barnabas | j°PP"AD according to 1 Cor 9 5f) and then to have


and Saul and so to be their “helper” in preaching
and teaching. The more common view has been
(Meyer, Swete, et al.) that he was to perform “per-
sonal service not evangelistic,’”’ “official service but
not of the menial kind’”’—to be a sort of business
agent. The view that he was to be a teacher, a
catechist for converts, seems to fit best all the facts.

Why did he turn back from the work (Acts 13
13)? Not because of homesickness, or anxiety for
his mother’s safety, or home duties, or the desire
to rejoin Peter, or fear of the perils incident to the
journey, but rather because he objected to the offer
of salvation to the Gentiles on condition of faith
alone. There are hints that M.’sfamily, like Paul’s,
were Hebrews of the Hebrews, and it is not without
significance that in both verses (Acts 13 5.13) he
is given only his Heb name. The terms of Paul’s
remonstrance are very strong (Acts 15 38), and
we know that nothing stirred Paul’s feelings more
deeply than this very question. The explanation
of it all may be found in what happened at Paphos
when the Rom Sergius Paulus became a believer.
At that time Paul (the change of name is here noted
by Lk) stepped to the front, and henceforth, with
the exception of 15 12.25, where naturally enough
the old order is maintained, Lk speaks of Paul and
Barnabas, not Barnabas and Saul. We must remem-
ber that, at that time, Paul stood almost alone in
his conviction. Barnabas, even later than_that,
had misgivings (Gal 2 13). Perhaps, too, M. was
less able than Barnabas himself to see the latter take
second place.

We hear nothing further of M. until the begin-
ning of the second missionary journey 2 years later,
when Paul’s unwillingness to take him with them
led to the rupture between Paul and Barnabas and
to the mission of Barnabas and M. to Cyprus
(Acts 15 89). He is here called Mark, and in that
quiet way Luke may indicate his own conviction
that Mark’s mind had changed on the great ques-
tion, as indeed his willingness to accompany Paul
might suggest. He had learned from the discus-
sions in the council at Jerus and from subsequent
events at Antioch. ;

About 11 years elapse before we hear of him
again (Col 4 10f; Philem ver 24). He is at Rome
with Paul. The breach is healed. He is now one
of the faithful few among Jewish Christians who
stand by Paul. He is Paul’s honored ‘‘fellow-
worker” and a great ‘‘comfort” to him.

The Colossian passage may imply a contem-
plated visit by M. to Asia Minor. It may be that
it was carried out, that he met Peter and went with
him to Babylon. In 1 Pet 5 13 the apostle sends
M.’s greeting along with that of the church in
Babylon. Thence M. returns to Asia Minor, and
in 2 Tim 4 11 Paul asks Timothy, who is at
Ephesus, to come to him, pick up M. by the way,
and bring him along. In that connection Paul
pays M. his final tribute; he is “useful for min-
istering” (etxpyoros els Siaxovlay, evichréstos ets dia-
kontan), so useful that his ministry is a Joy to the
veteran’s heart.

The most important and retiable tradition is that he


lose attendant andinterpreter of Peter, and has
beast ma given us in the Gospel that bears his name


i an account of Peter's teaching. For that
3. His comradeship the NT facts furnish a basls,
History and the gaps in the NT history leave
as Known plenty of room. An examination of the
from tradition will be toe in ee THE

GoOsPEL ACCORDING TO (q.V.).

Other Other traditions add but little that is
Sources reliable. It is said that M. had been a


riest, and that after becoming a Christlan
he sinputated: a finger to disqualify himself for that
service. Hence the nickname xodofoddxtvdcs, kolobo-
dékiulos, which, however, is sometimes otherwise ex-


one to Alexandria, founded the church there, hecome
its first bishop and there died (or was martyred) in the
8th year of Nero (62-63). They add that in 815 AD
Venetian soldiers stole his remains from Alexandria and
piaced them under the church of St. Mark at Venice.


LivERATURE.—Chase, HDB, III, 245 ff; Rae, DCG,
II, 119f; Harnack, Ene Brit; Zahn, Intro tothe NT, II,
427-56; Lindsay, Salmond, Morison and Swete in their
Comms.

J. H. Farmer

MARK, THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO:

. Our SEconpD GosPEL

II, Contents anp GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS
1. Scope
2. Material Peculiar to Mark
3. Quotations
4, A Book of Mighty Works
5. The Worker Is Also a Teacher
6. A Book of Graphic Detalls

II. Tur Text

IV. Lanovace
1. General Character
2. Vocabulary
3. Style
4, Original Language

V. AUTHORSHIP
1, External Evidence
2. Internal Evidence

VI. Sources anp INTEGRITY

TI. Date anp Piace oF Composition
. Hisroricity

IX. Purpose anp Puan

1. The Gospel for Romans
2. Plan of the Gospel
X. Leapine Doctrines
1. Person of Christ
2. The Trinity
3. Salvation
4, Eschatology
Literature

I. Oar Second Gospel.—The order of the Gospels
in our NT is probably due to the early conviction
that this was the order in which the Gospels were
written. It was not, however, the invariable order.
The question of order only arose when the roll was
superseded by the codex, our present book-form.
That change was going on in the 3d cent. Origen
found codices with the order Jn, Mt, Mk, Lk—due
probably to the desire to give the apostles the lead-
ing place. That and the one common today may
be considered the two main groupings—the one in
the order of dignity, the other in that of time. The
former is Egyp and Lat; the latter has the authority
of most Gr MSS, Catalogues and Fathers, and is
supported by the Old Syr.

Within these, bowever, there are variations.
The former is varied thus: Jn, Mt, Lk, Mk, and Mt,
Jn, Mk, Lk, and Mt, Jn, Lk, Mk; the latter to Mt,
Mk, Jn, Lk. Mk is never first; when it follows
Lk, the time consideration has given place to that
of length.

II. Contents and General Characteristics —The
Gospel begins with the ministry of John the Baptist
and ends with the announcement of
the Resurrection, if the last 12 vs be
not included. These add post-resur-
rection appearances, the Commission, the Ascen-
sion, and a brief summary of apostolic activity.
Thus its limits correspond closely with those indi-
cated by Peter in Acts 10 37-43. Nothing is said
of the early Judacan ministry. The Galilean min-
istry and Passion Week with the transition from
the one to the other (in ch 10) practically make up
the Gospel.

Matter peculiar to Mk is found in 4 26-29 (the
seed growing secretly); 3 21 (his kindred’s fear);

7 32-37 (the deaf and dumb man);
2. Material 8 22-26 (the blind man); 13 33-37.
Peculiar to (the householder and the exhortation
Mark to watch); 14 51 (the young man who

escaped). But, in addition to this,
there are many vivid word-touches with which the
common material is lighted up, and in not a few


1. Scope


Mark, Gospel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1988


of the common incidents Mk’s account is very
much fuller; e.g. 6 14-29 (death of John the Bap-
tist); 7 1-23 (on eating with unwashen hands);
9 14-29 (the demoniac boy); 12 28-34 (the ques-
tioning scribe). There is enough of this material
to show clearly that the author could not have been
wholly dependent on the other evangelists. Haw-
kins reckons the whole amount of peculiar material
at about fifty verses (Hor. Syn., 11).


In striking contrast to Matthew who, in |} passages,
calls attention to the fulfilment of prophecy by Jesus,
Mark only once quotes the OT and
3. Quota- that he puts in the very forefront of his
tious Gospel. The Isa part of his composite
notation appears in ali 4 Gospels; the
Mal part in Mk only, though there is a reflection of it in
Jn 3 28. This fact alone might convey an erroneons
impression of the attitude of the Gospel to the OT.
Though Mark himself makes only this one twofold refer-
ence, yet he represents Jesus as doing so frequently.
The difference in this respect hetween him and Matthew
is not great. He has 19 formal quotations as compared
with 40 in Mt, 17 in Lk and 12 in Jn, Three of the 19
are not found elsewhere. The total for the NT is 160,
so that Mk has a fair proportion. When OT references
and loose citations are considered the result is much the
same. WH give Mt 100, Mk 58, Lk 86, Jn 21, Acts
107. Thns the OT lies back of Mk also as the authori-
tative word of God. Swete (Intro to the OT in Gr, 393)
points out that in those quotations which are common
to the synoptists the LXX is usually followed; in
others, the Heb more frequently. (A good illustration
is seen in Mk 7 7 where the LXX is followed in the
phrase, ‘“‘in vain do they worship me’’—a fair para-
phrase of the Heb; but ‘teaching as their doctrines the
precepts of men”’ is a more correct representation of the
Heb than the LX X gives.) Three quotations are pecul-
iar to Mk, viz. 9 48; 10 19; 12 32.


Judged by the space occupied, Mk is a Gospel of
deeds. Jesus is a worker. His life is one of
strenuous activity. He hastens from
4. A Book one task to another with energy and
of Mighty decision. The word ed#vs, euthis,
Works ie. “straightway,’ is used 42 t as
against Mt’s 7 and Lk’s 1. In 14 of
these, as compared with 2 in Mt and none in Lk,
the word is used of the personal activity of Jesus.
It is not strange therefore that the uneventful early
years should be passed over (ef Jn 2 11). Nor is
it strange that miracles should be more numerous
than parables. According to Westcott’s classification
(Intro to Study of the Gospels, 480-86), Mk has 19
miracles and only 4 parables, whereas the corre-
sponding figures for Mt are 21 to 15 and for Lk 20
to 19. Of the miracles 2 are peculiar to Mk, of the
parables only 1. The evangelist clearly records the
deeds rather than the words of Jesus. These facts
furnish another point of contact with Peter’s
speeches in Acts—the beneficent character of the
deeds in Acts 10 38, and their evidential signifi-
cance in Acts 2 22 (cf Mk 1 27; 2 10, etc).


The following are the miracles recorded by Mk: the
unclean spirit (1 21-28), the paralytic (2 1-12), the
withered hand (3 1-5), the storm stilled (4 35-41), the
Gerasene demoniac (5 1-17), Jairus’ daughter (5 22 ff),
the woman with the issue (5 25-34), feeding the 5,000
(6 35-44), feeding the 4,000 (8 1-10), walking on the
water (6 481f); the Syrophoenician’s daughter (7 24-
30), the deaf mute (7 31-37), the blind man (8 22-26),
the demoniac boy (9 14 ff), blind Bartimaeus (10 46—
52), the fig tree withered (11 20 ff), the resurrection
(16 1 ff). For an interesting classification of these see
Westcott’s Intro to Study of the Gospels, 391. Only the
last three helong to Judaea.


Though what has been said is true, yet Mk is by
no means silent about Jesus as a teacher. John the
Baptist is a preacher (1 4.7), and


5. The Jesus also is introduced as a preacher,
Workera taking up and enlarging the message
Teacher of John. Very frequent mention is


made of Him as teaching (e.g. 1 21;
218; 6 6, etc); indeed the words étéax%, didaché,
and dddoxw, diddskd, occur more frequently in Mk
than in any other Gospel. Striking references are
made to His originality, methods, popularity and


peerlessness as a teacher (1 22; 4 11.33; 11 27—
12 37; esp. 12 34). A miracle is definitely de-
clared to be for the purpose of instruction (2 10),
and the implication is frequent that His miracles
were not only the dictates of His compassion, but
also purposed self-revelations (6 19f; 11 21-28).
Not only is He Himself a teacher, but He is con-
cerned to prepare others to be teachers (3 13 f;
4 10f). Mk is just as explicit as Mt in calling
attention to the fact that at a certain stage He
began teaching the multitude in parables, and ex-
pounding the parables to His disciples (4 2-11f).
He mentions, however, only four of them—the
Sower (4 1-20), the Seed Growing Secretly (4 26-
29), the Mustard Seed {4 30-32) and the Husband-
men (12 1-12). The number of somewhat lengthy
discourses and the total amount of teaching is con-
siderably greater than is sometimes recognized.
Chs 4 and 13 approach most nearly to the length of
the discourses in Mt and correspond to Mt 13 and
24 respectively. But in 7 1-23; 9 33-50; 10
5-31.389-45 and 12 1-44 we have quite extensive
sayings. If Jesus is a worker, He is even more a
teacher. His works prepare for His words rather
than His words for His works. The teachings
grew naturally out of the occasion and the circum-
stances. He did and taught. Because He did
what He did He could teach with effectiveness.
Both works and words reveal Himself.
There is a multitude of graphic details: Mk
mentions actions and gestures of Jesus (7 33; 9 36;
10 16) and His looks of inquiry
6. Graphic (6 32), in prayer (6 41; 7 34), of
Details approval (3 34), love (10 21), warn-
ing (to Judas esp. 10 23), anger (3 5),
and in judgment (11 11). Jesus hungers (11 12),
seeks rest in seclusion (6 31) and sleeps on the boat
cushion (4 38); He pities the multitude (6 34),
wonders at men’s unbelief (6 6), sighs over their
sorrow and blindness (7 34; 8 12), grieves at their
hardening (3 5), and rebukes in sadness the wrong
thought of His mother and brothers, and in indig-
nation the mistaken zeal and selfish ambitions of
His disciples (8 33; 10 14). Mk represents His
miracles of healing usually as instantaneous (1 31;
211f; 3 5), sometimes as gradual or difficult
(1 26; 7 32-35; 9 26-28), and once as flatly im-
possible “because of their unbelief”? (6 6). With
many vivid touches we are told of the behavior of
the people and the impression made on them by
what Jesus said or did. They bring their sick along
the streets and convert the market-place into a
hospital (1 32), throng and jostle Him by the sea-
side (3 10), and express their astonishment at His
note of authority (1 22) and power (2 12). Disciples
are awed by His command over the sea (4 41),
and disciples and others are surprised and alarmed
at the strange look of dread as He walks ahead
alone, going up to Jerus and the cross (10 32).
Many other picturesque details are given, as in
1 13 (He was with the wild beasts); 2 4 (digging
through the roof); 4 38 (lying asleep on the cushion);
5 4 (the description of the Gerasene demoniac);
6 39 (the companies, dressed in many colors and
looking like flower beds on the green mountain-
side). Other details peculiar to Mk are: names
(1 29; 36; 18 8; 16 21), numbers (65 13; 6 7),
time (1 35; 2 1; 11 19; 16 2), and place (2 13;
38; 731; 1241; 1338; 1468 and 16 39).
These strongly suggest the observation of an eye-
witness as the final authority, and the geographical
references suggest that even the writer understood.
the general features of the country, esp. of Jerus and
its neighborhood. (For complete lists see Lindsay,
St. Mark’s Gospel, 26 ff.)
HI, Text.—Of the 58 select readings noted by
WH (Intro), only a few are of special intcrest or


1989


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Mark, Gospel


importance. The following are to be accepted:
év7r@ Healg r@ rpopyry (1 2); auapriuaros (3 29);
whipys (indeclinable, 4 28); 6 rékrwy (6 3; Jesus
_ is here called “‘the carpenter’); atrod (6 22, Herod's
daughter probably had two names, Salome and
Herodias); wvyy9 (7 23, “with the fist,” ic. “thor-
oughly,” not muxvd, “oft’’), WH are to be fol-
lowed in rejecting mirefca: (leaving the graphic
Td El Stvy [9 23]); kal vyorelg (9 29); waoa ....
adobjoera: (9 49); rods... . xpiuace (10 24);
but not in rejecting vio? Geof (11). They are
probably wrong in retaining ots... . dvéparay
(3 14; it was probably added from Lk 6 81);
and in rejecting cal «way and accepting parti-
cwvrat instead of Barricwvra: (7 4; ignorance of the
extreme scrupulosity of the Jews led to these scribal
changes; cf Lk 11 38, where éSarrlo6y is not dis-
puted). So one may doubt #répe (6 20), and
suspect it of being an Alexandrian correction for
érole., which was more difficult and yet is finely
appropriate.


The most important textuai
9-20. Burgon and Miller and Salmon helieve it to he
genuine. Miller supposes that up to that port Mk had
been giving practically Peter's words, that for some
reason those then failed him and that vs 9-20 are drawn
from his own stores. The majority of scholars regard
them as non-Markan; they think ver 8 is not the in-
tended conclusion; that if Mark ever wrote a conclusion,
it has heen lost, and that vs 9-20, embodying traditions
of the papErelle Age, were supplied later. Conybeare
has found in an Armenian S a note referring these
verses to the presbyter Ariston, whom he identifies with
that Aristion, a disciple of John, of whom Papias speaks.
Many therefore would regard them as authentic, and
some accept them as clothed with John’s authority.
They are certainly very carly, perhaps as early as 100
AD, and have the support of ACDXI4Z, ail late uncials,
all cursives, most VSS and Fathers, and were known to
ie scribes of & and B, who, however, do not accept

em.

It is just possible that the Gospel did end at ver 8.
The very abruptness would argue an early date when
Christians lived in the atmosphere of the Resurrection
and would form an even appropriate closing for the
Gospel of the Servant (see below). A Servant comes,
fulfils his task, and departs—we do not ask about his
lineage, nor follow his subsequent history.


IV. Language.—Mark employs the common


coloquial Gr of the day, understood everywhere
throughout the Gr-Rom world. It


robiem is that of 16


1. General was emphatically the language of the |


Character people, “known and read of all men.”


His vocabulary is equally removed
from the technicalities of the schools and from
the slang of the streets. It is the clean, vigor-
ous, direct speech of the sturdy middle
class.


Of his 1,330 words, 60 are proper names.
Of the rest 79 are peculiar to Mk, so far
as the NT is concerned; 203 are found
elsewhere only in the Synoptics, 15 only in John's Gos-

el, 23 only in Paul (including He), 2 in the Catholic

pp. (1 in Jas, 1 in 2 Pet), 5 in the Apocalypse (see
Swete, Comm. on St. Mark). Rather more than a fourth
of the 79 are non-classical as compared with one-seventh
for Lk and a iittle more than one-seventh for Mt. Haw-
kins also gives a list of 33 unusual words or expressions.
The most interesting of the single words are cx:oudvous,
schizoménous, horev, Ephien, xwpowddres, kdmopéleis, éxe-
GorAwoarv, ekephalfosan, mpoavdov, proadlion, and drt,
héti, in the sense of ‘'why” (2 16; 9 11.28); of the
expressions, the distributives in 6 7.39 f and 14 19,
the Hebraistic «i do00jcera, and érav with indic. Of
ordinary constructions the following are found with
marked frequency: «ai (reducing his use of é¢ to half
of Mt’s or Lk’s), historic present (accounting for the
very frequent use of Adye. instead of elrev), the peri-
phrastic imperfect, the art. with infinitives or sentences,
participies, and prepositions. % 5

There are indications that the writer in earlier life
was accustomed to thinkin Aramaic. Occasionally that
fact shows itself in the retention of Aram. words which
are proportionately rather more numerous than in Mt
and twice as numerous as in Lk or Jn. The most inter-
esting of these are traded Kovpm, taleithé kotm, éppabd,
ephphathé, and Boarypyés, Boanérgés, eacb uttered at a
time of intense feeling.

Latinisms in Mk are ahout half as numerous as Arama-
Isms. They number 11, the same as in Mt, as com-


ared with 6in Lk and 7in Jn. The greater proportion
n Mk is the only really noteworthy fact in these figures.
It suggests more of a Roman outlook and fits in with the
common tradition as to its origin and authorship.

For certain words he has great fondness: ev@us, 42 t;
axdbaptos, t; AAdérw, and its compounds very fre-
quentiy; so érepwrav, imdyew, éfoveia, evayyéAtov, mpooKa-
AcigOar, emitemay, Compounds of wropeverOar, cuvgnreiv, and
such graphic words as éx@aufeto@ar, éuSpimacda, évayxadt-
GerOas ant dusotcda, The following he uses in an unusuai
sense: eveixev, muyug, améxer, emiBarav.

The same exact and vivid representation of the facts
of actual experience accounts for the anacolutha and
other broken constructions, Se 4 31f: 5 23; 6 8f:
11 32. Some are due to the insertion of explanatory
clauses, as in % 3-5; some to the introduction of a quo-
tation as in 7 11f. These phenomena represent the
same type of mind as we have already seen (II, 6 above).


The style is very simple. The common con-
nective is xaf. The stately periods of the classics
are wholly absent. The narrative is

3. Style commonly terse and concise. At
times, however, a multitude of details
are crowded in, resulting in unusual fulness of ex-
pression. This gives rise to numerous duplicate
expressions as in 1 32; 2 25; 6 19 and the like,
which become a marked feature of the style. The
descriptions are wonderfully vivid. This is helped
out by the remarkably frequent use of the historic
present, of which there are 151 examples, as con-
trasted with 78 in Mt and 4 in Lk, apart from its
use in parables. Mk never uses it in parables,
whereas Mt has 15 cases and Lk 5. Jn has 162, a
slightly smaller proportion than Mk on the whole,
but rather larger in narrative parts. But Mk’s
swift passing from one tense to another adds a
variety and vividness to the narrative not found in


n.
That the original language was Gr is the whole
impression made by patristic references. Trans-
lations of the Gospel are always from,

4, Original not into, Gr. It was the common lan-


Language guage of the Rom world, esp. for
letters. Paul wrote to the Romans in
Gr. Half acentury later Clement wrote from Rome


to Corinth in Gr. The Gr Mk bears the stamp of
originality and of the individuality of the author.


Some have thought it was written in Lat. The only
real support for that view is the subscription in a few

SS (e.g. 160, 161, éypady ‘Pwpaiori ev ‘Pwun, egrdphé
Rhomaistt en Rhémé) and in the Peshitta and Harclean
Syr. It is a mistaken deduction from the belief that it
was written in Rome or due to the supposition that *‘in-
ferpipter of Peter’’ meant that Mark tré Peter's discourses
into Lat.

Blass contended for an Aram. original, believing that
Lk, in the first part of Acts, followed an Aram. source,
and that that source was by the author of the Second
Gospel which also, therefore, was written in Aramaic.
He felt, moreover, that the text of Mk suggests several
forms of the Gospel which are hest explained as tr of a
common original. Decisive against the view is the tr
of the few Aram. words which are retained.


V. Authorship.—The external evidence for the
authorship is found in the Fathers and the MSS.
The most important patristic state-

1. External ments are the following:


Evidence Paptas—Asia Minor, ¢ 125 AD— (quoted

5 by Eus., HE, III, 39): ‘And this also the
elder said: Mark, having hecome the interpreter {épuyved-
775, herménedtés} of Peter, wrote accurately whathe remem-
hered (or recorded) of the things said or done by Christ,
but not in order. For he neither heard the Lord nor fol-
lowed Him: but afterward, as I said [he attached himself
to) Peter who used to frame his teaching to meet the needs
of his hearers], but not as composing an orderly account
oivraéw, sintaxin] of the Lord’s discourses, so that Mark
committed no error in thus writing down some things
as he remombered them: for he took thought for one
thing not to omit any of the things he had heard nor to
falsify anything in them."

Justin Martyr—Palestine and the West, c 150 AD—(In
Dial. with Trypho, cvi, Migne ed): ‘And when it is said
that He imposed on one of the apostles the name Peter,
and when this is recorded in his ‘Memoirs’ with this
other fact that He named the two sons of Zebedee
*Boanerges,’ which means ‘Sons of Thunder,’ ’’ etc.

Trenaeus—Asia Minor and Gaul, c 175 AD—(Ad».
Haer., iii.1, quoted in part Eus., HEH, V,8): "After the


Mark, Gospel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1990


apostles were clothed with the power of the Holy Spirit
and fully furnished for the work of universal evangel-
ization, they went out [‘‘exierunt,’’ in Rufinus’ tr] to
the ends of the earth preaching the gospel. Matthew
went eastward to those of Heb descent and preached to
them in their own tongue, in which language he also
[had ?] published a writing of the gcspel, while Peter and
Paul went westward and pucecne and founded the
church in Rome. But after the departure ([étodor,
“exitum"’ in Rufinus] of these, Mark, the disciple and
interpreter [épunvevtys, herménedtés] of Peter, even he
has delivered _to us in writing the things which were
preached by Peter.”’ .

Clement of Alezandria—c 200 Be yEoue: in Eus.,
AE, VI, 14): **The occasion for writing the Gospel acc.
to Mk was as foliows: After Peter had publicly preached
the word in Rome and declared the gospel by the Spirit,
many who were present entreated Mark, as one who had
followed him for a long time and rememhered what he
said, to write down what he had spoken, and Mk, aiter
composing the Gospel, presented it to his petitioners.
When Peter became aware of it he neither eagerly hin-
dered nor promoted it.”’

Also (Eus., HE, II, 15): ‘‘So charmed were the
Romans with the light that shone in upon their minds
from the discourses of Peter, that, not contented with a
single hearing and the viva voce proclamation of the
truth, they urged with the utmost solicitation on Mark,
whose Gospel is in circulation and who was Peter's
attendant, that he would leave them in writing a record
of the teaching which they had received hy word of
mouth. They did not give over until they had pre-
vailed on him; and thus they hecame the cause of the
composition of the so-calied Gospel according to Mk.
It is said that when the apostle knew, by revelation of
the Spirit, what was done, he was pleased with the eager-
ness Of the men and authorized the writing to be read
in the churches.”

Tertullian—North Africa, c 207 AD—(Ad>». Mare., |v.
5): He speaks of the authority of the four Gospels, two
hy apostles and two by companions of apostles, ‘not
excluding that which was published hy Mark, for it may
he ascribed to Peter, whose interpreter Mark was.”’

Origen—Alexandria and the East, c 240 AD—(‘‘Comm.
on Mt” quoted in Eus., HE, VI, 25): ‘The second is
that according to Mk who composed it, under the guid-
ance of Peter [as [¢rpos wtdyyjocato atts, has Pétros
huphégésata auté], who therefore, in his Catholic ep.,
acknowledged the evangelist as his son."’

Eusebius—Caesarea, C 325 AD—(Dem. Evang., III, 5):
“Though Peter did not undertake, through excess of
diffidence, to write a Gospel, yet !t had ali along heen
currently reported, that ark, who had hecome his
familiar acquaintance and attendant [yvipimos cai poiryrys,
gnérimos kat phoitétés] made memoirs of [or recorded, aro-
Bvyovetoat, apomnémonersai] the discourses of Peter
concerning the doings of Jesus.’’ ‘‘Mark indeed writes
this, but it is Peter who so testifies about himself, for al!
that is in Mk are memoirs (or records) of the discourses
of Peter.”

Epiphanius—Cyprus, c 350 AD—(Haer., 41): ‘But
Immediately after Matthew, Mark, having become a
follower [axéAovéo0s, akdlouthas] of the holy Peter in
Rome, is entrusted with the putting forth of a gospel.
Having completed his work, he was sent by the holy
Peter into the country of the Egyptians."

Jerame—East and West, c 350 AD—(De vir. illustr.,
vili): ‘Mark, disciple and interpreter of Peter, at the
request of the hrethren in Rome, wrote a hrief Gospel
in accordance with what he had heard Peter narrating.
When Peter heard it he approved and authorized it to
be read in the churches.”

_ Also xi: “Accordingly he had Titus as interpreter
just as the blessed Peter had Mark whose Gospel was
composed, Peter narrating and Mark eS

Preface Camm. on Mt: ‘The second is Mark, inter-
preter of the apostle Peter, and first hishop of the Alex-
andrian church; who did not himself sce the Lord Jesus,
but accurately, rather than in order, narrated those of
His deeds, which he had heard his teacher preaching.”

To these should be added the Muratorian Fragment
—c 170 AD—"' which gives a list of the NT hooks with a
hrief account of the authorship of each. The account
of Mt and most of that of Mk are lost, only these words
relating to Mark beiug left: ‘quibus tamen interfuit,
et ita posuit’’’ (see helow).


These names represent the churches of the 2d,
3d and 4th cents., and practically every quarter of
the Rom world. Quite clearly the common opinion
was that Mark had written a Gospel and in it had
given us mainly the teaching of Peter.

That our second Gospel is the one referred to in
these statements there can be no reasonable doubt.
Our four were certainly the four of Irenaeus and
Tatian; and Salmon (/niro) has shown that the
same four must have been accepted by Justin,
Papias and their contemporaries, whether orthodox
or Gnostics. Justin’s reference to the surname


“Boanerges” supports this so far as Mark is con-
cerned, for in the Gospel of Mk alone is that fact
mentioned (3 17).

A second point is equally clear—that the Gospel
of Mk is substantially Peter’s. Mark is called dis-
ciple, follower, interpreter of Peter. Origen ex-
pressly quotes ‘‘Marcus, my son” (1 Pet 5 13 AV)
in this connection. ‘“‘Disciple’’ is self-explanatory.
“Follower’’ is its equivalent, not simply a traveling
companion. ‘“Interpreter’’ is less clear. One view
equates it with “translator,’”’ because Mark tr
either Peter’s Aram. discourses into Gr for the
Hellenistic Christians in Jerus (Adeney, et al.), or
Peter’s Gr discourses into Lat for the Christians in
Rome (Swete, et al.). The other view—that of the
ancients and most moderns (e.g. Zahn, Salmon)—
is that it means “interpreter’’ simply in the sense
that Mark put in writing what Peter had taught.
The contention of Chase (HDB, III, 247) that this
was a purely metaphorical use has little weight
because it may beso used here. The conflict in the
testimony as to date and place will be considered
below (VII).

There is no clear declaration that Mark himself
was a disciple of Jesus or an eyewitness of what he
records. Indeed the statement of Papias seems to
affirm the contrary. However, that statement
may mean simply that he was not a personal dis-
oie of Jesus, not that he had never seen Him at
all.


The Muratorian Fragment is not clear. Its broken
sentence has been differently understood. Zahn com-
pletes it thus: ‘' [ali] quibus tamen interfuit, et ita posuit,’’
and understands it to mean that ‘‘at some incidents [in
the life of Jesus], however, he was present and so put
them down.'’ Chase(HD8) and others regard ‘‘ quibus
tamen"’ as a-literal tr of the Gr ols 8, hots dé, and
helieve the meaning to be that Mark, who had prob-
ahly just been spoken of as not continuously with
Peter, ‘‘was present at some of his discourses and so
recorded them.” Chase feels that the phrase following
respecting Luke: ‘'Dominum tamen nec ipse vidit in
carne,’ compels the helief that Mark like Luke had not
seen the Lord. But Paul, not Mark, may he there in
mind, and further, this interpretation rather belittles
Mark’s association with Peter.


The patristic testimony may be regarded as sum-
marized in the title of the work in our earliest
MSS, viz. xara Mdpxov, katé Mdrkon. This phrase
must refer to the author, not his source of informa-
tion, for then it would necessarily have been xara
Tlérpov, katd Pétron. This is important as throwing
light on the judgment of antiquity as to the author-
ship of the First Gospel, which the MSS all entitle
xara Maé@atov, katé Matthaton.

The internal evidence offers much to confirm
the tradition and practically nothing to the

contrary. That Peter is back of it
2. Internal j, congruous with such facts as the
Evidence following:


(1) The many vivid details referred to _ahove (III,
6) must have come from an eyewitness. The frequent
use of Aéye, légei, in Mk and Mt where Lk uses
clvev, efpen, works in the same direction.

(2) Certain awkward expressions in lists of names can
hest he explained as Mark’s turning of Peter's original,
e.g. 1 29, where Peter may have said, ‘‘We went home,
James and John accompanying us." So in 1 36 (con-
trasted with Lk’s impersonal description, Lk 4 42 f);
Mk 3 16; 13 3.

(3) Two passages (9 6 and 11 21) describe Peter's
own thought; others mention incidents which Peter
would he most likely to mention: e.g. 14 37 and vs 66-
72 (csp. impf. ypveiro, érnetio); 16 7; 7 12-23 (in view
of Acts 10 15).

(4) In 3 7 the order of names suits Peter's Galilean
standpoint rather than that of Mark in Jerus—Galilee,
Judaea, Jerus, Peraea, Tyre, Sidon. The very artlessness
of these hints is the best kind of proof that we are In
touch with one who saw with his own eyes and speaks
out of his own consciousness.

(5) Generally Mark, like Matthew, writes from the
standpoint of the Twelve more frequently than Luke: and
Mark, more frequently than Matthew, from the stand-
point of the three most honored hy Jesus. Cf Mk § 37
with Mt 9 23, where Mt makes no reference to the three;


1991


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mark, Gospel


the unusual order of the names In Lk’s corresponding
passage (8 51) suggests that James was his ultimate
source. The language of Mk 9 14 is clearly from one
of the three, Lk’s may he, but Mt’s is not. The con-
trast in this respect between the common synoptic
material and Lk 9 51-18 14 lends weight to this con-
sideration. :

(6) The scope of the Gospel which corresponds to
tit onus fh Peter’s address to Cornelius Macts 10

(7) The book suits Peter’s character—impresslonable
rather than reflective, and emotional rather than logical.
To such men arguments are of minor importance. It
is deeds that count (Burton, Short Intro).

It may seem to militate against all this that the three
striking incidents in Peter’s career narrated in Mt 14
28-33 (walking on the water), 17 24-27 (tribute money),
and 16 16-19 (the church and the keys), should be
omitted in Mk. But this is just a touch of that fine
courtesy and modesty which companionship with Jesus
bred. e see John in his Gospel hiding himself in a
similar way. These men are more llkely to mention the
things that reflect discredlt on themselves. It is only
in t’s list of the Twelve that he himself is called

the publican.’’ So ‘‘ Peter never appears in a separate
réle in Mk except to receive a rebuke’’ (Bacon).


As to Mark’s authorship, the internal evidence
appears slight. Like the others, he does not ob-
trude himself. Yet for that very reason what
hints there are become the more impressive.

There may be something in Zahn's point that the
description of John as brother of James is an unconscious
betrayal of the fact: that the author’s own name was John.
There are two other passages, however, which are clearer
and which reinforceeach other. The story of the youthin
14 51 seems to be of a different complexion from other
Gospel incidents. But if Mark himself was the youth,
Its presence is explained and vindicated. In that case
it is likely that the Supper was celebrated in his own
home and that the upper room is the same as that in
Acts 12. This is favored by the fuller description of it
in ME, esp. the word ‘‘ready’’—a most natural touch,
the echo of the housewife’s exclamation of satisfaction
when everything was ready for the guests. It is made
almost_a certainty when we compare 14 17 with the
paraliels in Mt and Lk. Mt 26 20 reads: “Now when
even was come, he was sitting at meat with the twelve
disciples’; Lk 22 14: ‘‘And when the hour was come,
he sat down, and the apostles with him”; while Mk has:
“And when it was evening he cometh with the twelve.”
The last represents exactly the standpoint of one in the
home who sees Jesus and the Twelve approaching.
(And how admirably the terms ‘‘the twelve disciples,’’
‘the apostles’’ and ‘‘the twelve” suit Mt, Lk, and Mk
respectively.) Such phenomena, undesigned (save by
the inspiring Spirit), are just those that would not have
been invented later, and become the strongest attesta-
tion of the reliabiity at the tradition and the historicity
of the narrative. odern views opposed to this are
touched upon in what follows.


VI. Sources and Integrity.—We have seen that,
according to the testimony of the Fathers, Peter’s
preaching and teaching are at least the main source,
and that many features of the Gospel support that
view. We have seen, also, subtle but weighty
reasons for believing that Mark added a little
himself. Need we seek further sources, or does
inquiry resolve itself into an analysis of Peter’s
teaching?

B. Weiss believes that Mark used a document
now lost containing mainly sayings of Jesus, called
Logia (L) in the earlier discussions, but now com-
monly known asQ. In that opinion he has recently
been joined by Sanday and Streeter. Harnack,
Sir John Hawkins and Wellhausen have sought
to reconstruct Q on the basis of the non-Markan
matter in Mt and Lk. Allen extracts it from Mt
alone, thinking that Mk also may have drawn afew
sayings from it. Some assign a distinct source for
ch 13. Streeter considers it a document written
shortly after the fall of Jerus, incorporating a few
utterances by Jesus and itself incorporated bodily
by Mark. Other sources, oral or written, are
postulated by Bacon for smaller portions and
grouped under X. He calls the final redactor R—
not Mark but a Paulinist of a radical type.

In forming a judgment much depends upon one’s
conception of the teaching method of Jesus and the
apostles. Teaching and preaching are not synony-


mous terms. Mt sums up the early ministry in
Galilee under “teaching, preaching and _healing,’’
and gives us the substance of that teaching as it
impressed itself upon him. Mk reports less of it,
but speaks of it more frequently than either Mt
or Lk. Jesus evidently gave teaching a very large
place, and a large proportion of the time thus spent
was devoted to the special instruction of the inner
circle of disciples. The range of that instruction
was not wide. It was intensive rather than exten-
sive. He held Himself to the vital topic of the
kingdom of God. He must have gone over it again
and again. He would not hesitate to repeat in-
structions which even chosen men found it so diffi-
cult to understand. Teaching by repetition was
common then as it is now in the East. The word
“catechize’ (xarnxéw, katéché0) implies that, and
that word is used by Paul of Jewish (Rom 2 18)
and by Luke of Christian teaching (Lk 1 4). See
CatTEcuist.

The novelty in His teaching was not in method
so much as in content, authority and accompany-
ing miraculous power (Mk 1 27). Certainly He
was far removed from vain repetition. His supreme
concern was forthe spirit. Justas certainly He was
not concerned about a mere reputation for origi-
nality or for wealth and variety of resources. He
was concerned about teaching them the truth so
effectively that they would be prepared by intel-
lectual clearness, as well as spiritual sympathy, to
make it known to others. And God by His Provi-
dence, so kind to all but so often thwarted by human
self-will, was free to work His perfect work for Him
and make all things work together for the further-
ance of His purpose. Thus incidents occur, sit~
uations arise and persons of all types appear on the
scene, calling forth fresh instruction, furnishing
illustration and securing the presentation of truth
in fulness with proper balance and emphasis and
in right perspective.

Thus before His death the general character of
that kingdom, its principles and prospects, were
taught. That furnished the warp for the future
Gospels. The essence, the substance and general
form were the same for all the Twelve; but each
from the standpoint of his own individuality saw
particular aspects and was impressed with special
details. No one of them was large enough to grasp
it all, for no one was so great as the Master. And
it would be strange indeed, though perhaps not 80
strange as among us, if none of them wrote down
any of it. Ramsay, Salmon and Palmer are quite
justified in feeling that it may have been put in
writing before the death of Jesus. It may well be
that Matthew wrote it as it lay in his mind, giving
us substantially Harnack’s Q. John and James
may have done the same and furnished Luke his
main special source. But whether it was written
down then or not, the main fact to be noted is that
it was lodged in their minds, and that the substance
was, and the details through mutual conference
increasingly became, their common _ possession.
They did not understand it all—His rising from the
dead, for example. But the words were lodged in
memory, and subsequent events made their meaning


clear.

Then follow the great events of His death and
resurrection, and for forty days in frequent appear-
ances He taught them: the things concerning the
kingdom of God and expounded in all the Scriptures
the things concerning Himself, esp. the necessity
of His death and resurrection. These furnished the
woof of the future Gospels. But even yet they are
not equipped for their task. So He promises them
His Spirit, a main part of whose work will be to
bring to their remembrance all He had said, to lead
them into all the truth, and show them things to


Mark, Gospel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1992


come. When He has come they will be ready to
witness in power. :

The apostles’ conception of their task is indicated
in some measure by Peter when he insisted that au
indispensable qualification in a successor to Judas
was that he must have been with them from the
beginning to the end of Christ’s ministry, and so
be conversant with His words and deeds. From the
day of Peutecost onward they gave themselves
preéminently to teaching. The thousands con-
verted on that day continued in the teaching of the
apostles. Wheu the trouble broke out between
Hebrews and Hellenists, the Seven were appointed
because the apostles could not leave the word of
God to serve tables. The urgency of this business
may have been one reason why they stayed in
Jerus when persecution scattered so many of the
church (Acts 8 2). They were thus in close touch
for years, not only through the struggle between
Hebrews and Hellenists, but until the admission of
the gentile Cornelius and his friends by Peter had
been solemnly ratified by the church in Jerus and
possibly until the Council had declared against the
contention that circumcision was necessary for sal-
vation. During these years they had every oppor-
tunity for mutual conference, and the vital im-
portance of the questions that arose would compel
them to avail themselves of such opportunities.
Their martyr-like devotion to Jesus would make
them quick to challenge anything that might seem
a misrepresentation of His teaching. The Acts
account of their discussions at great crises proves
that conclusively. To their success in training
others and the accuracy of the body of catachetical
instruction Luke pays fine tribute when he speaks
of the ‘‘certainty” or undoubted truth of it (Lk 1 4),
Thus Jesus’ post-resurrection expositions, the ex-
perience of the years and the guidance of the Spirit
are the source and explanation of the apostolic
presentation of the gospel.


Of that company Peter was the recognized leader, and
did more than any other to determine the mold into
which at least the post-resurrection teachings were Cast.
Luke tells us of many attempts torecord them. He him-
self in his brief reports of Peter's addresses sketches their
broad outlines. ark, at the request of Rom Christians
and with Peter's approval, undertook to give an adequate
account. Two special facts influenced the result—one,
the character of the people for whom he wrote; the
other, the existence (as we may assume) of Matthew's Q.
It would be natural for him to supplement rather than
duplicate that apostolic summary. Moreover, since Q
presented mainly the ethical or law side of Christianity
the supplement would naturally present the gospel side
of It—and so become its complement—-while at the same
time this presentation and the needs of the people for
whom he specially writes make it necessary to add
something from the body of catechetical material, oral
or written, not included in Q, as his frequent «ai
éreyev, kai élegen, seems to imply (Buckley, 152 ff).
So Mk's is ‘‘the beginning of the Gospel.” e Intro-
duces Jesus in the act of symbolically devoting Himself
to that death for our sins and rising again, which consti-
tutes the gospel and then entering upon His ministry
hy calling upon the people to ‘‘repent and believe in the
gospel.” The book is written from the standpoint of
the resurrection, and gives the story of the passion and
of the ministry in a perenne thus determined. About
the same time it may be, Matthew, writing for Jewish
Christians, combines this gospel side of the teaching with
his own Q side of it, adding from the common stock or
abridging as his purpose might suggest or space might
demand. Later e does a similar service for Gr
Christians (cf Harnack, The Twofold Gospel in the NT).


The only serious question about the integrity
of the book concerns the last twelve vs, for a dis-
cussion of which see under III above. Some have
suggested that 1 1-13 is akin to 16 9-20, and may
have been added by the same hand. But while
vocabulary and connection are main arguments
agaiust the genuineness of the latter, in both these
respects 1 1-13 is bound up with the main body of
the book. Nor is there sufficient reason for deny-
ing ch 13 as a true report of what Jesus said.


Wendling’s theory of three strata assignable to three
different writers—historian, poet, and theologian—
is quite overdrawn. Barring the closing verscs,
there is nothing which can possibly demand any-
thing more than an earlier and a later edition by
Mark himself, and the strongest point in favor of
that is Luke’s omission of 6 45—8 26. But Haw-
kins gives other reasons for that.

VII. Date and Place of Composition.— Ancient
testimony is sharply divided. The Paschal Chrouni-
cle puts it in 40 AD, and many MSS, both uncial
and cursive (Harnack, Chronologie, 70, 124) 10 or 12
years after the Ascension. These Swete sets aside
as due to the mistaken tradition that Peter began
work in Rome in the 2d year of Claudius (42 AD).
Similarly he would set aside the opinion of Chrysos-
tom (which has some MSS subscriptions to support
it) that it was written in Alexandria, as an error
growing out of the statement of Eusebius (H#, II,
16) that Mark went to Egypt and preached there
the Gospel he composed. This he does in deference
to the strong body of evidence that it was written
in Rome about the time of Peter’s death. Still
there remains a discrepancy between Irenaeus, as
commonly understood, and the other Fathers. For,
so understood, Irenaeus places it after the death of
Peter, whereas Jerome, Epiphanius, Origen and
Clement of Alexandria clearly place it within Peter’s
lifetime. But it does not seem necessary so to
understand Irenaeus. It may be that it was com-
posed while Peter was living, but only published
after his death. Christophorson (1570 AD) had
suggested that and supported it by the conjectural
emendation of édecw, ékdosin, ‘‘surrendering,”
‘Gmprisonment,’’ for eoder, éxedon, in Irenaeus.
Grabe, Mill and others thought Irenaeus referred,
not to Peter’s death, but to his departure from
Rome on further missionary tours. But if we take
exodon in that sense, it is better to understand by
it departure from Pal or Syria, rather than from
Rome. Irenaeus’ statement that the apostles were
now fully furnished for the work of evangelization
(Adv. Haer., iii.1) certainly seems to imply that they
were now ready to leave Pal; and his next statement
is that, Matthew _and Mark wrote their respective
Gospels. And Eusebius (HE, III, 24) states ex-
plicitly that, Matthew committed his Gospel to writ-
ing ‘‘when he was about” to leave Pal ‘to go to other
peoples.” The same may very possibly be true of
Mark. If the fact. be that Romans in Caesarea or
Antioch made the request of Mark, we can easily
understand how, by the time of Irenaeus, the whole
incident might be transferred to Rome.

If this view be adopted, the date would probably
not_be before the council at Jerus and the events
of Gal 2 11 ff. Itis true the NT hints are that the
apostles had left Jerus before that, but that they had
gone beyond Syria is not likely. At any rate, at
the time of the clash at Antioch they had not be-
come so clear on the question touching Jews and
Gentiles in the church as to be “fully furnished
for the work of universal evangelization.” But
may it not be that Paul’s strong statement of the


_ Seriousness of their error actually did setile those


questions in the minds of the leaders? If so, and
if, with new vision and ardor, they turn to the work
of world-wide evangelism, that would be a natural
and worthy occasion for the composition of the
Gospel. The place may be Caesarea or Antioch,
and the date not earlier than 50 AD. ‘This is the
simplest synthesis of the ancient testimony. Mod-
ern opinion as to date has ranged more widely than
the ancient. Baur and Strauss were compelled
by their tendency and mythical theories to place it
in the 2d cent. Recent criticism tends strongly to
a date in the sixties of the 1st cent., and more com-
monly the later sixties. This is based partly on


1993


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mark, Gospel


hints in the Gospel itself, partly on its relation to laeeeraie did not lack material. Each of the


Mt and Lk. The hints usually adduced are 2 26
and 13. The former, representing the temple as
still standing, has force only if the relative clause
be Mark’s explanatory addition. Ch 13 has more
force because, if Jerus had already fallen, we might
expect some recognition of the fact.


_ Pwo other slight hints may be mentioned. The omis-
sion by the synoptists of the raislng of Lazarus, and of
the name of Mary in connection wlth the auolnting of
Jesus argues an early date when mentlou of them might
have been unpleasant for the Renily When the Fourth
Gospel was published, they may have been no ionger
alive. The description of John as the brother of James
(5 37) may also take us back to an early date when
James was the more honored of the two brothers—
though the unusual order of the names may be due, as
Zahn thinks, to the author's instinctively distinguishing
that John from himself.


The relation of Mk to Mt and Lk is important
if the very widespread conviction of the priority
of Mk be true. For the most likely date for Acts
is 62 AD, as suggested by the mention of Paul’s
two years’ residence in Rome, and Luke’s Gospel
is earlier than the Acts. It may well have been
written at Caesarea about 60 AD; that again throws
Mk back into the fifties.


The great objection to so early a date is the amount
of detail given of the destructlon of Jerus. Abbott and
others have marshaled numerous other objections, but
they have very little weight—most of them indced are
puerile. The real crux is that to accept an earlier date
than 70 AD is to admit predictive prophecy. Yet to
deuy that, esp. for a believer in Christ, is an unwarranted

re-judgment, and even so far to reduce it as to deny
its presence in this passage is to charge Luke—a con-
fessedly careful historian—with ascribing to Jesus stato-
ments which He never made.

The eagerness to date Mt not earlier than 70 is due
to the same feeling. But the problem here is compli-


cated by the word ‘‘immediately” (24 29). Some
regard that as proof positive that it must have been
written before the destruction of Jerus. Others (e.g.


Allen and Plummer) feel that it absolutely forbids a
date much later than 70 AD, and consider 75 AD as a
limit. But is it not possible that by ect@éws, euthéds
(Mot wapexpqua, parachréma), Christ, speaking as a
prophet, may have meant no more than that the next
eat event comparable with the epochal overthrow of
Sadaien would be His own return and that the Divine
urpose marches straight on from the one to the other?
he NT nowhere says that the second advent would
take place within that generation. See below under
“Eschatology.’’ There is therefore no sufficient reason
in the Olivet discourse for dating Lk or Mt later than
60 AD, and if Mk is earlier, it goes back into the fifties.
VIN, Historicity.—Older rationalists, like Paul-
us, not denying Mark’s authorship, regarded the
miraculous elements as misconceptions of actual
events. Strauss, regarding these as mythical, was
compelled to postulate a 2d-cent. date. When,
however, the date was pushed back to the neighbor-
hood of 70 AD, the historicity was felt to be largely
established. But recently the theory of “prag-
matic values’’ has been developed; Bacon thus states
it: “The key to all genuinely scientific appreciation
of Bib. narrative . . . . is the recognition of motive.
The motive... . is never strictly historical but
always aetiological and_ frequently apologetic.
.... The evangelic tradition consists of so and
so many anecdotes, told and retold for the pur-
pose of explaining or defending beliefs and practices
of the contemporary church’? (Modern Comm., Be-
ginnings of Gospel Story, 9). Bacon works out the
method with the result that Mk is charged again
and again with historical and other blunders. ‘This
view, like Baur’s tendency-theory, has elements of
truth. One is that the vocabulary of a later day
may be a sort of necessary tr of the original expres-
sion. But tr is neither invention nor perversion.
The other is that each author has his purpose, but
that simply determines his selection and arrange-
ment of material; it neither creates nor misrepre-
gents it if the author be honest and well informed.
The word “selection” is advisedly chosen. The


Twelve had pcrsoual knowledge beyond the con-
tent of Q or of Mk. These represent the central
orb-—the one the ethical, the other the evangelic
side of it—but there were rays of exceeding bright-
ness radiating from it in all directions. Luke’s
introduction and John’s explicit declaration attest
that fact. And neither John nor Luke throws
the slightest suspicion on the reliability of the
material they did not use. There is no sufficient
reason for charging them with misstating the facts
to make a point. Bacon seems to trust any other
aucient writers or even his own imagination rather
than the evangelists. The test becomes alto-
gether too subjective. Yet since Christianity is a
historical revelation, perversion of history may
become perversion of most vital religious teaching.
In the last analysis, the critic undertakes to decide
just what Jesus could or could not have done or
said. The utter uncertainty of the result is seen
by a comparison of Schmiedel and Bacon. The
former is sure that the cry “My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me” is one of the very few gen-
uine sayings of Jesus; Bacon is equally sure that
Jesus could not have uttered it. Bacon also charges
Mark with “immoral ecrudity” because in 10 45
he reports Jesus as saying that He came “‘to give
his life a ransom for [dévrl, anti] many.”’ Thus on
two most vital matters he charges the evangelists
with error because they run counter to his own reli-
gious opiuions.

Plummer’s remark is just (Comm. on Mt, xxxiii):
“To decide a priori that Deity cannot become in-
carnate, or that incarnate Deity must exhibit such
and such characteristics, is neither true philosophy
nor scientific criticism.” A. T. Robertson
(“Mt”? in Bible for Home and School, 26): “The
closer we get to the historic Jesus the surer we feel
that He lived and wrought as He is reported in the
Synoptic Gospels.” The evangelists had oppor-
tunities to know the facts such as we have not.
The whole method of their training was such as to
secure accuracy. ‘They support each other. They
have given us sketches of unparalleled beauty,
vigor and power, and have portrayed for us a Persou
moving among men absolutely without sin—a
standing miracle. If we cannot trust them for the
facts, there is little hope of ever getting at the
facts at all.

IX. Purpose and Plan.—Mark’s purpose was to
write down the Gospel as Peter had presented it to

Romans, so say the Fathers, at least,
1. The and internal evidence supports them.
Gospel for In any additions made by himself he
Romans had the same persons in mind. That

the Gospel was for Gentiles can be
secn (a) from the tr of the Aram. expressions in
3 17 (Boanerges), 5 41 (Talitha cumi), 7 11 (Cor-
ban), 10 46 (Bartimaeus), 14 36 (Abba), 15 22 (Gol-
gotha); (b) in the explanation of Jewish customs in
14 12 and 15 42; (c) from the fact that the Law is
not mentioned and the OT is only once quoted iu
Mark’s own narrative; (d) the gentile sections, esp.
in chs 6-8.

That it was for Romans is seen in (a) the ex-
planation of a Gr term by a Lat in 12 42; (6) the
preponderauce of works of power, the emphasis
on authority (2 10), patience and heroic endurance
(10 17 ff); (¢) 10 12 which forbids a practice that
was not Jewish but Rom. Those who believe it
was written at Rome find further hints in the men-
tion of Rufus (15 21; cf Rom 16 13) and the re-
semblance between 7 1-23 and Rom 14. The Rom
centurion’s remark (15 39) is the Q.E.D. of the
author, and bears the same relation to Mark’s pur-
pose as Jn 20 31 to John’s.

But one cannot escape the feeling that we have


Mark, Gospel
Market


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1994


in this Gospel the antitype of the Servant of Je-
hovah. A. B. Davidson (OT Theol., 365) tells us
that there are two great figures around which Isaiah’s
thoughts gather—the King and the Servant. The
former rises ‘to the unsurpassable height of ‘God
with us,’ ‘mighty God,’ teaching that in Him God
shall be wholly present with His people.” The
Servant is the other. The former is depicted in
Mt, who also identifies Him with the Servant (12
18 f); the latter by Mk who identifies Him with the
Messianic King (11 10; 14 62). Davidson sum-
marizes the description of the Servant: ‘‘(1) He is
God’s chosen; (2) He has a mission to establish
judgment on the earth. ... . The word is His in-
strument and the Lord is in the Word, or rather
He Himself is the impersonation of it; (3) His en-
dowment is the Spirit and an invincible faith; (4)
There is in Him a marvelous combination of great-
ness and lowliness; (5) There are inevitable suffer-
ings—bearing the penalty of others’ sins; (6) He
thus redeems Israel and brings light to the Gentiles.
(7) Israel’s repentance and restoration precede that
broader blessing.” It is not strange that this Serv-
ant-conception—this remarkable blend of strength
and submission, achieving victory through apparent
defeat—should appeal to Peter. He was himself
an ardent, whole-souled man who knew both defeat
and victory. Moreover, he himself had hired serv-
ants (Mk 1 20), and now for years had been a
servant of Christ (cf Acts 4 29). That it did
appeal to him and became familar to the early
Christians can be seen from Acts 3 13 and 4 30.
In his First Ep. he has 17 references to Isaiah, 9 of
which belong to the second part. Temperamentally
Mark seems to have been like Peter. And his ex-
perience in a wealthy home where servants were
kept (Acts 12 13), and as himself hupérétés of
apostles in Christian service, fitted him both to
appreciate and record the character and doings of the
perfect servant—the Servant of Jeh. For Rom
Christiaus that heroic figure would have a peculiar
fascination.
The plan of the Gospel seems to have been in-
fluenced by this conception. Christ’s kingship
was apprehended by the Twelve at a
2. Plan of comparatively early date. It was
the Gospel not until after the resurrection, when
Jesus opened to them the Scriptures,
that they saw Him as the Suffering Servant of Isa
58. That gave Peter his gospel as we have already
seen, and at the same time the general lines of its
presentation. We see it sketched for Romans in
Acts 10. That sketch is filled in for us by Mark.
So we have the following analysis:


Title: 1 1


1. The Baptist preparing the way: 1] 2-8; cfIsa 40 3 f.


2. Devotement of Jesus to death for us and endowment
by the Spirit: 1 9-13; cf Isa 42 1 ff.
3. His greatness—the Galilean Ministry: 1 14—8 30;
cf Isa 43—52 12. ;
(1) In the synagogue: period of popular favor lead-
ing to break with Pharisaic Judaism: 1 14—3 6.
(2) Outside the synagogue: paraholic teaching of the
multitude, choice and training of the Twelve and
their Great Confession: 3 7 ff—8 30.
4. His lowliness—mainly beyond Galilee: 8 31—15; cf
Isa 52 13—53 9.
qd) pone north—announcement of death: § 31—


(2) On the way to Jerus and the cross——through Gali-
Ise (9 30-50), Peraea (10 1-45), Judaea (10 46-


(3) The triumphal entry into Jerus (11 1-11).

(4) In Jerus and vicinity—opposed hy the leaders
(11 12—12 44); foretelling their doom (18);
preparing for death (14 1-42); betrayed, con-
demned, crucified and buried in a rich man's
tomb (14 43—15).

5. His victory—the resurrection: Ch 16: cf Isa 53
10-12. What follows in Isa is taken up in Acts, for
the first part of which Peter or Mark may have been
Luke’s main source.

Generally speaking the plan is chronological, but it is


plain that the material is sometimes grouped according
to subject-matter.

This Servant-conception may also be the real
explanation of some of the striking features of this
Gospel, e.g. the absence of a genealogy and any
record of His early life; the frequent use of the
word “straightway’’; the predominance of deeds;
the Son’s not knowing the day (13 32); and the
abrupt ending at 16 8 (see III).

X. Leading Doctrines.—The main one, naturally,
is the Person of Christ. The thesis is that He is
Messiah, Son of God, Author (Source)
of thegospel. The first half ofthe book
closes with the disciples’ confession of
His Messiahship; the second, with the
supreme demonstration that He is Son of God.
Introductory to each is the Father’s declaration of
Him as His Beloved Son (1 11; 9 7). That the
sonship is unique is indicated in 12 6 and 13 32.
At the same time He is the Son of Man—true man
(4 38; 8 5; 14 34); ideal man as absolutely obe-
dient to God (10 40; 14 36), and Head of humanity
(2 10.28), their rightful Messiah or King (1 1; 14
62)—yet Servant of all (10 44f); David's Son and
David’s Lord (12 37). The unique Sonship is the
final explanation of all else, His power, His knowl-
edge of both present (2 5.8; 8 17) and future (8 31;
10 39; 14 27; 13), superiority to all men, whether
friends (1 7; 9 3 ff) or foes (12 34), and to super-
human beings, whether good (13 32) or evil (1 13.
32; 3 27).

The Father speaks in 1 11; 9 7; is spoken of in
13 32; and spoken to in 14 36. The usual dis-

tinction between His fatherhood in
2. The relation to Christ and in relation to us
Trinity is seen in 11 25; 126 and 13 32.

The Spirit is mentioned in 1 8.10.12;
3 29 and 13 11. The last passage especially im-
plies His personality.

As to salvation, the Son is God's final messenger
(12 6); He gives His life a ransom instead of many

(10 45); Hisbloodshedisthus theblood


1. Person
of Christ


3. Salva- of the covenant (14 24); that involves
tion for Him death in the fullest sense, in-

cluding rupture of fellowship with God
(15 34). From the outset He knew what was


before Him—only so can His baptism be explained
(1 5.11; cf 2 20); but the horror of it was upon
Him, esp. from the transfiguration onward (10 32;
14 33-36); that was the Divine provision for sal-
vation: He gave His life (10 45). The human
condition is repentance and faith (115; 2 5;
5 34.36; 6 5; 9 23; 16 16), though He bestows
lesser blessings apart from personal faith (1 23-26
5 1-20; 6 35-43). The power of faith, within the
will of God, is limitless (11 25); faith leads to doing
the will of God, and only such as do His will are
Christ’s true kindred (3 35). Salvation is possible
for Gentile as well as Jew (7 24-30).
_ The eschatology of this Gospel is found chiefly
in 8 349 land 13. In 9 1 we have a prediction
of the overthrow of Jerus which is here
4. Escha- given as a type and proof of His final
tology ~ coming for judgment and reward which
He has had in mind in the preceding
verses. Ch 13 is a development of this—the de-
struction of Jerus bemg meant in vs 5-23 and 28-
31, the final coming in vs 24-27 and 32. The dis-
tinction is clearly marked by the pronouns radra,
tatita, and éxelvys, ekeings, in vs 30 and 32 (cf Mt
24 34.36). In each passage (9 1; 13 30) the fall
of Jerus is definitely fixed as toward the close of that
generation; the time of the latter is known only to
the Father (13 32). Between Christ’s earthly
life and the Second Coming He is seated at the right
hand of God (12 36; 16 19). The resurrection
which He predicted for Himself (8 31; 9 31; 10


1995


84) and which actually took place (ch 16), He affirms
for others also (12 24-27).


Lrrnraturs.—The works marked with the asterlsk are

apecially commended; for very full list see Moffat's
‘ntro.

Commentaries: Fritzsche, 1880; Olshausen, trd 1863;
J. A. Alexander, 1863; Lange, trd 1866; Meyer,* 1866,
Amer. ed, 1884; Cook, Speaker's Comm., 1878; Plumptre,
Ellicott's, 1879; Riddle, Schaff’s, 1879; W. N. Clarke,
Amer. Comm., 1881; Lindsay, 1883; Broadus,* 1881 and
1905; Morison, *1889; H. G. Holtzmann?, 1901; Maclean,
Cambridge Bible, 1893; Gould, ICC, 1896; Bruce,* Fzpos
Gr Test., 1897; B. Welss, Meyer, 1901; Menzies, The
Earliest Gospel, 1901; Salmond, Century Bible; Wellhauson?,
1909; Swete,* 1908; Bacon, The Beginnings of Gospel
Story, 1909; Wohlenberg, Zahn's Series, Das Evangelium
des Markus, 1910. For the earlier see Swete.

Introduction: Eichhorn, 1827; Credner, 1836;
Schleiermacher, 1845; De Wette, 1860; Bleek, 1866,
trd 1883; Reuss, 1874, trd 1884; B. Weiss.* 2ded, trd


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mark, Gospel
Market


above, and in HDB, II, 284 ff; Turner,* '' Chronology of
NT,” HDB, I, 403 ff; J. J. Scott,* The Making of the
Gospels, 1905; Burkitt,* Gospel History and Its Trans-
mission, 1906; Salmon, Human Element in the Gospels,
1907; Harnack,* Gesch. der altchristl. Lit., I, 1893; II,
2d ed, 1904; Beitrdge zur Hinleitung in das NT, 4 vols,
trd In ‘‘Crown Theol. Lib.," Luke the Physictan, 1907;
The Sayings of Jesus, 1908; The Acts of the Apostles,
1909; The Date of the Acts and of the Syn. Gospels, 1911;
Montefore, The Synoptic Gospels, 1909; Hawkins, *
Horae Synopticae, 2d ed, 1909; Denney,* Jesus and the
Gospel; Cambridge Biblical Hssays,* ed by _Swete, 1909;
Oxford Studies in the Syn. Problem,* ed by Sanday, 1911;
Salmond,* HDB, III, 248 ff; Maclean,* DCG, 1. 1201;
Petrie, Growth of Gospels Shown by Structural Criticism,
1910; Buckley,* Intro to Synoptic Problem, 1912.

The Language: Dalman,* Words of Jesus, tr4 1909;


Deissmann,* Bible Studies, tr? 1901; Light from_the
Ancient Hast, tri 1910; Allen, Hzpos, I, ET, 1902;
Marshall, Hxzpos, 1891-94; Wellhausen,* Hinl; Hatch,
Essays in Bib. Gr, 1889; Swete and Hawkins.


Bazaar av JAPFA.


1886; 3d ed, 1897; H. J. Holtzmann,* 1892; Th. Zahn,*
1897, trd 1909; Godet, 1899; Jiilicher®, 1906; von Soden,
1905, tr4 1906; Wendling, Ur- Marcus, 1905; A. Miiller,
Geschichtskerne in den Evang., 1905; Wrede, Origin of NT
Scriptures, 1907, tr’ 1909; Horne, 1875; Westcott,* Intro
to Study of Gospels, 7th ed, 1888, and The Canon, 6thed,
1889; Salmon,* 1897; Adeney, 1899; Bacon, 1900;
Burton, 1904; Moffat,* Historical NT, 1901;
Lit. of NT, 1911; Peake, 1909; Gregory, Hini, 1909;
Charteris, Canonicity, 1881; The NT Scriptures,* 1882,
and popular Intros by Plumptre, 1883; Lumby, 1383;
Kerr, 1892: McClymont,* 1893; Dods,* 1894; Lightfoot,
Essays on the Work Entitled Supernatural Religion, 1889;
Sanday,* Gospels in the 2d Cent., 1874; Stanton,* Gospels
as Historical Documents, I, 1903; IT, 1909.

Mark and the Synoptic Problem: Rushbrooke,
Synopticon, 1880; Wright,* Synopsis of the Gospels in
Greek, 3d ed, 1906; Composition of the Four Gospels,
1890; Some NT Problems, 1898; H. J. Holtzmann, Die
synopt. Evang., 1863; Weizsdcker, Untersuch. aber die
evang. Gesch., 2d ed, 1901; Wernle, Die synopt. Frage,
1899; Loisy, Les év. syn., 1908; Wellhausen, Hinl in
die drei ersten _Hvang., 1905; Blass, Origin and Char. of
Our Gospels, ET, xviii; Norton, Internal Ewid. of the
Genuineness of the Gospels, 1847; F. H. Woods, Stud.
Bibl., II, 594; Palmer,* Gospel Problems and Their
Solutton, 1899; J. A. Robinson,* The Study of the Gos-
els, 1902; Gloag,* Intro to the Synoptte Gospels;

urton,* Some Principles of Lit. Criticism and Their
Application to the Synoptic Problem, 1904; Stanton,* as


Text: WH, Intro to NT in Gr; Salmon, Intro, ch ix;
Gregory, Text and Canon; Morison* and Swete,* in
Comm.; Burgon, Last Twelve Verses.

Special: Schweizer,* Quest of the Historical Jesus,
1910; Sanday, Life of Christ in Recent Research; Exmmet,
Eschatological Question in the Gospels, 1911; Hogg,
Christ's Message of the Kingdom, 1911; Forbes, Phe
Servant of the Lord, 1890; Davidson, OT Theology.

. H. Farmer

MARKET, miar’ket, MARKETPLACE, miar’ket-
plas, MART, mart (1992, ma‘érabh, “99, shar;
dyopd, agord): (1) Ma‘drabh, from a root meaning
“trading”? and hence goods exchanged, and so
“merchandise” in RV, “market” in AV, occurs only
in Ezk 27 13.17.19.25, and is tr? correctly ‘‘mer-
chandise” in both ERV and ARV. (2) Séhar
means a “trading emporium,” hence mart, and mer-
chandise. It occurs only in Isa 23 3 (see Mer-
CHANDISE). (3) Agora, from .root meaning ‘‘to
collect,’ means a “town meeting-place,” ‘‘resort of
the people,” so a place where the public generally
met to exchange views and wares. No doubt, the
central place soon filling up, the people thronged
the adjoining streets, and so in time each street


Market, Sheep
Marriage


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


1996


thus used came to be called agora, ‘‘marketplace’’;
tr? “marketplace[s]” in 1 Esd 2 18; Tob 2 3; Mt
11 16; 20 3; 23 7; Mk 6 56; 7 4; 12 38; Lk
7 32; 11 43; 20 46; Acts 16 19; 17 17; “Market
of Appius” in Acts 28 15 means, probably, “street”’
(see Apri Forum).

The marketplace in NT times was the public
open space, either simple or ornate, in town, city
or country, where (Mk 6 56) the people congre-
gated, not only for exchange of merchandise, but for
one or more of the following purposes: (1) a place
where the children came together to sing, dance and
play, a “back-to-date’’? municipal recreation center
(Mt 11 16.17; Lk 7 32); (2) a place for loafers, a
sort of ancient, irresponsible labor bureau where
the out-of-work idler waited the coming of an em-


Going to Market.


ployer with whom he might bargain for his services,
usually by the day (Mt 20 1-16); (8) a place
where the proud pretender could parade in long
robes and get public recognition, ‘“‘salutations in the
market-places,”’ eg. the scribes and Pharisees
against whom Jesus emphatically warns His dis-
ciples (Mt 23 3-7; Mk 12 38; Lk 11 48; 20 46);
(4) a place where the sick were brought for treat-
ment, the poor man’s sanatorium, a municipal
hospital; Jesus “‘who went about doing good” often
found His opportunity there (Mk 6 56); (5) a
place of preliminary hearing in trials, where the
accused might be brought before rulers who were
present at the time, e.g. Paul and Silas at Philippi
(Acts 16 19); (6) a place for religious and prob-
ably political or philosophical discussion (gossip
also), a forum, a free-speech throne; no doubt often
used by the early apostles not only as a place of
proclaiming some truth of the new religion but also
a place of advertisement for a coming synagogue
service, e.g. Paul in Athens (Acts 17 17).

Wisd 16 12 (AV) has ‘‘They counted... our time
here a market for gain,” RV “a gainful fair,’ m
“a keeping of festival,’’ Gr ravnyupicpds, panéguris-
més, “an assembly of all.” Such assemblies offered
particular opportunitics for business dealings.

Wituiam Epwarp Rarrety

MARKET, SHEEP. See Samer Market.


MARMOTH, mar’moth, mar’moth (B, Mappoot,
Marmothi, A, Mappaol, Marmathi): ‘The priest
the son of Urias’”: to whom were committed the
silver and gold for the temple by the returning exiles
(1 Esd 8 62)=‘‘Meremoth” in || Ezr 8 33.


MAROTH, mi‘roth, ma’roth (MIVA, marath;
[katoikotca] oSivas, [katoikowisa] oddénas): An


unknown town probably in the Phili plain, named
by Micah (1 12).


MARRIAGE, mar’ij:
Introductory
Scope and Viewpoint of the Present Article
1. Marriage among the Hebrews
2. Betrothal the First Formal Part
3. Wedding Ceremonies
4, Jesus’ Sanction of the Institution
5. His Teaching concerning Divorce
LITERATURE


It would be interesting to study marriage hiologically
and sociologically, to get the far and near historical and
social background of it as an institution, esp. as it existed
among the aricient Jews, and as it figures in the teaching
of Jesus as recorded in the NT. For, like all social in-
stitutions, marriage, and the family which is the out-
come of marriage, must be judged, not by its status at
any particular time, but in the light of its history. Such
a study of it would raise a host of related historic ques-
tions, e.g. What was its origin? What part has it

jayed in the evolution and civilization of the race?

hat social functions has it performed?. And then, as

a sequel, Can the services it has rendered to civilization
and progress be performed or secured in any other way ?
This, indeed, would call for us to go hack even farther—
to try to discover the psychology of the institution and
its history, the beliefs from which it has sprung and by
which it has survived so long. This were a task well
worth while and amply justified by much of the thinking
of our time; for, as one of the three social institutions
that support the much challenged form and fabric of
modern civilization, marriage, private property and the
state, its continued existence, in present form at least, is
a matter of serious discussion and its abolition, along
with the other two, is confidently prophesied. ‘‘ Mar-
riage, as at present understood, is an arrangement most
closely associated with the existing social status and
stands or falls with it’’ (Bebel, Socialism and Sex, 199,
Reeves, London; The Coéperative Commonwealth in Its
Outline, Gronlund, 224). But such a task is entirely
outside of and heyond the purpose of this article.

_ Neither the Bible in general, nor Jesus in par-
ticular, treats of the family from the point of view
of the historian or the sociologist, but solely from
that of the teacher of religion and morals. In
short, their point of view is theological, rather than
sociological. Moses and the prophets, no less than
Jesus and His apostles, accepted marriage as an
existing institution which gave rise to certain prac-
tical, ethical questions, and they dealt with it ac-
cordingly. There is nothing in the record of the
teachings of Jesus and of His apostles to indicate
that they gave to marriage any new social content,
custom or sanction. They simply accepted it as
it existed in the conventionalized civilization of the
Jews of their day and used it and the customs con-
nected with it for ethical or illustrative purposes.
One exception is to be made to this general state-
ment, viz. that Jesus granted that because of the
exigencies of the social development Moses had
modified it to the extent of permitting and regu-
lating divorce, clearly indicating, however, at the
same time, that He regarded such modification as
out of harmony with the institution as at first given
to mankind. According to the original Divine
purpose it was monogamous, and any form of polyg-
amy, and apparently of divorce, was excluded by
the Divine idea and purpose. The treatment of
the subject here, therefore, will be limited as follows:
Marriage among the Ancient Hebrews and Other
Semites; Betrothal as the First Formal Part of the
Transaction; Wedding Ceremonies Connected with
Marriage, esp. as Reflected in the NT; and Jesus’
Sanction and Use of the Institution, Teaching
concerning Divorce, etc.

_.With the Hebrews married life was the normal
life. Any exception called for apology and ex-

__ Planation. “Any Jew who has not

1, Marriage a wife is no man’ (Talmud). It was
among the regarded as awaiting everyone on
Hebrews reaching maturity; and sexual ma-
turity comes much earlier indeed in

the East than with us in the West—in what we
call childhood. The ancient Hebrews, in common


1997


with all Orientals, regarded the family as the social
unit. In this their view of it coincides with that
of modern sociologists. Of the three great events
in the family life, birth, marriage and death, mar-
riage was regarded as the most important. It was
astep that led to the gravest tribal and family con-
sequences. In case of a daughter, if she should
prove unsatisfactory to her husband, she would
likely be returned to the ancestral home, discarded
and discredited, and there would be almost inevi-
tably a feeling of injustice engendered on one side,
and a sense of mutual irritation between the families
(Jgs 14 20; 18 18 19). If she failed to pass
muster with her mother-in-law she would just as
certainly have to go, and the results would be much
the same (cf customs in China). It was a matter
affecting the whole circle of relatives, and pos-


Modern Arab Marriage Procession.


sibiy tribal amity as well. It was natural and
deemed necessary, therefore, that the selection of
the wife and the arrangement of all contractual
and financial matters connected with it should be
decided upon by the parents or guardians of the
couple involved. Though the consent of the parties
was sometimes sought (Gen 24 8) and romantic
attachments were not unknown (Gen 29 20; 34 3;
Jgs 14 1; 1 S 18 20), the girl or woman in the
case was not currently thought of as having a per-
sonal existence at her own disposal. She was simply
a passive unit in the family under the protection and
supreme control of father or brothers. In marriage,
she was practically the chattel, the purchased pos-
session and personal property of her husband, who
was her ba‘al or master (Hos 2 16), she herself
being b¢alah (Isa 62 4). The control, however,
was not always absolute (Gen 26 34; Ex 2 21).

The bargaining instinct, so dominant among
Orientals then as now, played a large part in the
transaction. In idea the family was a little king-
dom of which the father was the king, or absolute
ruler. There are many indications, not only that
the family was the unit from which national coher-
ence was derived, but that this unit was perpetuated
through the supremacy of the oldest male. Thus
society became patriarchal, and this is the key of
the ancient history of the family and the nation.
Through the expansion of the family group was
evolved in turn the clan, the tribe, the nation, and
the authority of the father became in turn that of the
chief, the ruler, and the king. The Oriental cannot
conceive, indeed, of any band, or clan, or company
without a “father,” even though there be no kith
or kinship involved in the matter. The “father”
in their thought, too, was God’s representative, and
as such he was simply carrying out God’s purpose,
for instance, in selecting a bride for his son, or giving
the bride to be married to the son of another. This


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Market, Sheep
Marriage


is as true of the far East as of the near East today.
Accordingly, as a rule, the young people simply
acquiesced, without question or complaint, in what
was thus done for them, accepting it as though God
had done it directly. Accordingly, too, the family
and tribal loyalty overshadowed love-making and
patriotism, in the larger sense. Out of this idea
of the solidarity and selectness of the tribe and
family springs the overmastering desire of the
Oriental for progeny, and for the conservation of
the family or the tribe at any cost. Hence the
feuds, bloody and bitter, that persist between this
family or tribe and another that has in any way
violated this sacred law.
_ Traces of what is known as beena marriage are found
in the OT, e.g. that of Jacob, where Laban claims
Jacob's wives and children as his own (Gen $1 31.43),
and that of Moscs (Ex 2 21; 4 18). This is that form
of marriagein which the husband is incorporated into the
wife's tribe, the children belonging to her tribe and descent
being reckoned on her side (cf W. Robertson Smith, Kin-
ship and Marriage in Early Arabia, 94). In Samson's case
we seem to have an instance of what is known among
Arabs as cadkat marriage (from cadek, gift’), the kid
here being the customary cadek (Jgs 14; 15 1; 16 4).
There is no hint that he meant to take his wife home.
It is differentiated from prostitution in that no disgrace
is attached to it and the children are recognized as legiti-
mate by the tribe. Such marriages make it easier to un-
derstand the existence of the matriarchate, or the custom
of reckoning the descent of children and property through
the mothers. The influence of polygamy would work
in the same direction, subdividing the family into smaller
groups connected with the several wives. ‘There is, how-
ever, no clear evidence in the OT of polyandry (a plural-
ity of husbands), though the Levirate marriage isregarded
by some as a survival of it. In other words, polygamy
among the Hebrews seems to have been confined to polyg-
yny (a plurality of wives). It is easy to trace its chief
canses: (1) desire for a numerous offspring (‘‘ May his
tribe increase!"'); (2) barrenness of first wife (asin Abra-
ham's case); (3) advantages offered by marital alliances
(e.g. Solomon); (4) the custom of making wives of cap-
tives taken in war (cf Ps 45 3.9); (5) slavery, which as
it existed in the Orient almost implied it.
Betrothal with the ancient Hebrews was of a more
formal and far more binding nature than the ‘‘en-
gagement” is with us. Indeed, it was
2. Be- esteemed a part of the transaction of
trothal marriage, and that the most binding
part. Among the Arabs today it is
the only legal ceremony connected with marriage.
Gen 24 58.60 seems to preserve for us an example
of an ancient formula and blessing for such an
occasion. Its central feature was the dowry
(mohar), which was paid to the parents, not to the
bride. It may take the form of service (Gen 29;
1§ 18 25). Itis customary in Syria today, when
the projected marriage is approved by both families,
and all the financial preliminaries have been settled,
to have this ceremony of betrothal. It consists in
the acceptance before witnesses of the terms of the
marriage as contracted for. Then God’s blessing
is solemnly asked on the union thus provided for,
but to take place probably only after some months,
or perhaps some years. The betrothal effected, all
danger from any further financial fencing and bluff-
ing now being at an end, happiness and harmony
may preside over all the arrangements for the mar-
riage day. Among the Jews the betrothal was
so far regarded as binding that, if marriage should
not take place, owing to the absconding of the
bridegroom or the breach of contract on his part,
the young woman could not be married to another
man until she was liberated by a due process and a
paper of divorce. A similar custom prevails in
China and Japan, and in cases becomes very op-
pressive. The marriage may have been intended
by the parents from the infancy of the parties, but
this formality of betrothal is not entered on till the
marriage is considered reasonably certain and
measurably near. A prolonged interval between
betrothal and marriage was deemed undesirable
on many accounts, though often an interval was


Marriage
Marsena


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


needed that the groom might render the stipulated
service or pay the price—say a year or two, or, as
in the case of Jacob, it might be seven years. The
betrothed parties were legally in the position of a
married couple, and unfaithfulness was ‘adultery’
(Dt 22 23; Mt 1 19).

Polygamy is likely to become prevalent only where
conditions are abnormal, as where there is a dispropor-
tionate number of females, as in tribal life in a state of
war. In settled couditions it is possible only to those
able to provide '‘dowry"' and support for each and all of
the wives.

The fact of polygamy in OT times is abundantly wit-
nessed in the cases of Abraham, Jacob, the_judges,


David, Solomon, etc. It was prevalent in peenchat
w


Kings are
; 80). Noah, Isaac and
Joseph had each only one wife, and Bible p
domestic happiness are always connected with monog-
amy (2 K re Ps 128; Kd
1.13). Marriage is Beppe figuratively, too, to the
union between God _an
as the ideal state. Nevertheless, having the advantage
of precedent, it was long before polygamy fell into dis-
use in Heb society. Herod had nine wives at one time
(Jos, Ant, XVII, 1,2). Justin Martyr (Dial., 134, 141)
reproaches Jews of his day with having ‘‘four or even
five wives,” and for ‘‘marrying as many as they _wish"’
(cf Talm). It was not definitely and formally forbidden
amo. ews until c 1000 AD. It exists still among
Jews in Moslem lJands. Side by side with this practice
all along has been the ideal panels (Gen 2 18) re-
buking and modifying it. The legal theory that made
the man ‘‘lord"”’ of the wife (Gen 3 16; Tenth Com-
mandment) was likewise modified in practice by the
affection of the husband and the personality of the wife.

The difference between @ concubine and 2 wife was
largely due to the wife's birth and higher position and
the fact that she was usually backed by relatives ready
to defend her. <A slave could not be made a concubine
without the wife’s consent (Gen 16 2).

There is a disappointing uncertainty as to the
exact. ceremonies or proceedings connected with

marriage in Bible times. We have to
3. Cere- paint our picture from passing allu-
monies sions or descriptions, and from what
we know of Jewish and Arab. customs.
In cases it would seem that there was nothing beyond
betrothal, or the festivities following it (see Gen 24
3 ff). Later, in the case of a virgin, an interval of
not exceeding a year came to be observed.

The first ceremony, the wedding procession, appar-
ently a relic of marriage by capture (cf Jgs 5 30;
Ps 46 15), was the first part of the proceedings.
The bridegroom’s “friends” (Jn 3 29) went,
usually by night, to fetch the bride and her attend-
ants to the home of the groom (Mt 9 15; Jn 3 29).
The joyousness of it all is witnessed by the prover-
bial “voice of the bridegroom” and the cry, ‘Behold
the bridegroom cometh!” (Jer 7 34; Rev 18 23).
The procession was preferably by night, chiefly, we
may infer, that those busy in the day might attend,
and that, in accordance with the oriental love of
scenic effects, the weird panorama of lights and
torches might play an engaging and kindling part.

The marriage supper then followed, generally
in the home of the groom. Today in Syria, as Dr.
Mackie, of Beirut, says, when both parties live in
the same town, the reception may take place in
either home; but the older tradition points to the
house of the groom’s parents as the proper place.
It is the bringing home of an already accredited
bride to her covenanted husband. Shcis escorted by
a company of attendants of her own sex and by
male relatives and friends conveying on mules or by
porters articles of furniture and decoration for the
new home. As the marriage usually takes place in
the evening, the house is given up for the day to the
women who are busy robing the bride and making
ready for the coming hospitality. The bridegroom
is absent at the house of a relative or friend, where
men congregate in the evening for the purpose of


1998


escorting him home. When he indicates that it is
time to go, all rise up, and candles and torches are
supplied to those who are to form the procession,
and they move off. It is a very picturesque sight
to see such a procession moving along the unlighted
way in the stillness of the starry night, while, if it
be in town or city, on each side of the narrow street,
from the flat housetop or balcony, crowds look.
down, and the women take up the peculiar cry of
wedding joy that tells those farther along that the
pageant hasstarted. This cry is taken up all along
the route, and gives warning to those who are wait-
ing with the bride that it is time to arise and light
up the approach, and welcome the bridegroom with
honor. As at the house where the bridegroom
receives his friends before starting some come late,
and speeches of congratulation have to be made,
and poems have to be recited or sung in praise of
the groom, and to the honor of his family, it is often
near midnight when the procession begins. Mean-
while, as the night wears on, and the duties of
robing the bride and adorning the house are all
done, a period of relaxing and drowsy waiting sets
in, ag when, in the NT parable, both the wise and
the foolish virgins were overcome with sleep. In
their case the distant cry on the street brought the
warning to prepare for the reception, and then came
the discovery of the exhausted oil.

Of the bridegroom's retinue only a limited number
would enter, their chief duty being that of escort. They


might call next day to offer congratulations, An Arab,
wedding rhyme says:
“To the bridegroom’s door went the torch-lit array,
And then like goats they scattered away.”


With their dispersion, according to custom, the doors
would be closed, leaving within the relatives and invited
guests; and so, when the belated virgins of the parable
hastened back, they too found themselves inexorably
shut ont by the etiquette of the occasion. The opportn-
nity of service was past, and they were no longer needed. -


At the home all things would be “‘made ready,”
if possible on a liberal scale. Jn 2 gives a picture
of a wedding feast where the resources were strained
to the breaking point. Hospitality was here esp.
a sacred duty, and, of course, greatly ministered
to the joy of the occasion. An oriental proverb is
significant of the store set by it:


“He who does not invite me to his marriage
‘Will not have me to his funeral.”


To decline the invitation to a marriage was a gross
insult (Mt 22).

It was unusual in Galilee to have a “ruler of the
feast” as in Judaea (Jn 2). There was no formal
religious ceremony connected with the Heb mar-
riage as with us—there is not a hint of such a thing -
in the Bible. The marriage was consummated by
entrance into the “chamber,” i.e. the nuptial
chamber (Heb hedher), in which stood the bridal
bed with a canopy (huppah), being originally the
wife’s tent (Gen 24 67; Jgs 417). In all lands
of the dispersion the name is still applied to the
embroidered canopy under which the contracting
parties stand or sit during the festivities. In Arab.
ar and Heb the bridegroom is said to “go in’”’ to the

ride,

A general survey of ancient marriage laws and
customs shows that those of the Hebrews are not a
peculiar creation apart from those of other pcoples.
A remarkable affinity to those of other branches
of the Sem races esp., may be noted, and striking
petal are found in the CH, with regard, e.g., to

etrothal, dowry, adultery and divorce. But
modern researches have emphasized the relative
purity of OT sexual morality. In this, as in other
respects, the Jews had a message for the world.
Yet we should not expect to find among them the
Christian standard. Under the new dispensation


1999


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Marriage
Marsena


the keynote is struck by Our Lord’s action. The
significance of His attending the marriage feast at
Cana and performing His first miracle there can
hardly be exaggerated. The act corresponds, too,
with His teaching on the subject. He, no less than
Paul, emphasizes both the honorableness of the
estate and the heinousness of all sins against it.

The most characteristic use of marriage and the
family by. Our Lord is that in which He describes

the kingdom of God as a social order
4. Jesus’ in which the relationship of men to
Use of the God is like that of sons to a father,
Institution and their relation to each other like
: _, that between brothers. This social
ideal, which presents itself vividly and continuously
to His mind, is summed up in this phrase, ‘King-
dom of God,” which occurs more than a hundred
times in the Synoptic Gospels. The passages in
which it occurs form the interior climax of His
message to men. It is no new and noble Judaism,
taking the form of a political restoration, that He
proclaims, and no “far-off Divine event” to be real-
ized only in some glorious apocalyptic consum-
mation; but a kingdom of God “within you,” the
chief element of it communion with God, the loving
relation of “children” to a ‘“Father,’’ a present
possession. Future in a sense it may be, as a result
to be fully realized, and yet present; invisible, and
yet becoming more and more visible as a new social
order, a conscious brotherhood with one common,
heavenly Father, proclaimed in every stage of His
teaching in spite of opposition and varying fortunes
with unwavering certainty of its completion—this
is the ‘‘kingdom” that Jesus has made the inalien-
able possession of the Christian consciousness. His
entire theology may be described as a transfigura-
tion of the family (see Peabody, Jesus Christ, and
the Social Question, 149 ff; Holtzmann, NT The-
ology, I, 200; Harnack, History of Dogma, I, 62; B.
Weiss, Bib. Theol. of the NT, 1, 72, ET, 1882).

Beyond this Jesus frequently used figures drawn
from marriage to illustrate His teaching concerning
the coming of the kingdom, as Paul did concerning
Christ and the church. There is no suggestion of
reflection upon the OT teaching about marriage
in His teaching except at one point, the modifi-
cation of it so as to allow polygamy and divorce.
Everywhere He accepts and deals with it as sacred
and of Divine origin (Mt _19 9, etc), but He treats
it as transient, that is of the “flesh” and for this
life only.

A question of profound interest remains to be treated:
Did Jesus allow under any circumstances the remarriage
of a divorced person during the lifetime
of the partner to the marriage? Or did
He allow absolute divorce for any cause
whatsoever? Upon the answer to that
question in every age depend momentous issues, soclal
and civic, as well as religious. The facts bearlng on the
question are confessedly enshrined in the NT, and so
the inquiry may be limited to its records. Accepting
with the best scholarship the documents of the NT as
emanating from the disciples of Jesus in the second half
of the Ist cent. AD, the question is, what did these
writers understand Jesus to teach on this subject? If
we had only the Gospels of Mark and Luke and the Epp.
of Paul, there could be but one answer given: Christ
did not allow absolute divorce for any cause (see Mk 10

ff; Lk 1618; Gal 112; 1 Cor 710). The OT
permission was a concession, He teaches, to a low moral
state and standard, and opposed to the ideal of marriage
given in Gen (2 23)

“The position of women in that day was far from envi-
able. They could be divorced on theslightest pretext, and
had norecourse atlaw. Almost all the rights and privi-
leges of men were withheld from them. What Jesus said
inrelation to divorce was more in defence of the rights
of the women of His time than as a guide for the freer,
fuller life of our day. Jesus certainly did not mean to
recommend a hard and enslaving life for women. His


whole life was one long expression of full understanding
ofthem and sympathy for them" (Patterson, The Measure


of a Man,181f).
Two sayings attributed to Christ and recorded by


’ § Divorce


the writer or editor of the First Gospel (Mt § 32;
19 9) seem directly to contravene His teaching as re-
corded in Mk and Lk. Here he seems to allow divorce
for “fornicatlon"’ (ci my éwi wopveia, et mé ept porneta,
“save for fornicatlon’’), an exception which ds no
place in the parallels (ct 1 Cor 7 15, which allows
remarriage where a Christlan partner is deserted by a
heathen). The sense here demands that “fornication”
be taken in its wider sense (Hos 25; Am 7 17; 1 Cor
6 1). Divorce to a Jew carried with it the right of
remarriage, and the words’ ‘causeth her to commlt
adultery’ (Mt 5 32) show that Jesus assumed that the
divorced woman would marry again. Hence if He
allowed divorce, He also allowed remarriage. A critl-
cal examination of the whole passage In Mt has led
many scholars to conclude that the exceptive clause is an
interpolation due to the Jewlsh-Christian compiler or
editor through whose hands the materials passed.
Others think it betrays traces of having been rewrltten
from Mk or from a source common to both Mt and Mk,
and combined with a semi-Jewish tradition, in short,
that it is due to llterary revision and compilation. The
writer or compiler attempted to combine the original
sayings of Jesus and His own interpretatlon. Believin
that Our Lord had not come to set aside the authority 0:
Moses, but only certain Pharisaic exegesis, and sup-
ported, as doubtless he was, by a Jewish-Christian tra-
itlon of Pal, he simply interpreted Mk’s narrative by
inserting what he regarded as the integral part of an
eternal enactment of Jeh. In doing this he was uncon-
sciously inconsistent, not only with Mk and Lk, but also
with the context of the First Gospel itself, owing to his
slncere but mistaken belief that the Law of Moses must
not be broken. The view implied by the exception, of
course, is that adultery ¢pso facto dissolves the union,
and so opens the way to remarriage. But remarriage
closes the door to reconciliation, which on_ Christian
pee ought always to_he possible (cf Hosea; Jer
; Hermas, Mandiv.1). Certainly much is to be said
for the view which is’steadily gaining ground, that the
exception in Mt is an editorial addition made under the
pressure of local conditlons and practical necessity, the
absolute rule being found too hard (see HDB, extra vol,
276, and The Teaching of Our Lord as to the Indissolu-
bility of Marriage, by Stuart Lawrence Tyson, M.A. Oxon.,
University of the South, 1912).
_, The general principle expanded in the NT and the
ideal held up before the Christians is high and clear.
How far that ideal can be embodied in legislation and
applied to the community as a whole all are agreed
must depend upon soclal conditions and the general
moral development and environment. See further
1IVORCE,


Literature.—Material from Mish in Selden, Uszor
Heb, London, 1546; Hamberger, Real. Enc f. Bibel und
Talm, Breslau, 1870; Benzinger, Hebrdische Archdologie;
Nowack, Lehrbuch der hebrdischen Archdologie; McLen-
nan, Primitive Marriage; Westermarck, History of Human
Marriage, London, 1891; W. R. Smith, Kinship and Mar-
riage in Early Arabia, Cambridge, 1895; Tristram,
Eastern Customs, London, 1894; Mackie, Bzble Manners
and Customs, London, 1898; Peahody, Jesus Christ and
the Social Question, III, concerning the family.


‘ no. B. EacGer

MARROW, mar’d (MA, moh, 33M, helebh,
“APU , shikkay, MMA, mahah, “to make fat,” “to
grease’; pvedds, muelés): Marrow is the nourisher
and strengthener of the bones; it is said to moisten
the bones: “The marrow [mé6*h] of his bones is
moistened” (Job 21 24). The fear of Jeh ‘will be
health to thy navel, and marrow [shikkiy, m “re-
freshing, Heb moistening’’] to thy bones” (Prov 3
8). Thus the expression is used figuratively of the
things which alone can satisfy the soul: “My soul
shall be satisfied as with marrow [hélebh, “fat’’] and
fatness” (Ps 63 5); “In this mountain will Jeh
of hosts make unto all peoples a feast of fat things,
a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of
marrow [D'22, m*mukdyim, part. pl., Pual of
mahah), of wines on the lees well refined”’ (Isa 26 6).
In the Ep. to the He the writer speaks of the word
of God, which is “living, and active, and sharper
than any two-edged sword, and piercing even to the
dividing of soul and spirit, of both joints and mar-
row” (He 4 12), . L, BE. Luerme


MARSENA, mir-sé’na, mar’sé-na (RIO, mar-
gn@; derivation unknown but probably of Pers
origin [Fst 1 14]): One of “the seven princes of
Persia and Media, who saw the king’s face, and sat
first in the kingdom.”


Marsh
Mary


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2000


MARSH, marsh ([1] 824, gebhe’, ARV “marsh,”
AV and ERV “marish” [Ezk 47 11]; AV “pit,”


RV “cistern” [Isa 30 14]; cf Arab. lis , jaba’, “res-
ervoir,” “watering-trough’’; [2] 72, d¢, “mire’’;
MRA, biccah, “mire,” “fen”; cf Arab. as , badda,


to “trickle,” (ardo, badad, “a little water’; [3]
DD, f2t, “mire,” “clay”; [4] VOM, homer, “mire,”
“clay,” “mortar”; [5] MAINS M270, ma‘dbheh ha-
‘Gdhamak [1 K 7 46], and MOUNT "AY, ‘abhi ha-
‘adhamah [2 Ch 4 17], “clay ground’’): In the
vision of Ezekiel the saltness of the Dead Sea is
“healed” by the stream issuing from under the
threshold of the temple, “‘But the miry places
[biggah] thereof, and the marshes [gebhe’] thereof,
shall not be healed” (Ezk 47 11). Gebhe’ occurs
elsewhere only in Isa 30 14, where AV has “‘pit”’ and
RV “cistern.” Bac, ‘mire,’ is found only in Jer
38 22. Bigcah is found also in Job 8 11,


“Oan the rush grow up without mire [bic¢ah]?
Can the flag grow without water ?’’


and in Job 40 21 (of the behemoth),
“He lieth under the lotus-trees,
In the covert of the reed, and the fen [big¢aA]."
In 1 Mace 9 42.45 40s, hélos, but in ver 42 B
reads &pos, dros, “mount.” :
Marshes are found near the mouths of some of the
rivers, as the Kishon, about the Haleh (? waters of
Merom), at various places in the course of the Jor-
dan and about the Dead Sea, esp. at its south end.
For the most part Pal is rocky and dry.
ALFRED Ety Day
MARS’, marz, HILL. See Arnopacus.


MARSHAL, mar’shal: Not found in AV, but in
RV the word represents two Heb words: (1) (20,
séphér (Jgs 5 14), tr? “they that handle the mar-
shal’s staff.” A difficulty arises because the usual
meaning of séphér is “scribe” or “writer” (so AV).
The revisers follow LXX and Gr authority which
favor “marshal” as against “‘scribe.”’ The office
of marshal was to help the general to maintain
discipline (cf 1 Macc 5 42). (2) NOU, tphsar
(Jer 51 27), a loan-word whose meaning is not
clear. Lenormant thinks it akin to a Bab-Assyr
word meaning “tablet-writer’ (cf Delitasch).
Accordingly, RVm renders Nah 3 17 ‘‘thy scribes,”
though the Syr has ‘‘thy warriors,’’ as does the Tg
in Jer. We must await further light on both words.


Gro. B. Eacrer
MART, mart. See Market,


MARTHA, mir’tha (Mép0a, Médrtha, “mistress,”
being a transliteration of the fem. form of "2, mar,
“Lord”’): Martha belonged to Bethany, and was
the sister of Lazarus and Mary (Jn 1111). From
the fact that the house into which Jesus was re-
ceived belonged to Martha, and that she generally
took the lead in action, it is inferred that she was the
elder sister. Martha was one of those who gave
hospitality to Jesus during His public ministry.
Thus, in the course of those wanderings which began
when ‘“‘he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerus”
(Lk 9 51), he “entered into a certain village’—
its name is not stated—and “a certain womau
named Martha received him into ber house” (Lk
10 38). Martha, whose sense of responsibility
as hostess weighed heavily upon her, was ‘“‘cum-
bered about much serving,” and her indignation was
aroused at the lack of assistance given to her by
her sister. Her words, “Lord, dost thou not eare?”
implied a certain reproach to Jesus also, in that she
felt He showed a want of sympathy with her efforts
and was the cause of Mary’s remissness.


But :


Jesus, in tones of gentle reproof, reminded her that
for Him not the preparation of an elaborate meal
but the hearing of His Word in the spirit of Mary
was the ‘one thing needful’ (Lk 10 39-42).
Martha is first mentioned by St. John—the only
other Gospel writer who refers to Martha—in his
account of the raising of Lazarus from the dead at
Bethany (Jn 11 1-44). The narrative indicates,
however, that Jesus was already on terms of the
closest friendship with her and her household (cf
vs3.5). Intheincident which St. John here records,
Martha again displayed her more practical nature
by going out to meet Jesus, while Mary sat in the
house (ver 20). But she was not behind her sister
in her love for her brother (ver 19), in her faith in
Jesus (vs 21f) and in her belief in the final resur-
rection (ver 24). The power of Him, whom she
termed the “Teacher,’’ to restore Lazarus to life
even upon earth was beyond her understanding.
To the words of Jesus concerning this she gave,
however, a verbal assent, and went and informed
Mary, “The Teacher is here, and calleth thee” (vs
27f). Yet she remained inwardly unconvinced,
and remonstrated when Jesus ordered the stone
before the grave to be removed (ver 39). Jesus
then recalled His previous words to her remem-
brance (ver 40), and vindicated them by restoring
her brother to life (vs 41-44). After the raising of
Lazarus, Jesus then made His departure, but after
a short stay in Ephraim (ver 54) He returned to
Bethany (Jn 12 1). While He supped there,
Martha once more served, and Lazarus was also
present (Jn 12 2). It was on this occasion that
Mary anointed the feet of Jesus (Jn 12 3-8).
According to Mt 26 6-13; Mk 14 3-9, the anoint-
ing took place in the house of Simon the leper, and
it has hence been concluded by some that Martha
was the wife or widow of Simon. The anointing
described in Lk 7 36-50 happened in the house of
Simon a Pharisee. But in none of the synoptist
accounts is Martha mentioned. For the relation-
ship of these anointings with each other, see Mary,
Iv. As, according to St. John, the abode of the
sisters was in Bethany, a further difficulty of a
topographical nature is raised by those who hold
that St. Luke implies, from the Galilean setting of
Lk 10 38-41, that the sisters lived in Galilee. But
the information supplied by St. Luke, upon which
this inference is based, is of the vaguest (cf Lk 10
38), and the great division of St. Luke’s Gospel
(9 51—18 31) has within it no organic cohesion of
parts. In it is mentioned that on two separate
occasions Jesus passed through Samaria (Lk 9 52;
17 11). It is therefore more logical to suppose
that the events described in Lk 10 38-41, falling
within the intervening period, took place in Bethany
during an excursion of Jesus to Judaea, and formed
one of the several visits upon which the friendship
recorded in Jn 11 3.5 was built. According to a
fragment of a Coptic gospel belonging to the 2d
cent. (cf Hennecke, Neutestamentliche Apokry-
phen, 38, 39), Martha was present with the other
two Marys at the empty grave of Jesus (cf Mt 28
1.11), and went and informed the disciples.
. C. M. Kerr
MARTYR, miar’tér (paprés, martiés, Aeolic
paptop, martir): One who gives heed, and so, a
“witness,” so tr? in numerous passages, both as of
one bearing testimony, and also as of one who is a
spectator of anything (see Wirness). In AV
rendered “martyr” in Acts 22 20, “thy martyr
Stephen’; and Rev 2 13, “Antipas my faithful
martyr’; also 17 6, “the blood of the martyrs of
Jesus,” where alone ARV retains “martyrs.” These
3 passages are the beginning of the use of the word
“martyr” for such witnesses as were faithful even
unto death, its uniform modern use.


2001


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Marsh
Mary


MARVEL, mar’vel, MARVELOUS, mir’vel-us
(FOE, tamah, NDB, pala’; Savpdto, thaumdzo,
Savpacrrés, thaumastés): “To marvel’ is the tr of
timah, ‘“‘to wonder’ (Gen 43 33; Ps 48 5, RV
“were amazed’; Eeel 6 8); of thawmazo, “to
admire,’ “wonder” (Mt 8 10.27; Mk 5 20; Jn
37; Acts 27; Rev 177 AV, ete); ‘marvel’
(subst.) oceurs in the pl. as tr of pala’, “to distin-
guish,” fig., ‘to make wonderful’ (Hx 34 10, “I
will do marvels, such as have not been wrought”
[RVm “created’’]); and of thawmastos (thauma)
(2 Cor 11 14).


"Marvelous" is the tr of pala’, **marvelous works”


{i Ch 16 12.24; Ps 9 1); ‘marvelons things'' (Job
5 9; 10 16; Ps 31 21; 118 23; Isa 29 14; Dnl 11
36; Zec 8 6, bis); ‘*marvellously,”’ pala’ (Job 37 5;


Hab 1 5 bis omar “regard and wonder marvellously,”’
lit. ‘marvel marvellously"’); thaumastos, ''admirable,”’
“wonderful,” is tri ‘‘marvelous’” (Mt 21 42; 1 Pet 2
9; Rev 15 1.3, etc).

In Apoc we have ‘marvel’’ (Ecclus 1] 13; 47 17;
2 Macc 1 22; 12); _‘‘marvelicth’’ (Ecclus 40 7;
43 18); ‘‘marvellous’’ (Wisd 10 17; 19 8, etc, mostly
thaumazé and compounds).

RV has ‘‘wonder" for ‘‘marvel” (Bey 17.7); “the
marvel” for a ‘‘marvellous thing’ (Jn 9 30); ‘'mar-
velled'’ for *‘wondered'’ (Lk 8 25; 11 14); ‘‘marvelled
at’’ for ‘‘admired’’ (2 Thess 1 10); ‘’marveling’’ for
‘twondered"’ (Lk 9 43); ‘‘marvellons’’ for ‘‘wondrous’’
(1 Ch 16 9; Ps 105 2); ‘‘marvellous things’’ for ‘‘and
wonders’’ (Job 9 10); ‘‘wonderful" for ‘‘marvellous’’
(Ps 139 14); for ‘‘marvelled"’ (Mt 9 8), ‘were afraid,’’
and (Mk 12 17) ‘’marvelled greatly’’ (different texts).

: : . L. WALKER

MARY, ma’ri, mar’i (Mapla, Maria, Mapp,
Maridm, Gr form of Heb D772, miryam):

I. Derinition AND Questions OF IDENTIFICATION

The Name Mary in the NT

II. Mary, THE VIRGIN
. Mary in the Infancy Narratives
Mary at Cana
Mary and the Career of Jesus
. Mary at the Cross
. Mary in the Christian Community
. Mary in Ecclesiastical Doctrine and Tradition

(1) Legend

(2) Dogma Ge

(a) The Dogma of Her Sinlessness
(b) Dogma of Mary's Perpetual Virginity
1G Doctrine of Mary's Glorification

(3) Conclusion
III. Mary Maopatene

1. Mary Not the Sinful Woman

2. Mary Not a Nervous Wreck
IV. Mary or Betnany :

1. Attack upon Luke’s Narrative

2. Evidence of Luke Taken Alone

3. Evidence Sifted by Comparison

4, Character of Mary

V. Mary, tae Morrer or JAMES AND JosEs
VI. Mary, tHe Moruer or Joun Marx


L. Definition and Questions of Identification.—
A Heb fem. proper name of two persons in the OT
(see Ex 15 20; Nu 121; Mic 6 4; 1 Ch 4 17)
and of anumber not certainly determined in the NT.
The prevalence of the name in NT times has been
attributed, with no great amount of certainty, to
the popularity of Mariamne, the last representative
of the Hasmonean family, who was the second wife
of Herod I. x

(1) The name Mary occurs in 51 passages of the
NT to which the following group of articles is con-

fined (see Munriam). Collating all
The Name these references we have the following
Mary in apparent notes of identification: (a)
the NT Mary, the mother of Jesus; (b) Mary

Magdalene; (c) Mary, the mother of
James; (d) Mary, the mother of Joses; (e) Mary,
the wife of Clopas; (f) Mary of Bethany; (g) Mary,
the mother of Mark; (k) Mary of Rome; (¢) the
“other” Mary. ;

(2) A pen arieon of Mt 27 56; 28 1 with Mk
15 47 seems clearly to identify the ‘other’ Mary
with Mary the mother of Joses.

(3) Mk 15 40 identifies Mary the mother of
James and Mary the mother of Joses (cf 15 47)
(sce Allen’s note on Mt 27 56).


DORON


(4) At this point a special problem of identifi-
cation arises. Mary, the wife of Clopas, is men-
tioned as being present at the cross with Mary the
mother of Jesus, the latter’s sister and Mary of
Magdala (Jn 19 25). In the other notices of the
group at the cross, Mary, the mother of James, is
mentioned (Mt 27 56; Mk 15 40). Elsewhere,
James is regularly designated “son of Alphaeus’’
(Mt 103; Mk 318; Lk 615). Since it can
hardly be doubted that James, the apostle, and
James the Less, the son of Mary, are one and the
same person, the conclusion seems inevitable that
Mary, the mother of James, is also the wife of
Alphaeus. Here we might stop and leave the wife
of Clopas unidentified, but the fact that the name
Alphaeus (‘AAgaios, Alphaios) is the Gr trans-
literation of the Aram. "Don, halpay, together with
the unlikelihood that anyone important enough to
be mentioned by John would be omitted by the
synoptists and that another Mary, in addition to
the three definitely mentioned, could be present
and not be mentioned, points to the conclusion that
the wife of Clopas is the same person as the wife
of Alphacus (see AupHarus). Along with this
reasonable conclusion has grown, as an excrescence,
another for which there is no basis whatever; viz.
that the wife of Clopas was the sister of Mary, the
mother of Jesus. This would make the apostle
James the cousin of Jesus, and, by an extension of
the idea, would identify James, the apostle, with
James, the “Lord’s brother.’ The available evi-
dence is clearly against both these inferences (see
Mt 138 55; Mk 6 3; Gal 1 19).

(5) One other possible identification is offered for
ourconsideration. Zahn,in anexceedingly interesting
note (NT, II, 514), identifies Mary of Rome (Rom
16 6) with the “other’’ Mary of Mt. We need not
enter into a discussion of the point thus raised, since
the identification of a woman of whom we have no
details given is of little more than academic interest.

We are left free, however, by the probabilities
of the case to confine our attention to the principal
individuals who bear the name of Mary. We shall
discuss Mary, the mother of Jesus; Mary of Mag-
dala; Mary of Bethany; Mary, the mother of
James and Joses; Mary, the mother of Mark.

Hl, Mary, the Virgin.—The biography of the
mother of Jesus is gathered about a brief series of
episodes which serve to exhibit her leading char-
acteristics in clear light. Two causes have oper-
ated to distort and make unreal the very clear and
vivid image of Mary left for us in the Gospels.
Roman Catholic dogmatic and sentimental exag-
geration has well-nigh removed Mary from history
(see ImMacuLaTe Conception). On the other
hand, reaction and overemphasis upon certain
features of the Gospel narrative have led some to
credit Mary with a negative attitude toward Our
Lord and His claims, which she assuredly never
occupied. It is very important that we should
follow the narrative with unprejudiced eyes and
give due weight to each suceessive episode.

Mary appears in the following passages: the
Infancy narratives, Mt 1 and 2; Lk 1 and 2;
the wedding at Cana of Galilee, Jn 2 1-11; the
episode of Mt 12 46; Mk 3 £1.31 ff; the incident
at the cross, Jn 19 25 ff; the scene in the upper
chamber, Acts 1 14.

(1) It is to be noted, first of all, that Mary and
her experiences form the narrative core of both

Infaney documents. This is contrary
1. Mary in to the ordinary opinion, but is un-
the Infancy questionably true. She is obviously
Narratives the object of special interest to Luke
(see Ramsay, Was Christ Born at
Bethlehem? 761), and there are not wanting indi-


Mary


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2002


cations that Luke’s story came from Mary herself.
But, while Matthew’s account does not exhibit his
interest in Mary quite so readily, that he was in-
terested in the pathetic story of the Lord’s mother is
evident.

Luke tells the story of Mary’s inward and deeply
personal experiences, her call (1 26 f), her maidenly
fears (1 29.35), her loyal submission (1 38), her
outburst of sacred and unselfish joy (1 39-55).
From this anticipatory narrative he passes at once
to the Messianic fulfilment.

Matthew tells the story of the outward and, so
to say, public experiences of Mary which follow
hard upon the former and are in such dramatic con~
trast with them: the shame and suspicion which
fell upon her (1 18); her bitter humiliation (1 19),
her ultimate vindication (1 20f). Here the two
narratives supplement each other by furnishing
different details but, as in other instances, converge
upon the central fact—the central fact here being

ary herself, her character, her thoughts, her expe-
riences. The point to be emphasized above all
others is that we have real biography, although in
fragments; in that the same person appears in the
inimitable reality of actual characterization, in
both parts of thestory. This is sufficient guaranty
of historicity; for no two imaginary portraits ever
agreed unless one copied the other—which is evi-
dently not the case here. More than this, the story
is a truly human narrative in which the remarkable
character of the events which took place in her hfe
only serves to bring into sharper relief the simple,
humble, natural qualities of the subject of them.

(2) One can hardly fail to be impressed, in study-
ing Mary’s character, with her quietness of spirit;
her meditative inwardness of disposition; her
admirable self-control; her devout and gracious
gift of sacred silence. The canticle (Lk 1 46-55),
which at least expresses Luke’s conception of her
nature, indicates that she is not accustomed to
dwell much upon herself (4 lines only call particular
attention to herself), and that her mind is saturated
with the spirit and phraseology of the OT. The
intensely Jewish quality of her piety thus expressed
accounts for much that appears anomalous in her
subsequent career as depicted in the Gospels.

The first episode which demands our attention
is the wedding at Cana of Galilee (Jn 2 1-11).

The relationship between Jesus and
2. Mary His mother has almost eclipsed other
at Cana interests in the chapter. It is to be
noted that the idea of wanton inter-
ference on the part of Mary and of sharp rebuke on
the part of Jesus is to be decisively rejected. The
key to the meaning of this episode is to be found
in 4 simple items: (1) in a crisis of need, Mary
turns naturally to Jesus as to the one from whom
help is to be expected; (2) she is entirely undisturbed
by His reply, whatever its meaning may be; (8)
she prepares the way for the miracle by her authori-
tative directions to the servants; (4) Jesus does
actually relieve the situation by an exercise of power.
Whether she turned to Jesus with distinctly Messianic
expectation, or whether Jesus intended to convey a
mild rebuke for her eagerness, it is not necessary
for us to inquire, as it is not possible for us to’ de-
termine. It is enough that her spontaneous appeal
to her Son did not result in disappointment, since,
in response to her suggestion or, at least, in har-
mony with it, He “manifested his glory.” The
incident confirms the Infancy narrative in which
Mary’s quiet and forceful personality is exhibited.

In Mt 12 46 (|| Mk 3 31-35), we are told that,
when His mother and His brethren came secking
Him, Jesus in the well-known remark concerning
His true relatives in the kingdom of heaven
intended to convey a severe rebuke to His own


household for an action which involved both un-
belief and presumptuous interference in His great
life-work. The explanation of this


3. Mary incident, which involves no such pain-
and the ful implications as have become con-
Career of nected with it in the popular mind,
Jesus is to be found in Mark’s account. He


interrupts his narrative of the arrival of
the relatives (which begins in ver 21) by the account
of the accusation made by the scribes from Jerus that
the power of Jesus over demons was due to Beelze-
bub. This goes a long way toward explaining the
anxiety felt by the relatives of Jesus, since the un-
governed enthusiasm of the multitude, which gave
Him no chance to rest and seemed to threaten His
health, was matched, contrariwisc, by the bitter,
malignant opposition of the authorities, who would
believe any malicious absurdity rather than that
His power came from God. The vital point is that
the attempt of Mary and her household to get
possession of the person of Jesus, in order to induce
Him to go into retirement for a time, was not due
to captious and interfering unbelief, but to loving
anxiety. The words of Jesus have the undoubted
ring of conscious authority and express the determi-
nation of one who wills the contro! of his own life—
but it is a serious mistake to read into them any
faintest accent of satire. It has been well said
(Horace Bushnell, Sermons on Living Subjects, 30)
that Jesus would scarcely make use of the family
symbolism to designate the sacred relationships of
the kingdom of heaven, while, at the same time, He
was depreciating the value and importance of the
very relationships which formed the basis of His
analogy. The real atmosphere of the incident is
very different from this.
To be sure that many have misinterpreted the
above incident we need only turn to the exquisitely
tender scene at the cross recorded by
4. Mary at John (19 25 ff). This scene, equally
the Cross beautiful whether one considers the
“ relationship which it discloses as exist-
ing between Jesusand His mother, or between Jesus
and His well-beloved disciple, removes all possible
ambiguity which might attach to the preceding
incidents, and reveals the true spirit of the Master’s
home. Jesus could never have spoken as He did
from the cross unless He had consistently main-
tained the position and performed the duties of an
eldest son. The tone and quality of the scene
could never have been what it is had there not been
a stedfast tie of tender love and mutual under-
standing between Jesus and His mother. Jesus
could hand over His sacred. charge to the trust-
worthy keeping of another, because He had faith-
fully maintained it Himself.
The final passage which we need to consider (Acts
1 14) is esp. important, because in it we discover
Mary and her household at home in
5. Mary in the midst of the Christian community,
the Chris- engaged with them in prayer. It is
tian Com- also clear that Mary herself and the
munity family, who seemed to be very com-
pletely under her influence, whatever
may have been their earlier misgivings, never broke
with the circle of disciples, and persistently kept
within the range of experiences which led at last
to full-orbed Christian faith. This makes it suffi-
ciently evident, on the one hand, that the household
never shared the feelings of the official class among
the Jews; and, on the other, that the family of
Jesus passed through the same cycle of experiences
which punctuated the careers of the whole body of
disciples on the way to faith. The bearing of this
simple but significant fact upon the historical trust-
worthiness of the body of incidents just passed in
review is evident.


2003


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mary


The sum of the matter concerning Mary seems to
be this: The mother of Jesus was a typical Jewish
believer of the best sort. She was a deeply medi-
tative, but by no means a daring or original thinker.
Her inherited Messianic beliefs did not and perhaps
could not prepare her for the method of Jesus which
involved so much that was new and unexpected.
But her heart was true, and from the beginning
to the day of Pentecost, she pondered in her heart
the meaning of her many puzzling experiences until
the light came. _ The story of her life and of her
relationship to Jesus is consistent throughout and
touched with manifold unconscious traits of truth.
Such a narrative could not have been feigned or
fabled.

(1) Legend.—The ecclesiastical treatment of Mary
consists largely of legend and dogma, ahout equally

fictitious and unreliable. The legendary

6: Mary in accounts, which include the apocryphal
Eeclesiasti gospels, deal, for the most part, with de-
cclesiastl- tails of her parentage and early life; her
cal Doctrine hetrothal and marriage to Joseph; her


j~ Journey to Bethlehem and the birth of her
and Tradi child. At this point the legendary narra-
on tives, in their crass wonder-mongering


mse and indelicate intimacy of detall, are In
striking contrast to the chaste reserve of the canonical
story, and of evidential value on that account.

(2) Dogma.—There is, in addition, a@ full-grown legend
concerning Mary’s later life in the house of John; of
her death in which the apostles were miraculously allowed
to participate; her bodily translation to heaven; her
reception at the hands of Jesus and her glorification in
heaven. In this latter series of statements, we have
already made the transition from legend to dogma. It
is quite clear, from the statements of Roman Catholic
writers themselves, that no reliable historical data are
to be found among these legendary accounts. The

eneral attitude of modern writers is exhihited in the
‘ollowing sentences (from Wilhelm and Scannel, Man-
ual of Catholic Theol., II, 220, quoted hy Mayor, HDB,
II, 288, n.): ‘‘Mary's corporeal assumption into heaven
is so thoroughly implied in the notion of her personality
as given by Bible and dogma, that the church can dis-

ense with strict historical evidence of the fact." If that
is the way one feels, there is very little to say about it.
Aside from the quasi-historical dogma of Mary's bodily
assumption, the Roman Catholic doctrinal interpreta-
tion of her person falls into three parts. | |

(a) The dogma of her sinlessness: This is dlscussed
under ImMmMacuLATE CONCEPTION (q.v.) and need not


detain us here. aay

(b) The dogma of Mary’s perpetual virginity: It 1s
evident that this, too, is a doctrine of such a nature that
its advocates might, with advantage to their argument,
have abstained from the appearance of critical discussion.

Even if all the probabilities of exegesis are violated
and the cumulative evidence that Mary had other chil-
dren done away with; if the expression, “ brethren of the
Lord’' is explained as ‘‘foster-brethren,”’ ‘‘cousins" or
what-not; if Jesus is shown to be not only “first-born
but ‘‘only-horn’' Son (Lk 2 7); if the expression of Mt
1 25 is interpreted as meaning ‘‘up to and heyond’
(Pusey et al.; cf Roman Catholic Dict., 604), it would still
be as far as possible from a demonstration of the dogma.
That 2 married woman has no children is no proof of
virginity—perpetual or otherwise. That this thought
has entered the minds of Roman Catholic apologists
although not openly expressed by them, is evidenced
by the fact that while certain forms of dealing with the
“brethren-of-the-Lord ” question make these the sons of
Joseph by a former marriage, the favorite doctrine in-
cludes the perpetual virginity of Joseph. Just as the idea
of the sinlessness of Mary has led_to the dogma of the
immaculate conception, so the idea of her perpetual
virginity demands the ancillary notion of Joseph's. No
critical or historical considerations are of any possible
use here. It is a matter of dogmatic assumption un-
mixed with any alloy of factual evidence, and might better
be openly made such. Ki : tin nde

It is evident that a very serious moral issue is raised
here. The question is not whether virginity is a higher
form of life than marriage. One might be prepared to
say that under certain circumstances it is. The point
at issue here js very different. If Mary was married to
Joseph and Joseph to Mary in appearance only, then
they were recreant to each other and to the ordinance
of God which made them one. How a Roman Catholic,
to whom marriage is a sacrament, can entertain such a
notion is an unfathomable mystery. The fact that
Mary was miraculously the mother of the Mcssiah has
nothing to do with the question of her privilege and
obligation in the holiest of human relationships. Back
of this unwholesome dogma are two utterly false ideas:
that the marriage relationship is incompatihle with holy
llving, and that Mary is not to be considered a human
being under the ordinary obligations of human life.


(c) The doctrine of Mary’s glorification as the ohject
ot worship and her function as intercessor: With no
wish to be polemic toward Roman Catholicism, and, on
the contrary, with every desire to he sympathetic, it is
very difficult to he patient with the puerillties which
disfigure the writings of Roman Catholic dogmaticians
in the discusslon of this group of doctrines.

a Take, for example, the crude literallsm involved
in the identification of the woman of Rev 12 1-6 with
Mary. Careful exegesis of the passage (esp. ver 6), in
connectlon wlth the context, makes it clear that no hint
of Mary's status in hcaven is intended. As a matter of
fact, Mary, in any literal sense, is not referred to at all,
Mary's motherhood along with that of the mother of
Moses is very likely the basis of the figure, hut the
woman of the vision is the church, which is, at once, the
mother and the body of her Lord (ee Milligan, Exposi-
tors’ Bible, “Revelation,” 196f).

Three other arguments are most frequently used to
justify the place accorded to Mary in the liturgy.

(li) Christ's perpctual humanity leads to His per-
petual Sonship to Mary. his argument, if it carries
any weight at all, in this connection, implies that the
glorifled Lord Jesus is still suhject to His mother. It
is, however, clear from the Gospels that the subjection
to His parents which continued after the incldent in the
Temple (Lk 2 51) was gently hut firmly lald_aside at
the outset of the public ministry (see above, II, 2, 3).
In all that pertains to His heavenly office, as Lord,
Mary’s poaucn is one of dependence, not of authority.

(iii) Christ hears her prayers. Here, again, dogmatic
assumption is in evidence. That He hears her prayers,
even if true in a very special sense, does not, in the least,
imply that prayers are to he addressed to her or that
she is an intercessor through whom prayers may be
addressed to Him.

(iv) Since Mary cared for the body of Christ: when He
was on earth, naturally His spiritual body would be her
special carein heaven. But, on any reasonable hypothe-
sis, Mary was, is, and must remain, a part of that body
(see Acts 1 14). Unless she is intrinsically a Divine
heing, her care for the church cannot involve her uni-
versal presence in it and her accessibility to the prayers
of her fellow-believers.

To a non-Romanist, the most suggestive fact in the
whole controversy is that the statements of cautious
apologists in support of the ecclesiastical attitude toward

ary, do not, in the least degree, justify the tone of
extravagant adulation which marks the non-polemical
devotional literature of the subject (see Dearden, Modern

Romanism Examined, 22 f).

, (8), Conclusion.—Our conclusion on the whole ques-
tion is that the lit. of Mariolatry belongs, historically,
to unauthorized speculation; and, psychologically, to
the natural history of asceticism and clerical celibacy.


Hf, Mary Magdalene (Mapia MaySaAnvh, Maria
Magdaléné=of “Magdala’)—A devoted follower
of Jesus who entered the circle of the taught during
the Galilean ministry and became prominent during
the last days. The noun ‘Magdala,”’ from which
the adjective “Magdalene” is formed, does not occur
in the Gospels (the word in Mt 16 339, is, of course,
“Magadan”). The meaning of this obscure refer-
ence is well summarized in the following quotations
from Plummer (JCC, “Luke,” 215): “‘Magdala is
only the Gr form of mighdél or watch-tower, one
of the many places of the name in Pal’ (Tristram,
Bible Places, 260); and is probably represented by
the squalid group of hovels which now bears the
name of Mejdel near the center of the western shore
of the lake.’

As she was the first to bear witness to the resur-
rection of Jesus, it is important that we should get

a correct view of her position and char-
1. Mary not acter. The idea that she was a peni-


the Sinful tent, drawn from the life of the street,
Woman of undoubtedly arose, in the first in-
Lk 7 stance, from a misconception of the


nature of her malady, together with
an altogether impossible identification of her with
the woman who was a sinner of the preceding sec-
tion of the Gospel. It is not to be forgotten that
the malady demon-possession, according to NT
ideas (see Demon, DEmMono.oGy), had none of the
implications of evil temper and malignant disposi-
tion popularly associated with “having a devil.”
The possessed was, by Our Lord and the disciples,
looked upon as diseased, the victim of an alien and
evil power, not an accomplice of it. Had this
always been understood and kept in mind, the un-


Mary


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2004


fortunate identification of Mary with the career
of public prostitution would have been much less
easy.

According to NT usage, in such cases the name
would have been withheld (cf Lk 7 37; Jn 8 3).
At the same time the statement that 7 demons had
been cast out of Mary means cither that the malady
was of exceptional severity, possibly involving
several relapses (cf Lk 11 26), or that the mode
of her divided and haunted consciousness (cf Mk 6
9) suggested the use of the number 7. Even so,
she was a healed invalid, not a rescued social
derelict.

The identification of Mary with the sinful woman
is, of course, impossible for one who follows care-
fully the course of the narrative with an eye to the
transitions. The woman of ch 7 is carefully covered
with the concealing cloak of namelessness. Un-
doubtedly known by name ito the intimate circle
of first disciples, it is extremely doubtful whether
she was so known to Luke. Her history is definitely
closed at ver 50.

The name of Mary is found at the beginning of
a totally new section of the Gospel (see Plummer’s
analysis, op. cit., xxxvii), where thename of Mary is
introduced with a single mark of identification, apart
from her former residence, which points away from
the preceding narrative and is incompatible with
it. If the preceding account of the anointing were
Mary’s introduction into the circle of Christ’s
followers, she could not be identified by the phrase
of Lk. Jesus did not cast a demon out of the sinful
woman of ch 7,and Mary of Magdala is not repre-
sented as having anointed the Lord’s feet. The
two statements cannot be fitted together.

Mary has been misrepresented in another way,
scarcely less serious. She was one of the very first

witnesses to the resurrection, and her


2. Mary testimony is of sufficient importance
Not a to make it worth while for those who
Nervous antagonize the narfative to discredit
Wreck her testimony. This is done, on the


basis of her mysterious malady, by
making her a paranoiac who was in the habit of
“seeing things.’”’ Renan is the chief offender in
this particular, but others have followed his
example.

(1) To begin with, it is to be remarked that Mary
had been cured of her malady in such a marked way
that, henceforth, throughout her life, she was a
monument to the healing power of Christ. What
He had done for her became almost a part of her
name along with the name of her village. It is not
to be supposed that a cure so signal would leave her
anervous wreck, weak of will, wavering in judgment,
the victim of hysterical tremors and involuntary
hallucinations.

(2) There is more than this a priori consideration
against such an interpretation of Mary. She was
the first at the tomb (Mt 28 1; Mk 16 1; Lk 24
10). But she was also the last at the cross—she
and her companions (Mt 27 61; Mk 16 40). A
glance at the whole brief narrative of her life in the
Gospels will interpret this combination of state-
ments. Mary first appears near the beginning of
the narrative of the Galilean ministry as one of a
group consisting of “many” (Lk 8 3), among them
Joanna, wife of Chuzas, Herod’s steward, who fol-
lowed with the Twelve and ministered to them of
their substance. Mary then disappears from the
text to reappear as one of the self-appointed watch-
ers of the cross, thereafter to join the company of
witnesses to the resurrection. The significance of
these simple statements for the understanding of
Mary’s character and position among the followers
of Jesus is not far to seek. She came into the circle
of believers, marked out from the rest by an excep-


tional experience of the Lord’s healing power.
Henceforth, to the very end, with unwearied de-
votion, with intent and eager willingness, with
undaunted courage even in the face of dangers which
broke the courage of the chosen Twelve, she followed
and served her Lord. It is impossible that such
singleness of purpose, such strength of will, and,
above all, such courage in danger, should have
been exhibited by a weak, hysterical, neurotic in-
curable. The action of these women of whom Mary
was one, in serving their Master’s need while in life,
and in administering the last rites to His body in
death, is characteristic of woman at her best.

IV. Mary of Bethany— Another devoted follower
of Jesus. She was a resident of Bethany (Byéavia,
Béhania), and a member of the family consisting
of a much-beloved brother, Lazarus, and another
sister, Martha, who made a home for Jesus within
oes own circle whenever He was in the neighbor-

ood.

The one descriptive reference, aside from the
above, connected with Mary, has caused no end of
perplexity. John (11 2) states that it was this
Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment and
wiped His feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus
was sick. This reference would. be entirely satis-
fied by the narrative of Jn 12 1.8, and no difficulty
would be suggested, were it not for the fact that
Luke (7 86-50) records an anointing of Jesus by a
woman, accompanied with the wiping of His feet
with her hair. The identification of these twe
anointings would not occasion any great difficulty,
in spite of serious discrepancies as to time, place
and other accessories of the action, but for the very
serious fact that the woman of Lk T is described as
a sinner in the dreadful special sense associated
with that word in NT times. This is so utterly
out of harmony with all that we know of Mary and
the family at Bethany as to be a well-nigh intol-
erable hypothesis.

On the other hand, we are confronted with at
least one serious difficulty in affirming two anoint-
ings. This is well stated by Mayor (HDB, III,
2802): “Is it likely that Our Lord would have
uttered such a high encomium upon Mary’s act if
she were only following the example already set
by the sinful woman of Galilee; or (taking the
other view) if she herself were only repeating under
more favorable circumstances the act of loving
devotion for which she had already received His
commendation?” We shall be compelled to face
this difficulty in case we are forced to the conclusion
that there were more anointings than one.

In the various attempts to solve this problem, or
rather group of problems, otherwise than by hold-

ing to two anointings, Luke, who
1. Attack stands alone against Mark, Matthew
upon Luke’s and John, has usually suffered lois
Narrative of confidence. Mayor (op. cit., 282a)

suggests the possibility that the text
of Luke has been tampered with, and that originally
his narrative contained no reference to anointing.
This is a desperate expedient which introduces
more difficulties than it solves. Strauss and other
hostile critics allege confusion on the part of Luke
between the anointing at Bethany and the account
of the woman taken in adultery, but, as Plummer
well says, the narrative shows no signs of confusion.
“The conduct both of Jesus and of the woman is
unlike either fiction or clumsily distorted fact. His
gentle severity toward Simon, and tender reception
of the sinner, are as much beyond the reach of
invention as the eloquence of her speechless affec-
tion” CC, “Luke,” 209).

The first step in the solution of this difficulty is
to note carefully the evidence supplied by Luke’s
narrative taken by itself. Mary is named for


2005


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mary


the first time in Lk 10 38-42 in a way which clearly
indicates that the family of Bethany is there men-

tioned for the first time (a “certain [res,
2. Evidence tis] woman named Martha,” and “she


of Luke had a sister called Mary,” ete). This
Taken phrasing indicates the introduction of
Alone a new group of names (cf Jn 11 1).


It is also a clear indication of the fact
that Luke does not identify Mary with the sinful
woman of ch 7 (cf Mt 26 6-18; Mk 14 3-9; Lk
7 36-50; Jn 12 1-8).


Our next task is to note carefully the relatiouship
between the narratives of Mark, Matthew and John on
‘ one side, and that of Luke on the other.
83. Evidence We may effectively analyze the narratives
Sifted by under the following heads: (1) notes of
f time and place; (2) circumstances and
Comparison scenery of the incidtnt: (3) description
_ of the person who did the anointing;
. complaints of her action, by whom and for what;
(5) the lesson drawn from the woman's action which con-
stitutes Our Lord’s defence of it; (6) incidental features
of the narrative.
_ Under (1) notice that all three evangelists place the
incident near the close of the ministry and at Bethany.
Under (2) it is important to observe that Matthew and
Mark place the scene in the house of Simon “the leper,"
while John states vaguely that a feast was made for
Him by persons not named and that Martha served.
Under (3) we observe that Matthew and Mark say
“a woman,’' while John designates Mary. (4) Accord-
ing to Matthew, the disciples found fault; according to
Mark, some of those present found fault; while accord-
ing to John, the fault-finder was Judas Iscariot. Ac-
cording to all three, the ground or complaint is the
alleged wastefulness of the action. (5) Again, according
te all three, Our Lord defended the use made of the
omtment by a mysterious reference to an anointing of
His body for the burial. John’s expression in par-
ticular is most interesting and peculiar (see Jn 12.7).
(6) The Simon in whose house the incident is said to
have taken Place is by Matthew and Mark designated
‘*the leper.’” This must mean either that he had pre-
viously been cured or that his disease had manifested
itself subsequent to the feast. Of these alternatives
the former is the more natural (see Gould, ICC, ‘‘ Mark,”
257). The preserice of a healed leper on this occasion,
together with the specific mention of Lazarus as a guest,
would suggest that the feast was given by people, in and
about Bethany, who had especial reason to be grateful to
Jesus for the exercise of His healing power.

It is beyond reasonable doubt that the narratives of
Matthew, Mark and John refer to the same incident.
The amount of convergence and the quality of it put
this identification among the practical certainties. he
only discrepancies of even secondary importance are
a difference of a few days in the time (Gould says four)
and the detail as to the anointing of head or feet. It is
conceivable, and certainly no very serious matter, that
John assimilated his narrative at this point to the similar
incident of Lk 7. cen ‘

An analysis of the incident of Lk 7 with reference to
the same points of inquiry discloses the fact that it can-
not be the same as that described by the other evangel-
ists. (1) The time and ples indications, such as they
are, point to Galilee and the Galilean ministry. This
consideration alone is a formidable obstacle in the
way of any such identification. (2) The immediate
surroundings are different, Simon ‘“‘the leper’ and
Simon ‘the Pharisee” can bordly be one person. No
man could have borne both of these designations. In
addition to this, it is difficult to believe that_a Pharisee
of Simon’s temper would have entertained Jesus when
once he had been proscribed by the authorities. Simon's
attitude was a very natural one at the beginning of
Christ’s ministry, but the combination of hostility and
questioning was necessarily a temporary, mood. (3)
The description of the same woman as sinner in the
sense of Lk 7 in one Gospel; simply as a woman in two
others; and as the beloved and honored Mary of Bethany
in a third is not within the range of probability, esp. as
there is no hint of an attempt at explanation on the part
of any of the writers. At any rate, prima facie, this
item in Luke's description is seriously at variance with
the other narratives. (4) Luke is again at variance
with the others, if he is supposed to refer to the same
event, in the matter of the complaint and its cause. In
Luke's account there is no complaint of the woman's
action suggested. Thereis no hint that anybody thought
or pretended to think that she had committed a sinful
waste of precious material. The only complaint is
Simon's, and that is directed against the Lord Himself,
because Simon, judging by himself, surmised that Jesus
did not spurn the woman because He did not know her
character. This supposed fact had a bearing on the
question of Our Lord’s Messiahship, concerning which
Simon was debating; otherwise one suspects he had
little interest in the episode. This fact is, as we shall see,


determinative for the understanding of the incident and
puts it apart from all other similar episodes.

(5) The lesson drawn from the act by Our Lord was
in each incident different. The sinful woman was com-
mended for an act of courtesy and tenderness which
expressed a love hased upon gratitude for deliverance and
forgiveness. Mary was commended for an act which had
a mysterious and sacramental relationship to the Lord’s
death, near at hand.

This brings us to the polnt where we may consider
the one serlous difficulty, that alleged by Mayor and
others, against the hypothesis of two anointings, namely,
that a repetition of an act like this with commendation
attached would not be likely to occur. The answer to
this argument is that the difficulty itself is an artificial
one due to a misreading of the incident. In the point
of central reference the two episodes are worlds apart.
The act of anointing in each case was secondary, not
pomary Anointing was one of those general and preva-

ent acts of social courtesy which might mean much or

little, this or that, and might be repeated a score of times
in a year with a different meaning each time. The
matter of primary importance in every such case would
be the purpose and motive of the anointing. By this
consideration alone we may safely discriminate between
these incidents. In the former case, the motive was to
express the love of a forgiven penitent. In the latter,
the motive was gratitude for something quite different,
a beloved brother back from the grave, and, may we not
aby din view of Jn 12 7), grief and forehoding? That

ary’s feeling was expressed in the same way outwardly
as that of the sinful woman of the early ministry does
not change the fact that the feeling was different, that
the act was different and that, consequently, the com-
mendation she received, being for a different thing, was
differently expressed. The two anointings are not
duplicates. ary’s act, though later, was quite as
spontaneous and original as that of the sinful woman,
ane ene else bestowed upon her quite as natural and

eserved.


With this fictitious and embarrassing identifica-
tion out of the way, we are now free to consider
briefly the career and estimate the

4. Character character of Mary. (1) At the outset
of Mary it is worth mentioning that we have
in the matter of these two sisters a

most interesting and instructive point of contact
between the synoptic and Johannine traditions.
The underlying unity and harmony of the two are
evident here as elsewhere. In Lk 10 38-42 we
are afforded a, view of Mary and Martha photo-
graphic in its clear revelation of them both. Martha
is engaged in household affairs, while Mary is sitting
at the feet of Jesus, absorbed in listening. This,
of course, might mean that Mary was idle and list-
less, leaving the burden of responsibility for the
care of guests upon her more conscientious sister.
Most housewives are inclined to take this view and
to think that Martha has been hardly dealt with.
The story points to the contrary. It will be no-
ticed that Mary makes no defence of herself and
that the Master makes no criticism of Martha until
she criticizes Mary. When He does speak, it is
with the characteristic and inimitable gentleness,
but in a way leaving nothing to be desired in the
direction of completeness. He conveyed His love,
His perfect understanding of the situation, His de-
fence of Mary, Hisrebuke to Martha, in asingle sen-
tence which contains a perfect photograph of the two
loved sisters. Martha is not difficult to identify.
She was just one of those excellent and tiresome
women whose fussy concern and bustling anxiety
about the details of household management make
their well-meant hospitality a burden to all their
guests. Mary’s quiet and restful interest in the
guest and His conversation must be set against the
foil of Martha’s excess of concern in housework
and the serving of food. When one comes to think
of it, Mary chose the better part of hospitality, to
put no higher construction upon her conduct.
(2) In Jn 11 20, we are told that Martha went
forth to meet Jesus while Mary remained in the
house. In this we have no difficulty in recognizing
the same contrast of outwardness and inwardness
in the dispositions of the sisters; esp., as when Mary
does come at Martha’s call to meet Jesus, she ex-


Mary
Master


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2006


hibits an intensity of feeling of which Martha gives
no sign. It is significant that, while Mary says
just what Martha had already said (vs 21.32), her
way of saying it and her manner as a whole so shakes
the Lord’s composure that He is unable to answer
her directly but addresses His inquiry to the com-
pany in general (ver 34). (3) Then we come to the
events of the next chapter. The supper is given
in Bethany. Marthaserves. Of course she serves.
She always serves when there is opportunity.
Waiting on guests, plate in hand, was the innocent
delight of her life. One cannot fail to see that, ina
single incidental sentence, the Martha of Lk 10 38-
42 is sketched again in lifelikeness. It is the same
Martha engaged in the same task. But what of
Mary in this incident? She is shown in an unprec-
edented réle, strange to an oriental woman and
esp. to one so retiring in disposition as Mary. Her
action not only thrust her into a public place alone,
but brought her under outspoken criticism. But
after all, this is just what we come to expect from
these deep, intense, silent natures. The Mary who
sat at Jesus’ feet in listening silence while Martha
bustled about the house, who remained at home
while Martha went out to meet Him, is the very
one to hurl herself at His feet in a storm and passion
of tears when she does meet Him and to break out
in a self-forgetful public act of devotion, strange
to her modest disposition, however native to her
deep emotion.

Martha was a good and useful woman. No one
would deny that, least of all the Master who loved
her (Jn 11 5). But she lived on the surface of
things, and her affections and her piety alike found
adequate and satisfying expression at all times in
the ordinary kindly offices of hospitality and do-
mestic service. Notso Mary. Her disposition was
inward, silent, brooding, with a latent capacity
for stress and the forthwith, unconventional ex-
pression of feelings, slowly gathering intensity
through days of thought and repression. Mary
would never be altogether at home in the world of
affairs. Hers was a rare spirit, doomed often to
loneliness and misunderstanding except at the
hands of rarely discerning spirits, such as she
happily met in the person of her Lord.

V. Mary, the Mother of James and Joses.—
Under this caption it is necessary merely to recall
and set in order the few facts concerning this Mary
given in the Gospels (see Mt 27 55.56.61; Mk 16
40; 16 1; Lk 24 10; cf Lk 23 49-56).

In Mt 27 55.56 (|| Mk 15 40), we are told that
at the time of the crucifixion there was a group of
women observing the event from a distance. These
women are said to have followed Jesus from Galilee,
ministering to Him and to the disciples. Among
these were Mary Magdalene (see ITI, above); Mary,
mother of James and Joses; and the unnamed
mother of Zebedee’s children. By reference to
Lk 8 2.3, where this group is first introduced, it
appears that, as a whole, it was composed of those
who had been healed of infirmities of one kind or
another. Whether this description applies indi-
vidually to Mary or not we cannot be sure, but it is
altogether probable. At any rate, it is certain that
Mary was one who persistently followed with the
disciples and ministered of her substance to aid
and comfort the Lord in His work for others. The
course of the narrative seems to imply that Mary’s
sons accompanied their mother on this ministering
journcy and that one of them became an apostle.
It is interesting to note that two mothers with their
sons joined the company of the disciples and that
three out of the four became members of the apos-
tolic group. Another item in these only too frag-
mentary references is that this Mary, along with
her of Magdala and the others of this group, was


of sufficient wealth and position to be marked
among the followers of Jesus as serving in this par-
ticular way. The mention of Chuzas’ wife (Lk 8
3) is an indication of the unusual standing of this
company of faithful women.

The other notices of Mary show her lingering
late at the cross (Mk 15 40); a spectator at the
burial (Mk 16 47); and among the first to bear
spices to the tomb. This is the whole of this
woman’s biography extant, but perhaps it is enough.
We are told practically nothing, directly, concerning
her; but, incidentally, she is known to be generous,
faithful, loving, true and brave. She came in sorrow
to the tomb to anoint the body of her dead Lord;
she went away in joy to proclaim Him alive forever-
more. A privilegeto be coveted by the greatest was
thus awarded to simple faith and trusting love.

VI. Mary, the Mother of John Mark.—This
woman is mentioned but once in the NT (Acts 12
12), but in a connection to arouse intense interest.
Since she was the mother of Mark, she was also, in
all probability, the aunt of Barnabas. The aunt
of one member and the mother of another of the
earliest apostolic group is a woman of importance.
The statement in Acts, so far as it concerns Mary, is
brief butsuggestive. Professor Ramsay (see St. Paul
the Traveller, etc, 385) holds that the authority for
this narrative was not Peter but Mark, the son of
the house. This, if true, adds interest to the story
as we haveit. In the first place, the fact that Peter
went thither directly upon his escape from prison
argues that Mary’s house was a well-known center
of Christian life and worship. The additional fact
that coming unannounced and casually the apostle
found a considerable body of believers assembled
points in the same direction. That “many” were
gathered in the house at the same time indicates
that the house was of considerable size. It also ap-
pears that Rhoda was only one of the maids, arguing
a household of more than ordinary size. There isa
tradition of doubtful authenticity, that Mary’s
house was the scene of a still more sacred gathering
in the upper room _on the night of the betrayal.
We conclude that Mary was a wealthy widow of
Jerus, who, upon becoming a disciple of Christ,
with her son, gave herself with whole-souled devo-
tion to Christian service, making her large and well-
appointed house a place of meeting for the pro-
scribed and homeless Christian communion whose.
benefactor and patron she thus became.

Louis Marraews SwEEer

MARY, THE PASSING OF. See ArpocryPHAL
GospE.s.


MASALOTH, mas’a-loth. See Mesatora.
MASCHLL, mas’kil.


MASH (Wa, mash): Named in Gen 10 23 as
one of the sons of Aram. In the | passage in
1 Ch 1 17 the name is given as ‘Meshech”
(meshekh), and the LXX (Mésoch) supports this
form in both passages. ‘“Meshech,’’ however, is a
Japhetic name (Gen 10 2), and “Mash” would
seem to be the original reading. It is probably to
be identified with the Mons Masius of classical
writers (Strabo, etc), on the northern boundary of
Mesopotamia.


See Psaus.


MASHAL, ma’shal Owe, mashal, 1 Ch 6 74).
See MisHau. .

MASIAS, maz-si’as (A, Mactas, Masias, B, Me-
galas, Meisatas): The head of one of the families
of Solomon’s servants (1 Esd 6 34); it has no
equivalent in the || Ezr 2 55 ff; RVm “Misaias.”


2007


MASMAN, mas’man. See Maasmas.


MASON, ma’s’n: The tr of 4 Heb words: (1)
JAN WIN, harash ’ebhen, “graver of stone” (2 8 6
11); (2) (8) ‘VI, gadhar (2 K 12 12), P WI,
harash kir (1 Ch 14 1), “maker of a wall [or
hedge]; (4) AEN, hacabh, “a, hewer or digger [of
stones]” (1 Ch 22 2; Ezr 37). Lebanon still
supplies the greater number of skilled masons to Pal
and Syria (see 2 8 6 11), those of Shweir being in
special repute. See Crarts, II, 8; also AncHi-
TECTURE; BurILpIna; GrBaL; House.


MASPHA, mas’fa (1 Mace 3 46, RV ‘““Mizpeh’’).
See Mizprn, 4.


MASREKAH, mas’ré-ka, mas-ré’ka (TPT,
masrékah; Maoékxa, Masékka): A place mentioned
in the list of ancient rulers of Edom (Gen 386 31),
“before there reigned any king over the children of
Israel.” Masrekah was the royal city of Samlah,
son of Hadad (ver 36; 1 Ch 1 47). The name
may mean “place of choice vines,” but there is
nothing to show in what locality it must be sought.


MASSA, mas’a (RW, massa’, “burden’):
Descendant of Abraham through Ishmael (Gen 25
14; 1 Ch 1 30). His people may be the Masani
of Ptolemy, having Eastern Arabia near Babylon
as their habitat. The marginal reading of the head-
ing to Prov 31 mentions Lemuel as king of Massa.
If that reading is accepted, it would seem that a
tribe and probably a place were named from Ish-
mael’s descendant. The reading is doubtful,
however, for where the phrase recurs in Prov 30 1
(RV) it appears to be a gloss.


MASSACRE, mas‘a-kér, OF THE INNOCENTS.
See InNocENTs, Massacre oF.


MASSAH AND MERIBAH, mas’a, mer’i-ba
(IBTYO1 OA, magsah ameribhah, “proving and
strife’; mepacpds Kal AowWdpnots, petrasmés kat
loidérésis): These names occur together as applied
to one place only in Ex 17 7; they stand, however,
in parallelism in Dt 33 8; Ps 95 8. In all other
eases they are kept distinct, as belonging to two
separate narratives. The conjunction here may
be due to conflation of the sources. Of course, it is
not impossible that, for the reason stated, the double
name was given, although elsewhere (Dt 6 16;
9 22) the place is referred to as Massah.

This scene is laid in Ex 17 1 at Repniprm (q.v.)
and in ver 6 at Hores (q.v.). It is near the begin-
ning of the desert wanderings. In
dearth of water the people murmur
and complain. Moses, appealing to
God, is told what todo. He takes with
him the elders of Israel, and smites with his rod
the rock on which the Lord stands in Horeb, where-
upon water gushes forth, and the people drink.
Here Moses alone is God’s agent. There is no hint
of blame attaching to him. He called the place
Massah and Meribah, because of the striving of the
children of Israel, and because they tempted the
Lord (ver 7). In some way not indicated, here
and at Meribah, God put the Levites to proof (Dt
33 8).

The second narrative describes what took place
at Kadesh (i.e. “Kadesh-barnea”) when the desert

- wanderings were nearly over (Nu 20

2. Second 1-13). The flow of water from the
Instance famous spring for some reason had
ceased. In their distress the people
became impatient and petulant. At the door of
the tent of meeting Moses and Aaron received the


1, First
Instance


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mary
Master


Lord’s instructions. In his speech of remonstrance
to the people Moses seemed to glorify himself and
his brother; and instead of speaking to the rock
as God had commanded, he struck it twice with his
rod. The flow of water was at once restored; but
Moses and Aaron were heavily punished because
they did not sanctify God in the eyes of the children
of Israel. The “Waters of Meribah” was the name
given to this scene of strife. The incident is re-
ferred to in Nu 20 24, and Dt 32 51 (m*ribhath
kadhesh, AV “Meribah-Kadesh,’’ RV ‘“Meribah of
Kadesh”). In Ps 817 God appears as having
tested Israel here. The sin of Israel and the en-
suing calamity to Moses are alluded toin Ps 106 32.

The place appears in Ezk 47 19; 48 28, as on
the southern border of the land of Israel, in the
former as ‘Meriboth-kadesh,” in the latter as
“Meribath-kadesh’’ (Meriboth=pl. Meribath=
“const, sing.’’) where the position indicated is that
of ‘ Ain Kadts, ‘‘Kadesh-barnea.”

In Dt 33 2, by a slight emendation of the text
we might read m*ribhoth kadhésh for méribh-bhoth
kodhesh. This gives a preferable sense.

W. Ewina

MASSIAS, ma-si’‘as (A, Maoclas, Massias, B,
*Acoelas, Assetas): One of those who put away their
speenee wives” (1 Esd 9 22) =‘‘Maaseiah” of Ezr

2.


MAST. Sce Suires anv Boats, II, 2, (3); 3.


MASTER, mas’ter (IN, ’adhon, 592, ba'al,
“21, rabbi; Seomdtys, despdtés, &8doeKahos, didd-
skalos, kiptos, kirios, paBBl, rhabbi): ‘‘Master,’”’
when the tr of ’adhon, “ruler,” “lord” (Sir),
often tr4 “lord,” denotes generally the owner or
master of a servant or slave (Gen 24 9, etc; 39 2,
ete; Ex 214, ete; Dt 23 15 bis; 28 9 9.10
bis; Prov 30 10); elsewhere it is rather “‘lord’’ or
“ruler” (often king, e.g. 1S 24 6.8; 26 16); in
the pl. ’dédhonim, it is, as the rule, used only of God
(but see Gen 19 2.18; Dt 1017; Ps 136 3,
“Lord of lords’; Isa 26 13, “other lords’; 19 4
[Heb “lords’’]; 24 2). Ba‘al, “lord,” ‘owner,’ is
tri “master”: “the master of the house’ (Ex 22 8;
Jgs 19 22.23); ‘the ass his master’s crib” (Isa 1
3). We have it also tr’ “masters of assemblies”
(Eccl 12 11). See Assrmpiies, Masters or. Cf
Ecelus 32 1, “master [of a feast],” RV “ruler”;
Jn 2 9, “ruler of the feast”; rabh (Dn) 13; Jon 1
6, “‘shipmaster’’),; rabh, Aram., “great,” “mighty,”
“elder” (Dnl 4 9; 6 11, “master of the magicians”’);
also sar, “head” or ‘chief’? (Ex 1 11, ‘‘taskmasters”’;
1 Ch 15 27, “master of the song,’ RVm “the
carrying of the ark, Heb the lifting up”); ‘dr, “to
call,” ‘to awake,” is also rendered ‘master’ in
AV, “The Lord will cut off the man that doeth this,
the master and the scholar,’ m “him that waketh
and him that answereth,’’ RV as AVm (Mal 2 12).

The vb. “to master” docs not occur in the OT,
but we have in Apoc (Wisd 12 18) ‘mastering thy
power’ (despézin ischios), RV “being sovereign
over [thy] strength.”

In the NT despotés answers to ’édhGn as ‘‘master”
(1 Tim 6 1.2; 2 Tim 2 21), rendered also “Lord”
(Lk 2 20,ete); kurios, is “Master,” “Lord,” “Sir,”
used very frequently of God or of Christ (Mt 1
20.22.24), tra “Master” (Mt 6 24; 16 27; AV Mk
13 35; Rom 14 4,etc); kathégétés, a “leader,” is tra
“Master”? (Mt 23 8[AV].10); didaskalos, a title very
often applied to Our Lord in the Gospels, is ‘“Teach-
er,” tr4 “Master” in AV Mt 8 19; 9 11; Mk 4 38;
Lk 3 12, ete; RV ‘Teacher’; also Jn 3 2.10; Jas
3 1, “be not many masters,” RV “teachers”; rhabbi,
rhabbei (‘Rabbi’) (a transliterated Heb term
signifying ‘“‘my Teacher’) is also in several instances
applied to Jesus, AV “Master” (Mt 26 25.49; Mk


Mastery


, THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2008


Matthew, Gospe.
95; 1121; Jn 92 [RV leaves untranslated];
Mk 10 51, “Rabboni,” AV ‘Lord’; Jn 20 16


[“Rabbouni’’], RV “Rabboni,” q.v.).


For ‘‘master” RV has “lord” (1 S 26 16; 29 4.10;
Am 41; Mk 13 35; Rom 14 4); “master” for “lord”
(Gen 39 16; 2 Pet 2 1; 10); for ‘good man
of the house’ (Mt 24 43; Lk 12 39), ‘master of the
honse"’; in Eph 6 5, RVm gives ‘'Gr lords” (in ver 9,
“their Master and yours” is also Gr kurios); instead
of ‘‘the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ”’
(Jude ver 4), RV reads “our only Master and Lord,
Jesus Christ,”" m ‘‘the only Master, and our Lord Jesus

‘brist’’; for ‘‘overcame them’ (Acts 19 16), ‘‘mas-


tered both of them."
W. L. WaLgkER

MASTERY, mas’tér-i (VIIA, g*bharah, 020,
shlét, Aram.; dyovifopar, agdnizomai, a0dlo,
athléo): ‘Mastery’? occurs twice in the OT and
twice in AV of the NT: in Ex 82 18 (g*bharah,
“might’’), “the voice of them that shout for mas-
tery”; in Dnl 6 24 (shelét, ‘‘to have power’), ‘The
lions had the mastery of them”; in 1 Cor 9 25,
agénizomat, ‘to contend for a prize,” to be a com-
batant in the public games, is tr4 “striveth for the
mastery,” RV “striveth in the games”; and in
2 Tim 2 5, aihled, with the same meaning, is tr4
“strive for masteries,’’ RV “contend in the games.”
From the Gr we have the words “athlete,”’ etc.

W. L. WaLker

MASTIC, MASTICK, mas’tik (oxtvos, schinos): A
tree mentioned only in Sus ver 54 (cf Gen 37 25m).
It is the Pistacia lentiscus (Arab. Mistaki), a shrub
which attains a height of 10 to 12 ft., growing in
thickets on the slopes round the Mediterranean.
The gum which exudes through incisions made in
the bark is greatly prized as a masticatory. The
smell and flavor are suggestive of the terebinth.
It is chewed in order to preserve the teeth and gums.
But often men chew it without any special purpose,
just because they like it. The mastick produced
in Chios is most highly esteemed. It is employed
in making perfumes and sweetmeats; in preparing
bread a little is sometimes added to the dough just
before it is put into the oven. Ewine

MATHANIAS, math-a-ni‘as: AV in 1 Esd 9
31. See Marrzantas.


MATHELAS, ma-thé’las (A, Ma€fAas, Mathélas,
B, Moeftas, Macélas; AV Matthelas): One of the
priests who had married “strange wives” (1 Esd
9 19)=‘‘Maaseiah” of Ezr 10 18.


MATHUSALA, ma-thi’sa-la (Mabovoadd, Mathou-
sald): Gr form of ‘Methuselah,’ RV (Lk 3 37
AV).


MATRED, mia’ired (TWO), matrédh, “expul-
sion’): The mother of Mehetabel, wife of Hadar,
one of the kings of Edom (Gen 36 39; 1 Ch 1 50,
“Hadad”). The LXX and Pesh designate Matred
as male, i.e. as son of Me-zahab instead of daughter.


MATRI, ma’tri (Q'S, mair?, “rainy”): A
family of the tribe of Benjamin to which King Saul
belonged (1 S 10 21 AV).


MATRITES, ma’trits (QI, ha-mairz): The
RV tr of matri with the definite art., “‘the Matrites”’
(L § 10 21).


MATTAN, mat’an (jf1'9 , maiian, “‘a gift’):

(1) A priest in the house of Baal, slain by Jehoiada
before Baal’s altar (2 K 11 18; 2 Ch 23 17).

(2) The father of Shephatiah a contemporary
and persecutor of Jeremiah (Jer 38 1), one of those
who put Jeremiah into Malechiah’s dungeon (ver 6).


MATTANAH, mat’a-na (WMD, maitanah; B,
Mavéavacy, Manthanaein; A, Mavéavelv, Man-
thanein): A station of the Israelites which seems to
have lain between Beer and Nahaliel (Nu 21 18 f).
The name means “gift,” and might not inappro-
priately be applied to a well in the wildemess
(Budde translates “Out of the desert a gift’’; see
Expos T, VI, 482). Some would therefore identify
it with Beer. This is improbable. There is now
no clue to the place, but it must have lain S.W.
of the Dead Sea.


MATTANIAH, mat-a-ni’a (MD , mattanyaha,
“gift of Jeh”’):

(1) King Zedekiah’s original name, but changed
by Nebuchadnezzar when he made him king over
crs instead of his nephew Jehoiachin (2 K

17).

(2) A descendant of Asaph (1 Ch 9 15), leader
of the temple choir (Neh 11 17; 12 8). Men-
tioned among the “‘porters,”’ keepers of ‘the store-
houses of the gates’? (12 25), and again in ver 35 as
among the “priests’ sons with trumpets.”

(3) May be the same as (2), though in 2 Ch 20
14 he is mentioned as an ancestor of that Jahaziel
whose inspired words in the midst of the congrega-
tion encouraged Jehoshaphat to withstand the in-
vasion of Moab, Ammon and Seir (vs 14 ff).

(4-7) Four others who had foreign wives, (a) the
Matthanias of 1 Esd 9 27 (Ezr 10 26); (6) the
Othonias of 1 Esd 9 28 (Ezr 10 27); (c) the
Matthanias of 1 Esd 9 31 (Ezr 10 30); (d) the
fourth of these in 1 Esd 9 34 AV has had his
name blended into that of Mattenai, and the two
appear as the composite name Mamnitanemus
(Ezr 10 37). Heisason of Bani.

(8) A Levite, father of Zaccur, ancestor of Hanan
the under-treasurer of the Levitical offerings under
Nehemiah (Neh 13 18).

(9) One of the sons of Heman the singer, whose
office it was to blow the horns in the temple-service
as David had appointed it (1 Ch 25 4.5). He
was head of the 9th division of the 12 Levites (1
Ch 26 16), who were proficient in the Songs of Jeh
(1 Ch 26 7).

(10) One of the sons of Asaph who helped Heze-
kiah in the fulfilling of his vow to cleanse the house
of the Lord (2 Ch 29 18). Henry WALLACE


MATTATHA, mat’/a-tha (Marraéa, Maiiathd):
Son of Nathau the son of David in the genealogy
of Jesus (Lk 3 31).


MATTATHAH, mat’a-tha:
(q.v.).


MATTATHIAS, mat-a-thi’as (Marra@las, Aai-
tathias). The persons of this name in the Apoc are:

(1) Mattathias the father of the Maccabees.
See AsMoNEANS; MaccaBEEs.

(2) One of the 7 who stood on Ezra’s right hand
as he read the law (1 Esd 9 43)=“‘Mattithiah”
of Neh 8 4.

(3) The son—probably the youngest (cf 1 Mace
16 2)—of Simon the Maccabean, treacherously
murdered along with his father and his brother
Judas by his brother-in-law Ptolemy, son of Abubus
in the stronghold of Dok near Jericho in the 177th
Seleucid—-136-135 BC (1 Mace 16 14).

(4) Son of Absalom, one of the two “captains
of the forces’’ who in the campaign against Deme-
trius in the plain of Hazor gallantly supported
Judas, enabling the latter to turn an impending
defeat into a great victory (1 Mace 11 70).

(5) One of the three envoys sent by Nicanor to
treat with Judas in 161 BC (2 Mace 14 19). No


RV  Martrarrau


2009


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mastery
Matthew, Gospel


ee of envoys are given in the account of 1 Mace
(6) One of the sons of Asom who put away his
“strange wife’ (1 Esd 9 33)=AV “Matthias” =
“Mattattah” of Ezr 10 33.
_In addition to these two of this name are men-
tioned in the NT:
(7) Lk 3 25, “son of Amos.”
(8) Lk 3 26, “son of Semein.”’ S. ANaus


MATTATTAH, mat’a-ta (MANA, mattatiah): RV
for ‘“Mattathah” in AV (Ezr 10 33). The same as
“Mattathias” of 1 Esd 9 33, AV “Matthias” (q.v.).


MATTENAI, mat-é-ni/i, mat’éni (TVA, mat-
tenay, “liberal’’):

(1) (2) Two who married foreign wives, one a
son of Hashum (Ezr 10 33; in 1 Esd 9 33 ‘‘Altan-
neus’’); the other a son of Bani (Ezr 10 37).

(8) A priest in the days of Joiakim son of Jeshua
(Neh 12 19), representing the house of Joiarib.


MATTER, mat’ér: This word being a very general
term may express various ideas. RV therefore
frequently changes the reading of AV in order to
state more definitely the meaning of the context
(cf Ex 24 14; 1S 16 18; 1 K 8 59; 28 11 19;
Est 3 4; Ps 35 20; 645; Prov 16 20; 18 13).
“31, dabhar, and the Gr \éyos, légos, both meaning
“word,” are very frequently tr4 by “matter.”
try, hilé, “wood,” is rendered “matter” in Jas 3 5
AV (RV “how much wood is kindled”; cf Sir 28
10). Job 32 18 tr? lit. “words’’; also Dnl 4 17,
“sentence.” d:adépw, diaphérd, “to carry in differ-
ent places,” “to differ,’ is rendered “to make
matter” (Gal 2 6). The meaning is ‘it makes a
difference,’ “it matters,’’ “it is of importance.”

A. L. Bresiice

MATTHAN, mat’than (TR Maréav, Matthén, WH
Maé@dv, Maththén): An ancestor of Jesus, grand-
father of Joseph the husband of Mary (Mt 1 15).
See Marruar.


MATTHANIAS, mat-tha-ni’as (A, Maréavlas,
Matthanias, B, Marav, Matdn): ;

(1) One of those who put away their “strange
wives’ (1 Esd 9 27)=‘‘Mattaniah” of Ezr 10 26.

(2) AV “Mathanias”’ (1 Esd 9 31) =“Mattaniah”
of Ezr 10 30. B, followed by Swete, reads Beo-
kacracpus, Beskaspasmis.


MATTHAT, mat’that (Mar@dér, Matihdt, Maé-
Gar, Mathihdt): The name of two ancestors of Jesus
in Lk’s genealogy (Lk 3 24.29), one being the
grandfather of Joseph the husband of Mary.


MATTHEW, math’i: Matthew the apostle
and evangelist is mentioned in the 4 catalogues of
the apostles in Mt 103; Mk 318; Lk 6 15;
Acts 1 13, though his place is not constant in this
list, varying between the 7th and the 8th ple and
thus exchanging positions with Thomas. ‘The name
occurring in the two forms Maré@aios, Maithatos, and
MaGGaios, Maththaios, is a Gr reproduction of the
Aram. Mattathyah, i.e. “gift of Jeh,” and equivalent
to Theodore. Before his call to the apostolic office,
-according to Mt 9 9, his name was Levi. The
identity of Matthew and Levi is practically beyond
all doubt, as is evident from the predicate in Mt 10
3; and from a comparison of Mk 2 14; Lk 5 27
with Mt 99. St. Mark calls him “the son of
Alphaeus” (Mk 2 14), although this cannot have
been the Alphaeus who was the father of James the
Less; for if this James and Matthew had been
brothers this fact would doubtless have been men-
tioned, as is the case with Peter and Andrew, and
also with the sons of Zebedee. Whether Jesus, as


He did in the case of several others of His disci-
ples, gave him the additional name of Matthew
is a matter of which we are not informed. As
he was a customs officer (6 reAdv7s, ho telénés, Mt
10 3) in Capernaum, in the territory of .Herod
Antipas, Matthew was not exactly a Rom official,
but was in the service of the tetrarch of Galilee, or
possibly a subordinate officer, belonging to the class
called ortitores, serving under the publicani, or
superior officials who farmed the Rom taxes. As
such he must have had some education, and doubt-
less in addition to the native Aram. must have been
acquainted with the Gr. His ready acceptance of
the call of Jesus shows that he must have belonged
to that group of publicans and sinners, who in
Galilee and elsewhere looked longingly to Jesus
(Mt 11 19; Lk 7 34; 15 1). Just at what period
of Christ’s ministry he was called does not appear
with certainty, but evidently not at once, as on the
day when he was called (Mt 9 11.14.18; Mk 5
37), Peter, James and John are already trustworthy
disciples of Jesus. Unlike the first six among the
apostles, Matthew did not enter the group from
among the pupils of John the Baptist. These are
practically all the data furnished by the NT on the
person of Matthew, and what is found in post- and
extra-Bib. sources is chiefly the product of imagina-
tion and in part based on mistaking the name of
Matthew for Matthias (cf Zahn, Iniro to the NT, ch
liv, 0.3). Tradition states that he preached for
15 years in Pal and that after this he went to foreign
nations, the Ethiopians, Macedonians, Syrians,
Persians, Parthians and ‘Medes being mentioned.
He is said to have died a natural death either in
Ethiopia or in Macedonia. The stories of the Roman
Catholic church that he died the death of a martyr
on September 21 and of the Gr church that this
occurred on November 10 are without any histori-
cal basis. Clem. Alex. (Sirom., iv.9) gives the ex-
plicit denial of Heracleon that Matthew suffered
martyrdom. G. H. Scuoppr


MATTHEW, THE GOSPEL OF (etayyéAtov cara
Ma6aiov, euaggélion katéd Maththaion [or Mar@aiov,
Matthaton}):

1. Name of Gospel—Unity and Integrit

2. Canonicity and ‘Authorship oot

3. Relation of Gr and Aram. Gospels

4, Contents, Character and Purpose

5. Problems of Literary Relation

6. Date of Gospel
LITERATURE

The “Gospel according to Matthew,” i.e. the
Gospel according to the account of Matthew, stands,

according to traditional, but not en-
1. Name of tirely universal, arrangement, first
Gospel— among the canonical Gospels. The
Unity and Gospel, as will be seen below, was
Integrity unanimously ascribed by the testi-

mony of the ancient church to the
apostle Matthew, though the title does not of itself
necessarily imply immediate authorship. The
unity and integrity of the Gospel were never in
ancient times called in question. Chs 1, 2, par-
ticularly—the story of the virgin birth and child-
hood of Jesus—are reed by the consentient tes-
timony of MSS, VSS, and patristic references, to
have been an integral part of the Gospel from the
beginning (see Vircin Birtu). The omission of
this section from the heretical Gospel of the Ebion-
ites, which appears to have had some relation to our
Gospel, is without significance.

The theory of successive redactions of Mt, starting
with an Aram. Gospel, elaborated by Eichhorn and
Marsh (1801), and the related theories of successive
editions of the Gospel put forth by the Tiibingen school
(Baur, Hilgenfeld, Késtlin, etc), and by Ewald (Bleek
supposes a primitive Gr Gospel), lack historical founda-
tion, and are refuted by the fact that MSS and VSS
know only the ultimate redaction. Is it credible that


Matthew, Gospel THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2010


the churches should quietly accept redaction after redac-
pon wad Det a word be said, or a vestige remain, of any
o. em.


_ @) Canonicity—The apostolic origin and canon-
ical rank of the Gospel of Mt were accepted without
a doubt by the early church. Origen,


2, Canon- in the beginning of the 3d cent. could
icity and speak of it as the first of “the four
Authorship Gospels, which alone are received with-


out dispute by the church of God under
heaven” (in Euseb., HH, VI, 25). The use of the
Gospel can be traced in the apostolic Fathers; most
distinctly in Barnabas, who quotes Mt 22 14 with
the formula, “It is written” (5). Though not
mentioned by name, it was a chief source from which
Justin took his data for the life and words of Jesus
(cf Westcott, Canon, 91 ff), and apostolic origin is
implied in its forming part of “the Memoirs of the
Apostles,” ‘‘which are called Gospels,’ read weekly
in the assemblies of the Christians (Ap. i.66, etc).
Its identity with our Mt is confirmed by the un-
doubted presence of that Gospel in the Diatessaron
of Tatian, Justin’s disciple. The testimony of
Papias is considered below. The unhesitating
acceptance of the Gospel is further decisively shown
by the testimonies and use made of it in the works
of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, and
by its inclusion in the Muratorian Canon, the Itala,
Pesh, etc. See Canon or NT; GospeEzs.

(2) Authorship— The questions that cluster
around the First Gospel have largely to do with the
much-discussed and variously disputed statement
concerning it found in Eusebius (H £, III, 39), cited
from the much older work of Papias, entitled In-
terpretation of the Words of the Lord. Papiasis the
first who mentions Matthew by name as the author
of the Gospel. His words are: “Matthew com-
posed the Logia [\éya, légia, “words,” “‘oracles’’]
in the Heb [Aram.] tongue, and everyone inter-

reted them as he was able.’’” Papias cannot here

e referring to a book of Matthew in which only the
discourses or sayings of Jesus had been preserved,
but which had not any, or only meager accounts of
His deeds, which imaginary document is in so many
critical circles regarded as the basis of the present
Gospel, for Papias himself uses the expression
Td déyia, td légia, as embracing the story, as he
himself says, im speaking of Mk, “of the things
said or done by Christ”? (useb., HH, Ill, 24; cf

articularly T. Zahn, Intro to NT, sec. 54, and

ightfoot, Supernatural Religion, 170 ff). Eusebius
further reports that after Matthew had first labored
among his Jewish compatriots, he went to other
nations, and as a substitute for his oral preaching,
left to the former a Gospel written in their own
dialect (ITI, 24). The testimony of Papias to
Matthew as the author of the First Gospel is con-
firmed by Irenaeus (ii.3, 1) and by Origen (in
Euseb., HE, V, 10), and may be accepted as repre-
senting a uniform 2d-cent. tradition. Always,
however, it is coupled with the statement that the
Gospel was originally written in the Heb dialect.
Hence arises the difficult question of the relation of
the canonical Gr Gospel, with which alone, appar-
ently, the fathers were acquainted, to this alleged
original apostolic work.

One thing which seems certain is that whatever
this Heb (Aram.) document may have been, it was not

an original form from which the present


3. Relation Gr Gospel of Mt was tr4, either by the


of Grand apostle himself, or by somebody else,
Aram. as was maintained by Bengel, Thiersch,
Gospels and other scholars. Indeed, the Gr


Mt throughout bears the impress of
being not a tr at all, but as having been originally
written in Gr, and as being less Hebraistic in the
form of thought than some other NT writings, e.g.


the Apocalypse. It is generally not difficult to
discover when a Gr book of this period is a tr from
the Heb or Aram. That our Mt was written origi-
nally in Gr appears, among other things, from the
way in which it makes use of the OT, sometimes
following the LXX, sometimes going back to the
Heb. Particularly instructive passages in this
regard are 12 18-21 and 18 14.15, in which the
rendering of the Alexandrian tr would have served
the purposes of the evangelist, but he yet follows
more closely the original text, although he adopts
the LXX wherever this seemed to suit better than
the Heb (cf Keil’s Comm. on Mt, loc. cit.).

The external evidences to which appeal is made
in favor of the use of an original Heb or Aram. Mt
in the primitive church are more than elusive.
Eusebius (HE, V, 10) mentions as a report (Aé
yerat, légetat) that Pantaenus, about the year 170
AD, found among the Jewish Christians, probably
of South Arabia, a Gospel of Mt in Heb, left there
by Bartholomew; and Jerome, while in the Syrian
Beroea, had occasion to examine such a work,
which he found in use among the Nazarenes, and
which at first he regarded as a composition of the
apostle Matthew, but afterward declared not to be
such, and then identified with the Gospel according
to the Hebrews (Evangelium secundum or juata
Hebraeos) also called the Gospel of the Twelve
Apostles, or of the Nazarenes, current among the
Nazarenes and Ebionites (De Vir. Illustr., iii; Con-
tra Pelag.,iii.2; Comm. on Mt 12 13, etc; see Gos-
PEL ACCORDING TO THE HEBREWS). For this reason
the references by Irenaeus, Origen, Eusebius to the
Heb Gospel of Mt are by many scholars regarded as
referring to this Heb Gospel which the Jewish Chris-
tians employed, and which they thought to be the
work of the evangelist (cf for fuller details RH, XII,
art. ‘“Matthaeus der Apostel”). Just what the origi-
nal Heb Mt was to which Papias refers (assuming it
to have had a real existence) must, with our present
available means, remain an unsolved riddle, as also
the possible connection between the Gr and Heb
texts. Attempts like those of Zahu, in his Kom-
mentar on Mt, to explain readings of the Gr text
through an inaccurate understanding of the imag-
inary Heb original are arbitrary and unreliable.
There remains, of course, the possibility that the
apostle himself, or- someone under his care (thus
Godet), produced a Gr recension of an earlier Aram.
work,

The prevailing theory _at present is that the Heb
Matthaean document of Papias was a collection mainly
of the discourses of Jesus (called by recent critics Q),
which, in variant Gr translations, was used both by the
author of the Gr Mt and by the evangelist Luke, thus
explaining the common features in these two gospels

W. C. Allen, however, in his Crit. and Exeget. Comm. on
Mt, disputes Lk’s use of this supposed common source,
Intro, xlviff).. The use of this supposed Matthaean
source is thought to explain how the Gr Gospel came to
be named after the apostle. It has already been re-
marked, however, that there is no good reason for sup-


posing that the ‘‘Logia’’ of Papias was confined to dis-
courses. See further on ‘‘sources’’ below.


(1) Contents and character—As_ respects con-
tents, the Gospel of Mt can be divided into 3 chief
arts: (1) preliminary, including the


4. Contents, birth and early youth of the Lord


Character (chs 1,2); (2) the activity of Jesus in
and Galilee (chs 8-18); (3) the activity
Purpose of Jesus in Judaea and Jerus, followed


by His passion, death, and resurrection
(chs 19-28). In character, the Gospel, like those
of the other evangelists, is only a chrestomathy, a
selection from the great mass of oral tradition con-
cerning the doings and sayings of Christ current
in apostolic and early Christian circles, chosen for
the special purpose which the evangelist had in view.
Accordingly, there is a great deal of material in Mt


2011


in common with Mk and Lk, although not a little
of this material, too, is individualistic in character,
and of a nature to vex and perplex the harmonist,
as e.g. Matthew’s accounts of the temptation, of the
demoniacs at Gadara, of the blind man at Jericho
(4 1-11; 8 28-34; 20 29-24); yet there is much
also in this Gospel that is peculiar to it. Such are
the following pericopes: chs 1,2; 9 27-36; 10 15.
37-40; 11 28-30; 12 11.12.15-21.33-38; 18 24-
00.36-52; 14 28-31; 1617-19; 17 24-27; 18
15-35; 19 10-12; 20 1-16; 21 101f.14-16.28-32;


22 1-14; 23 8-22; 24 42—25 46; 27 3—10.62-66;.


28 11ff. The principle of arrangement of the
material is not chronological, but rather that of
similarity of material. The addresses and parables
of Jesus are reported consecutively, althongh they
may have been spoken at different times, and
material scattered in the other evangelists—esp. in
Lk—is found combined in Mt. Instances are seen
in the Sermon on the Mount (chs 5-7), the “mission
address’ (ch 10), the seven parables of the Kingdom
of God (ch 13), the discourses and parables (ch 18)
the woes against the Pharisees (ch 23), and the gran

eschatological discourses (chs 24, 25) (cf with || in
the other gospels, on the relation to which, see
helow).

(2) Purpose-——The special purpose which the
writer had in view in his Gospel is nowhere expressly
stated, as is done, e.g., by the writer of the Fourth
Gospel in Jn 20 30.81, concerning his book, but it
can readily be gleaned from the general contents of
the book, as also from specific passages. The tradi-
tional view that Matthew wrote primarily to prove
that in Jesus of Nazareth is to be found the ful-
filment and realization of the Messianic predictions
of the OT prophets and secrs is beyond a doubt
correct. The mere fact that there are about 40


proof passages in Mt from the OT, in connection -


even with the minor details of Christ’s career, such
as His return from Egypt (2 15), is ample evidence
of this fact, although the proof manner and proof
value of some of these passages are exegetical
cruces, as indeed is the whole way in which the OT
is cited in the NT (see Quotations, NT).

The question as to whether the Gospel was
written for Jewish Christians, or for Jews not yet
converted, is less important, as this book, as was the
case probably with the Ep. of Jas, was written at
that transition period when the Jewish and the
Christian communions were not yet fully separated,
and still worshipped together.

Particular indications as to this purpose of the
Gospel are met with at the beginning and through-
out the whole work; e.g. it is obvious in 1 1, where
the proof is furnished that Jesus was the son of
Abraham, in whom all families of the earth were to
be blessed (Gen 12 3), and of David, who was to
establish the kingdom of God forever (2 8 7). The
genealogy of Lk, on the other hand (3 28 ff), with
its cosmopolitan character and purpose, aiming to
show that Jesus was the Redeemer of the whole
world, leads back this line to Adam, the common
ancestor of all mankind. Further, as the genealogy
of Mt is evidently that of Joseph, the foster and
legal father of Jesus, and not that of Mary, as is the
case in Lk, the purpose to meet the demands of the
Jewish reader is transparent. The full account in
Mt of the Sermon on the Mount, which does not,
as is sometimes said, contain a “new program of
the kingdom of God’’—indeed does not contain the
fundamental principles of the Gospel at all—but is
the deeper and truly Bib. interpretation of the Law
over against the superficial interpretation of the
current Pharisaism, which led the advocates of the
latter in all honesty to declare, “What lack I yet?”
given with the design of driving the anditors to the
gospel of grace and faith proclaimed by Christ (cf


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Matthew, Gospel


Gal 3 24)—all this is only intelligible when we
remember that the book was written for Jewish
readers. Again the yéyparrat, gégraptai—i.e. the
fulfilment of OT Scripture, a matter which for the
Jew was everything, but for the Gentile was of
little concern—appears in Mt on all hands. We
haveit e.g. in connection with the birth of Jesus from
a virgin, His ee from Herod, His coming
to Nazareth (1 22f; 2 5.6.15.17 1.23), the activity
of John the Baptist (8 3; cf 11 10), the selection
of Galilee as the scene of Jesus’ operations (4 14 ff),
the work of Jesus as the fulfilment of the Law
and Prophets (6 17), His quiet, undemonstrative
methods (12 17 ff), His teaching by parables (18
35), His entrance into Jerus (21 41.16), His being
arrested (26 54), the betrayal of Judas (27 9), the
distribution of His garments (27 35). Through-
out, as Professor Kiibel says, the Gospel of Mt shows
a “‘diametrical contrast between Christ and Pharisa-
ism.” Over against the false Messianic ideas and
ideals of contemporary teachings among the Jews,
Mt selects those facts from the teachings and deeds
of Christ which show the true Messiah and the cor-
rect principles of the kingdom of God. In this
respect the Gospel can be regarded as both apolo-
getic and polemical in its aim, in harmony with
which also is its vivid portraiture to the growing
hostility of the Jews to Christ and to His teachings
which, in the latter part of Mt, appears as intense
as it does in John. Nowhere else do we find such
pronounced denunciations of the Pharisees and their
system from the lips of Jesus (cf 9 11 ff; 12 1 ff;
16 1ff; 16 1ff; and on particular points 5 20ff;
9 13; 23 23; see also 8 12; 9 34; 12 24; 21 42).
It is from this point of view, as representing the
antithesis to the narrow Pharisaic views, that we
are to understand the writer’s emphasis on the
universality of the kingdom of Jesus Christ (cf 3
1-12; 8 10-12; 21 33-44; 28 18-20)—passages
in which some have thought they discerned a con-
tradiction to the prevailing Jewish strain of the
Gospel.
The special importance of the Gospel of Mt for
the synoptic problem can be fully discussed only
in the art. on this subject (see Gos-
5. Problems pris, THe Synoptic), and in con-
of Literary nection with Mk and Lk. The
Relation synoptic problem deals primarily with
the literary relations existing between
the first 3 Gospels. The contents of these are in
many cases so similar, even in verbal details, that
they must have some sources in common, or some
dependence or interdependence must exist between
them; on the other hand, each of the 3 Gospels
shows so many differences and dissimilarities from
the other two, that in their composition some inde-
pendent source or sources—oral or writtcn—must
have becn employed. In general it may be said
that the problem itself is of little more than literary
importance, having by no means the historical
significance for the development of the religion ot
the NT which the Pentateuchal problem has for
that of the OT. Nor has the synoptic problem
any historical background that promises a solution
as the Pentateuchal problem has in the history of
Israel. Nothing save an analysis of the contents of
these Gospels, and a comparison of the contents of
the three, offers the scholar any material for the
study of the problem, and as subjective taste and
impressions are prime factors in dealing with ma-
terials of this sort, it is more than improbable, in
the absence of any objective evidence, that the
synoptic problem in general, or the question of the
sources of Mt in particular, will ever be solved to
the satisfaction of the majority of scholars. The
hypothesis which at present has widest acceptance
is the ‘“‘two-source”’ theory, according to which


Matthias
Meals


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2012


Mk, in its existing or some earlier form, and al (ef NatHanary). He was traditionally the author


problematical origmal Mt (Q), constitute the basis
of our canonical Gospel.

In proof of this, it is pointed out that nearly the whole
of the narrative-matter of Mk is taken up into Mt, as
also into Lk, while the large sections, chiefly discourses,
common to Mt and Lk are held, as already said, to
point to a source of that character which both used.
The difficulties arise when the comparison is pursued into
details, and explanation is sought of the variations in
phraseology, order, sometimes in conception, in the
respective gospels.

Despite the prestige which this theory has at-
tained, the true solution is probably a simpler one.
Matthew no doubt secured the bulk of his data
from his own experience and from oral tradition,
and as the former existed in fixed forms, due to
catechetical instruction, in the early church, it is
possible to explain the similarities of Mt with the
other two synoptics on this ground alone, without
resorting to any literary dependence, either of Mt
on the other two, or of these, or either of them, on
Mt. The whole problem is purely speculative and
subjective and under present conditions justifies
a cut bono? as far as the vast literature which it has
called into existence is concerned.

According to early and practically universal
tradition Mt wrote his Gospel before the other

three, and the place assigned to it in
6. Date of NT literature favors the acceptance
Gospel of this tradition. Jrenaeusreports that

it was written when Peter and Paul
were preaching in Rome (iii.1), and Euseb. states
that this was done when Matthew left Pal and went
to preach to others (HE, III, 24). Clement of
Alexandria is responsible for the statement that the
presbyters who succeeded each other from the
beginning declared that “the gospels containing the
genealogies [Mt and Lk] were written first’’ (Euseb.,
HE, V1, 14). This is, of course, fatal to the current
theory of dependence on Mk, and is in consequence
rejected. At any rate, there is the best reason for
holding that the book must have been written
before the destruction of Jerus in 70 AD (cf 24 15).
The most likely date for the Gr Gospel is in the 7th
Christian decade. Zahn claims that Matthew
wrote his Aram. Gospel in Pal in 62 AD, while the
Gr Mt dates from 85 AD, but this latter date is not


probable.
Lireratvre.—Intro to the Comms. on Mt (Meyer,
Alford, Allen [ICC], Broadus [Philadelphia, 1887],


Morison, Plummer, Schaeffer in Lutheran Commentary
{New York, 1895], etc); works on Intro to the NT
(Salmon, Weiss, Zahn, etc); arts. in Bible Dicts. and
Encs may be consulted. See also F. C. Burkitt, The
Gospel History and Its Transmission; Wellhausen, Das
Evangelium Matthaet and Linleitung in die drei ersten
Evangelien; Sir J. C. Hawkins, Horae Synopticae; West-
Cott, Intro to the Study of the Gospels; Lightfoot, Essays
on Supernatural Religion, V, ‘ Papias of Hierapolis”’
(this last specially on the sense of Logia). See also the
works cited in Marz, Gosreu or.


G. H. Scuopps

MATTHIAS, ma-thi’as (Marélas, Matthias, or
Mal@las, Mathihias; TNT, Matlithyah, “given
of Jeh’’): Matthias was the one upon whom the
lot fell when he, along with Joseph Barsabbas, was
put forward to fill up the place in the apostleship
left vacant by Judas Iscariot (Acts 1 15-26).
This election was held at Jerus, and the meeting
was presided over by St. Peter. The conditions
demanded of the candidates were that they should
“have companied with us all the time that the Lord
Jesus went in and went out among us, beginning
from the baptism of John, unto the day that he was
received up from us,” and that the one chosen
should “become a witness with us of his resurrection”
(Acts 1 21.22). The mode of procedure was by
lot, and with prayer was the election made (cf
Acts 1 24).

Hilgenfeld identifies Matthias with Nathanael


of the ‘Gospel of Matthias,” a heretical work re-
ferred to by Origen (Hom. on Lk, i), by Eusebius
(HE, III, 25, 6) and by Hieronymus (Proem in
Matth.). No trace of it is left. The gnostic
Basilides (c 183 AD) and his son Isidor claimed to
ground their doctrine in the “Gospcl of Basilides’’
on the teaching Matthias received directly from the
Saviour (Hippol., vii.20) (cf Hennecke, Neutes-
tameniliche Apokryphen, 167). Various parts of
the apocryphal ‘‘Contendings of the Apostles” deal
with the imprisonment and blinding of Matthias by
the Ethiopian cannibals, and bis rescue by Andrew
(cf Budge, Contendings of the Apostles, II, 163, 164,
267-88; see also ANDREW). According to the
Martyrdom of St. Matthias (Budge, IT, 289-94) he
was sent to Damascus, and died at Phalaeon, a city
of Judaea. Other sources mention Jerus as the
place of Matthias’ ministry and’ burial.
Cc. M. Kerr

MATTITHIAH, mai-i-thi’a (MMA, mattithyah,
or WOM A, maitithyaha, “gift of Jeh’’):

(1) The Mattithiah of Neh 8 4 (1st spelling)
was one of those who stood at Ezra’s right hand
while he read the law (cf 1 Esd 9 43). He may be
the individual set over “things that were baked in
pans” (1 Ch 9 81).

(2) One of those appointed by David to minister
before the ark, and to “celebrate and to thank and
praise Jeh, the God of Israel’? (1 Ch 16 4.5).

(3) One of those who had foreign wives (Ezr 10
43). In I Esd 9 35, “Mazitias.”

(4) One of the Levites who ministered before the
ark with harps (1 Ch 15 18.21; 25 3.21, 2d
spelling). Henry WaLLAce


MATTOCK, mat’ok: The tr of 3 Heb words:
(1) WWI, makdréshah, probably “a pickaxe’”’
(1 8 18 20.21; cf ver 21 m); (2) AW, herebh,
“sword,” “ax,” “tool” (2 Ch 34 6 AV, ‘with their
mattocks,” AVm “mauls,’”’ RV “in their ruins,”
RVm “with their axes’); (3) V9", ma‘dér, ‘a hoe,”’
“Take,” “chopping instrument’? (Isa 7 25). Vines
were usually grown on terraces on the hills of Pal,
and then the mattock was in constant use. The
usual mattock is a pick with one end broad, the
other pointed.


MAUL, mé6l (Y"DA, méphie, lit. “a breaker,” “a
club,” “mace,” ‘mattock’’): A smashing weapon
like the oriental war-club or the clubs always carried
by the shepherds of Lebanon (Prov 25 18; cf Jer
51 20 m).


MAUZZIM, moz’ém, mots’ém (OMT), ma*ue-
zim, ‘places of strength,” ‘‘lortresses’’): Many con-
jectures as to the meaning of this word and its
context (Dn) 11 38; cf vs 19.39) have been made.
The LXX (uncertainly), Theodotion, and the
Geneva Version render it as a propername. Theod-
oret adopted Theodotion’s reading and explained
it as “Antichrist”! Grotius thought it a corrup-
tion of "Agéfos, Azizos, the Phoen war-god, while
Calvin saw in it the “god of wealth”! Perhaps
the buzz of conjectures about the phrase is owing
to the fact that in the first passage cited the word
is preceded by ’#lé*h, meaning God. The context
of the passage seems clearly to make the words
refer to Antiochus Epiphanes, and on this account
some have thought that the god Mars—whose
figure appears on a coin of Antiochus—is here re-
ferred to. All this is, however, little better than
guesswork, and the RV tr, by setting the mind upon
the general idea that the monarch referred to would
trust in mere force, gives us, at any rate, the general


2013


a reference to a particular deity. In vs 19 and 39,
the word ‘““Mauzzim”’ is simply tr¢ “fortresses,” and
the idea conveyed is that the mental obsession of
fortresses is equivalent to deifying them. A con-
jecture of Layard’s (Nineveh, II, 456, n.), is, at any
rate, worth referring to. Henry WauuAcn


MAW, mé (32, kébhah [cf IP, kabhah, Nu 26
3], WD, kerés; LXX tworpov, énustron): The
first word means the maw or stomach of ruminants.
It is derived from a root designating “hollowed out.”
It is mentioned alongside of the shoulder and the
two cheeks of ox and sheep, which are the pricst’s
share of any sacrifice brought by Israelites (Dt 18
3). LXX, where enustron corresponds to Attic
jvuarpov, énustron, denotes the fourth stomach or
abomasum, which was considered as a delicacy, and
was almost a national dish of the Athenians, just
as tripe is of the Londoners. The parallel form
kobhah. is used for the body of a woman, which is
being transfixed by a spear thrust in Nu 25 8. The
last word A*rés is found in a metaphorical sense:
“{Nebuchadrezzar] hath, like a monster, swallowed
me up, he hath filled his maw with my delicacies”
(Jer 51 34). H. L. E. Luerine


MAZITIAS, maz-i-ti’as (A, Matirlas, Mazitias,
B, Zevrlas, Zeitias): One of those who had taken
“strange wives” (1 Esd 9 35), identical with
Mattithiah (Ezr 10 48).


MAZZALOTH, maz’a-loth (The Planets).
AsTROLoGY, 9.


See
MAZZAROTH, maz’a-roth: The 12 constella-

tions of the Zodiac. See Astronomy, II, 12.
MAZZEBAH, maz-é’ba, mats-é’ba. See Piuiar.


MEADOW, med’s: (1) MNS, ‘arath, “the
meadows [AV ‘paper reeds’’] by the Nile” (Isa


19 7); Jas AIA, ma‘dréh-gabha‘', AV “meadows - j


of Gibeah,” RV “Maareh-geba,” RVm “the
meadow of Geba, or Gibeah” (Jgs 20 33); from


TIP, ‘arah, “to be naked”; cf Arab. yt) ariya,


Cre
“to be naked,” als, ‘ara’@’, ‘“‘a bare tract of


land.’ ‘Ardth and ma‘éréh signify tracts bare of
trees. (2) JAIN, ’aha, in Pharaoh’s dream of tue
kine, AV_ “meadow,” RV “reed grass’ (Gen 41
2.18). ’Aha is found also in Job 8 11, AV and
RV “flag,” RVm “reed-grass.’’ According to
Gesenius, "aha is an Egyp word denoting the vege-
tation of marshy ground. (8) B73 Dar, *abhél
keramim, ‘‘Abel-cheramim,”’ RVm “The meadow
of vineyards,” AV “the plain [AVm “Abel’’] of the
vineyards” (Jgs 11 33); ‘‘Abel-beth-maacah” (1 K
15 20; 2 K 15 29; cf 28 20 14.15.18); ‘“Abel-
shittim” (Nu 33 49; ef 25 1; Josh 21; 31;
Jgs 7 22; Joel 3 18; Mic 6 5); ‘Abel-meholah”’
(Jes 7 22; 1K 412; 19 16); “Abel-maim”
(2 Ch 16 4); “Abel-mizraim” (Gen 50 11); ‘‘stone,”
AV “Abel,” RVm “Abel,” that is ‘‘a meadow” (1 8


6 18); ef Arab. QuI, ’abal, “green grass,” and
28

&As!, ’abalat, “unhealthy marshy ground,” from

des, wabal, “to rain.” Aurrep Exy Day


MEAH, mé‘a (TIN, mah, “hundred”). See


. + Hamman.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


sense, though it does not exclude the possibility of


Matthias
Meals


MEAL, mél (ook, ’dkhel): Denotes the portion of
food eaten at any one time. It is found as a com-
pound in Ruth 2 14, ‘“meal-time,”’ lit. “the time
of eating.’ See Foon.


MEAL OFFERING. See Sacririce.


MEALS, mélz, MEAL-TIME: Bread materials,
bread-making and baking in the Orient are dealt
with under Breap (q.v.). For food-stuffs in use
among the Hebrews in Bible times more specifically
see Foop. This article aims to be complementary,
dealing esp. with the methods of preparing and
serving food and times of meals among the ancient
Hebrews.

The Book of Jgs gives a fair picture of the early
formative period of the Heb people and their ways
of living. It is a picture of semi-savagery—of the
life and customs of free desert tribes. In 15 we
note a distinct step forward, but the domestic and
cultural life is still low and crude. When they are
settled in Pal and come in contact with the most
cultured people of the day, the case is different.
Most that raised these Sem invaders above the
dull, crude existence of fellahin, in point of civiliza-
tion, was due to the people for whom.the land was
named (Macalister, Hist of Civilization in Pal).
From that time on various foreign influences played
their several parts in modification of Heb life and
customs. A sharp contrast illustrative of the
primitive beginnings and the growth of luxury in
(sraelin the preparation and_use of foods may be
Be by a comparison of 2 § 17 28f with1 K 4

I, Methods of Preparing Food.—The most primi-
tive way of using the cereals was to pluck the fresh

ears (Lev 23 14; 2 K 4 42), remove
1. Cereals the husk by rubbing (cf Dt 23 25
and Mt 12 1), and eat the grain raw.
A practice common to all periods, observed by
fellahin today, was to parch or roast the ears and


Baking Bread on Stones.


eat them unground. Later it became customary
to grind the grain into flour, at first by the rudi-
mentary method of pestle and mortar (Nu 11 8;
cf Prov 27 22), later by the hand-mill (Ex 11 5;
Job 31 10; cf Mt 24 41), still later in mills worked
by the ass or other animal (Mt 18 6, lit. “a mill-


Meals
Mean


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2014


stone turned by an ass’’). The flour was then made
into bread, with or without leaven (see LEAVEN).

Another simple way of preparing the grain was to
soak it in water, or boil it slightly, and then, after drying
and crushing it, to serve it as the dish called ‘‘groats”
is served among western peoples.

The kneading of the dough preparatory to baking
was done doubtless, as it is now in the East, by press-
ing it between the hands or by passing it from hand to
hand; except thatin Egypt, as the monuments show, it
was put in ‘‘ baskets”
grapes in the wine press.
to this day.)

Lentils, several kinds of beans, and a profusion
of vegetables, wild and cultivated, were prepared
and eaten in various ways. The
lentils were sometimes roasted, as
they are today, and eaten like ‘parched
corn.”’ They were sometimes stewed
like beans, and flavored with onions and other
ingredients, no doubt, as we find done in Syria
today (cf Gen 25 29.34), and sometimes ground
and made into bread (Ezk 4 9; cf ZDPV, IX,
4). The wandering Israelites in the wilderness
looked back wistfully on the cucumbers, melons,
leeks, onions and garlic of Egypt (Nu 11 5), and
later we find all of these used for food in Pal. How
many other things were prepared and used for food
by them may be gathered from the Mish, our rich-
est source of knowledge on the subject.

The flesh of animals—permission to eat which it
would seem was first given to Noah after the deluge

(Gen 1 29f; 9 3 f)—-was likewise pre-
3. Meat pared and used in various ways: (a)
Roasting was much in vogue, indeed was
probably the oldest of all methods of preparmg such
food. At first raw meat was laid upon hot stones
from which the embers had been removed, as in the
case of the “‘cake baken on the hot stones’ (1 K 19
6RVm; cf Hos 7 8, “a cake not turned”), and
sometimes underneath with a covering of ashes.
The fish that the disciples found prepared for them
by the Sea of Galilee (Jn 21 9) was, in exception
to this rule, cooked on the live coals themselves.
A more advanced mode of roasting was by means
of a spit of green wood or iron (for baking in ovens,
see Foon). (8) Boiling was also common (see Gen
25 29; Ex 12 9, etc, ARV; EV more frequently
“seething,” “sod,” “sodden”’), as it is in the more
primitive parts of Syria today. The pots in which
the boiling was done were of earthenware or bronze
(Lev 6 28). When the meat was boiled in more
water than was required for the ordinary ‘“stew’’
the result was the broth (Jgs 6 19f), and the meat
and the broth might then be served separately.
The usual way, however, was to cut the meat into
pieces, larger or smaller as the case might demand
(18 213; Ezk 24 3ff; ef Micah’s metaphor,
3 3), and put these pieces into the cooking-pot
with water sufficient only for a stew. Vegetables
and rice were generally added, though crushed
wheat sometimes took the place of the rice, as in
the case of the ‘‘savory meat’’ which Rebekah pre-
pared for her husband from the ‘“‘two kids of the
goats’ (Gen 27.9). The seeds of certain legu-
minous plants were also often prepared by boiling
(Gen 26 29; 2 K 4 88). (c) The Heb house-
wives, we may be sure, were in such matters in no
way behind their modern kinswomen of the desert,
of whom Doughty tells: ‘“‘The Arab housewives
make savory messes of any grain, seething it and
putting thereto only a little salt and samn [clarified
butter].”

Olive oil was extensively and variously used by
the ancient Hebrews, as by most eastern peoples

then, as it is now. (a) Oriental cook-
4, Oil ing diverges here more than at any
other point from that of the northern
and western peoples, oil serving many of the pur-


(This is done in Paris bakeries
See Breap; Foon.


2. Vege-
tables


and _ trodden with _the feet, as.


poses of butter and Jard among ourselves. (6) Oil
was used in cooking vegetables as we use bacon
and other animal fats, and in cooking fish and eggs,
as also in the finer sorts of baking. See Breap;
Foon; Ot. (c) They even mixed oil with the
flour, shaped it into cakes and then baked it (Lev
2 4). The “little oil’’ of the poor widow of Zere-
phath was clearly not intended for the lamps, but
to bake her pitiful “handful of meal” (1 K 17 12).
(d) Again the cake of unmixed flour might be baked
till almost done, then smeared with oil, sprinkled
with anise seed, and bronght by further baking to
a glossy brown. A species of thin flat cakes of this
kind are “‘the wafers anointed with oil” of Ex 29 2,
etc. (e) Oil and honey constituted, as now in the
East, a mixture used as we use butter and honey,
and are found also mixed in the making of sweet
cakes (Ezk 16 13.19). The taste of the manna
is said in Ex 16 31 to be like that of ‘wafers made
with honey,” and in Nu 11 8 to be like “the taste
of cakes baked with oil’? (RVm).

Il, Meals, Meal-Time, etc.—(1) It was cus-
tomary among the ancient Hebrews, as among their
contemporaries in the East in classical lands, to
have but two meals a day. The “morning morsel”
or “early snack,” as it is called in the Talm, taken
with some relish like olives, oil or melted butter,
might be used by peasants, fishermen, or even
artisans, to “break their fast’’ (see the one refer-
ence to it in the NT in Jn 21 12.15), but this was
not a true meal. It was rather dpiorov mpwivdr,
driston proinén (Robinson, BRP, Il, 18), though
some think it the dpicror, driston, of the NT
(Edersheim, LTJM, II, 205, n. 3; cf Plummer,
ICC, on Lk 11 37). To “eat a meal,” i.e. a full
meal, in the morning was a matter for grave
reproach (Eccl 10 16), as early drinking was un-
usual and a sign of degradation (cf Acts 2 15).

(2) The first meal (cf “meal-time,”’ lit. ‘‘the time
of eating,” Ruth 2 14; Gen 48 16), according to
general usage, was taken at or about noon when


the climate and immemorial custom demanded a
rest from labor. Peter’s intended meal at Joppa,
interrupted by the messengers of Cornelius, was
at “the sixth hour,” ie. 12 M. It corresponded
somewhat to our modern “luncheon,” but the hour
varied according to rank and occupation (Shab-
bath 10a). The Bedawi take it about 9 or 10
o’clock (Burekhardt, Notes, I, 69). It is described
somewhat fully by Lane in Modern Egyptians.
To abstain from this meal was accounted “fasting”
(Jgs 20 26; 18 14 24). Drummond (Tropical
Africa) says his Negro bearers began the day’s
work without food.

(8) The second and main meal (NT, defrvov,
deipnon) was taken about the set of sun, or a little
before or after, when the day’s work was over and


2015


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Meals
Mean


the laborers had “‘come in from the field” (Lk 17
7; 24 29f). This is the “supper time,’’ the “great,
supper’ of Lk 14 16, the important meal of the
day, when the whole family were together for the
evening (Burckhardt, Notes, I, 69). It was the
time of the feeding of the multitudes by Jesus (Mk
6 35; Mt 14 15; Lk 9 12), of the eating of the
Passover, and of the partaking of the Lord’s Supper.
According to Jewish law, and for special reasons,
the chief meal was at midday—‘“at the sixth hour,”
according to Jos (Vita, 54; cf Gen 43 16-25;
28 24 15LXX). It was Jeh’s promise to Israel
that they should have ‘“‘bread”’ in the morning and
“flesh”? in the evening (Ex 16 12), incidental evi-
dence of one way in which the evening meal differed
from that at noon. At this family meal ordinarily
there was but one common dish for all, into which
all “dipped the sop” (see Mt 26 23; Mk 14 20),
so that when the food, cooked in this common stew,
was set before the household, the member of the
household who had prepared it had no further work
to do, a fact which helps to explain Jesus’ words
to Martha, ‘One dish alone is needful’ (Lk 10 42;
Hastings DCG, s.v. ““Meals’”’”). —-

(4) Sabbath banqueting became quite customary
among the Jews (see examples cited by Lightfoot,
Hor. Heb et Talm on Lk 14 1; cf Edersheim, LTJM,
TI, 52, 487; Farrar, Life of Christ, II, 119, n.).
Indeed it was carried to such an excess that it
became proverbial for luxury. But the principle
which lay at the root of the custom was the honor
of the Sabbath (Lightfoot, op. cit., III, 149), which
may explain Jesus’ countenance and use of the
eustom (cf Lk 7 36; 11 37; 14 7-14), and the
fact that on the last Sabbath He spent on earth
before His passion He was the chief guest at such
a festive meal (Jn 12 2). It is certain that He
made use of such occasions to teach lessons of
charity and religion, in one case even when His
host was inclined to indulge in discourteous criticism
(Lk 7 89; 11 38.451; cf Jn 12 7f). He seems to
have withheld His formal disapproval of what
might be wrong in tendency in such feasts because
of the latent possibilities for good He saw in them,
and so often used them wisely and well. It was
on one of these occasions that a fellow-guest in his
enthusiasm broke out in the exclamation, ‘Blessed
is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God”
(Lk 14 15), referring evidently to the popular
Jewish idea that the Messianic kingdom was to be
ushered in with a banquet, and that feasting was
to be a chief part of ita glories (cf Isa 26 6; Lk
13 29). See BANQuET. : 3

HL’ Customs at Meals.—In the earliest times
the Hebrews took their meals sitting, or more prob-
ably squatting, on the ground like the Bedawi and
fellahin of today (see Gen 37 25, etc), with the
legs gathered tailor-fashion (PHFS, 1905, 124).
The use of seats naturally followed upon the change
from nomadic to agricultural life, after the conquest
of Canaan. Saul and his messmates sat upon
“seats” (1 8 20 25), as did Solomon and his court
(i K 10 5; cf 13 20, etc). With the growth of
wealth and luxury under the monarchy, the custom
of reclining at meals gradually became the fashion.
In Amos’ day it was regarded as an aristocratic
innovation (Am 3 12; 6 4), but two centuries
later Ezekiel speaks of “a stately bed” or “‘couch”
(cf Est 1 6 RV) with “a table prepared before it”
(Ezk 23 41), as if it was no novelty. By the end
of the 3d cent. BC it was apparently universal, ex-
cept among the very poor Vth 12 15; Tob 2 1).
Accordingly, “sitting at meat” in the NT (EV) is
everywhere replaced by “reclining” (RVm), though
women and children still sat. They leaned on the
left elbow (Sir 41 19), eating with the right hand
(see Lono’s Supper). The various words used in


the Gospels to denote the bodily attitude at meals,
as well as the circumstances described, all imply
that the Syrian custom of reclining on a couch,
followed by Greeks and Romans, was in vogue
(Edersheim, II, 207). Luke uses one word for it


medius lectus


lectus


Imus
SUp20f StunUAS


Table and Couches with Seats Numbered in
Order of Rank,


which occurs nowhere else in the NT (xara-
KuOfvat, kataklithénat, 7 36; 14 8; 24 30; and
karaxdlvey, kataklinein, 9 14.15), which Hobart
says is the medical term for laying patients or
causing them to lie in bed (Medical Language of
Luke, 69). For costumes and customs at more
elaborate feasts see Banquet; Dress. For de-
tails in the “minor morals’? of the dinner table,
see the classical passages (Sir 31 12-18; 32 3-12),


Reclining on Conches.


in which Jesus ben-Sira has expanded the counsel
given in Prov 23 1f; cf Kennedy in 1-vol HDB,
g.v. “Meals.”


Literature.—Hdersheim, Life and Times of Jesus
the Messiah; O. Holtzmann, Hine Untersuchung zum
Leben Jesu, ET, 206; B. Weiss, The Life of Christ, II,
125, n. 2; Plummer, ICC, *’Luke,’’ 159f; Farrar, Life
of Christ; HDB, DCG, 1-vol HDB; EB; Jew Enc, etc.

no. B, Eacer

MEAN, mén: The noun “meaning” (Dnl & 15
AV, RV “I sought to understand”; and 1 Cor 14
11) is synonymous with “signification,” but in 1
Macc 15 4 AV it expresses “purpose” (RV “I am
minded to land’). The noun “mean” in Heb


the sense of “agency,” “instrument” (cf 1


tr® lit. “that a death having taken place,” from
rylvopas, ginomai, “to become,” “to happen.” Acts
18 21 AV, “I must by all means keep this feast,”
is omitted in RV in harmony with several cursives,
the Vulg, and some other VSS.

The adj. ‘‘mean” is used in the sense of
“eommon,” “humble” (OFX, ’ddhdm, “man”;


Meani
Medes


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2016


ef Isa 2.9; 5 15; 31 8 omits “mean”). It is also
-used in the sense of “obscure” (Prov 22 29, FW,
hashokh, “obscure”; denyos, dsemos, lit. “without
a mark,” “unknown,” Acts 21 39). “Mean” is
found in expressions like “in the meanwhile’ (AV
1 K 18 45, RV “little while’; Jn 4 31; Rom 2
15, RV “one with another’); “in the mean time”
(1 Mace 11 41 AV; Lk 12 1); and ‘‘in the mean
season”? AV (1 Mace 11 14; 15 15). The advb.
“meanly’’ is found (2 Mace 15 38) in the sense of
“moderately.”

The vb. ‘mean’ expresses purpose (Isa 3 15;
10 7; Gen 50 20, etc). In some cases RV renders
lit. tr: Acts 27 2, ‘was about to sail”? (AV “mean-
ing to sail’); ef Acts 2113; 2 Cor 813. In
other instances the idea of “‘to mean” Is “‘to signify,”
“to denote” (1 S 4 6; Gen 21 29; Mt 9 13, etc).
Lk 15 26 tr* lit. “what these things might be.”
In Ex 12 26 the sense of “mean ye’’ is “to have in


toind.” A. L. BrEsLIcH
ee mé-a’ni: AV=RV “Maani” (1 Esd
5 31).


MEARAH, mé-3’'ra (92, march; omitted in
LXX): A town or district mentioned only in Josh
13 4, as belonging to the Zidonians. The name
as it stands means “cave.’’ If that is correct it
may be represented by the modern village Mog-
heirtyeh, ‘Tittle cave,” not far from Sidon. Per-
haps, however, we should find in the word the name
of a Sidonian city, with the prep. J’, min, that has
suffered change in transcription. LXX reads “from
Gaza”; but Gaza is obviously too far to the S.


MEASURE, mezh’iir, MEASURES: Several
different words in the Heb and Gr are rendered by
“measure’ in EV. In Job 119 and Jer 13 25
it stands for WA, madh, VIA, middah, and it is
the usual rendering of the vb. 77’, maddhadh, “to
measure,” i.e. “stretch out,’’ “extend,” “spread.”
It is often used to render the words representing

articular measures, such as ephah (Dt 25 14.15;
Bree 20 10; Mic 6 10); or kor (1 K 4 22; 611
{5 2 and 5 25 Heb text]; 2 Ch 2 10 [Heb text
29); 27.5; Ezr 7 22); or seah (Gen 18 6; 18
25 18; 1 K 18 32; 2 K 7 1.16.18); or Béros, bétos,
“bath” (Lk 16 6). For these terms see WEIGHTS
AND Measures. It also renders 3", middah,


“measure of length’? (Ex 26 2); TMINW'A, mesarah,


a liquid measure (Lev 19 35; 1 Ch 23 29; Ezk


411.16); DSW, mishpat, “judgment” (Jer 30
11; 46 28); TROND, sa’s’ah, a word of uncertain
meaning, perhaps derived from seah (Isa 27 8);
wow, shalish, “threefold, large measure” (Ps 80 5
{Heb text ver 6]; Isa 40 12); JPM, tokhen, and
PIN, mathkoneth, “weight”? and that which is
weighed, taken as measure (Ezk 45 11). In Isa
6 14 it stands for PM, hok, “limit.” In the NT,
besides being the usual rendering of the vb. uerpéw,
metréd, and of the noun sérpov, métron, it is used
for xotmé, choiniz, a dry measure containing about
a quart (Rev 6 6). H. Porter


MEASURING LINE (ip, kaw, SUP, keweh):
The usual meaning is simply line, rope or cord, as
in Isa 28 10.13, but the line was used for measure-~
ment, as is evident from such passages as 1 K 7 23;
Job 38 5; Jer 31 39. Whether the line for meas-
uring had a definite length or not we have no means
of knowing. In Isa 44 18 it refers to the line used
by the carpenter in marking the timber on which he
is working, and in Zec 1 16 it refers to the builder’s

e.


Figuratively: It signifies destruction, or a portion
of something marked off by line for destruction, as
in 2 K 21 18; or for judgment, as ase 28 17.


. PorTER

MEASURING REED (7AM “3p, kenzh ha-
middah; xédhapos, kdlamos): Used in Ezk 40 5 ff;
42 16; 45 1; Rev 11 1; 21 15.16. The length
of the reed is given as 6 cubits, each cubit being a
cubit and a palm, i.e. the large cubit of 7 palms, or
about 10 ft. See Cusir. Originally it was an
actual reed used for measurements of considerable
length, but came at last to be used for a measure
of definite length, as indicated by the reference in
Ezk (cf “pole” in Eng. measures).


MEAT, mét (BpSpa, bréma, Bpdors, brésis): In AV
used for food in general, e.g. “I had my meat of
herbs” (2 Esd 12 51); “his disciples were gone
away into the city to buy meat,’ RV “food” (Jn
4 8). The Eng. word signified whatever is eaten,
whether of flesh or other food.


MEAT OFFERING. See Sacriricz.


MEBUNNAI, mé-bun’, mé-bun’é-i (723%,
m*bhunnay, ‘“‘well-built’’): One of David’s “braves”


.(2 8 23 27). In 28 2118 he is named “Sib-


bechai” (RV “Sibbecai”’), and is there mentioned
as the slayer of a Phili giant. The RV spelling
occurs in 1 Ch 11 29, the AV “Sibbechai” in 20
4 (cf 28 21 18); and in 1 Ch 27 11 the RV
spelling recurs, where this person is mentioned as
captain of the 8th course of the 12 monthly courses
that served the king in rota. Scribal error, and the
similarity in Heb spelling of the two forms accounts
for the difference in spelling. RV consistently tries
to keep this right. Henry WALLACE


MECHERATHITE, mé-ké’rath-it CMD, m*-
khérath?, ‘‘dweller in Mecharah’’): Possibly. this is
a misreading of ‘Maachathite’ (AV). It is the
description of Hepher, one of David’s valiant men
(1 Ch 11 36). ;

In the parallel list of 2 8 23, esp. ver 34, the ‘*Maa-
chathite” is mentioned without name in the place in the
list given to Hepher in 1 Ch 11 36. ‘The variations


do not destroy the conviction that the list is virtually
the same.


MECONAH, mé-kd'na (M35%9, m*khdndh; Mayvé,
Machnd): A town apparently in the neighborhood
of Ziklag, named only in Neh 11 28, as reoccupied
by the men of Judah after the Captivity., It ig.
not identified.


MEDABA, med’a-ba: The Gr form of ‘“Medeba”
ini Macc 9 36.


MEDAD, mé’dad (77%, médhadh, “affection
ate’’): One of the 70 elders on whom the spirit of
the Lord came in the days of Moses enabling them
to prophesy. Medad and one other, Eldad, began
to prophesy in the camp, away from the other elders
who had assembled at the door of the tabernacle
to hear God’s message. Joshua suggested that
Eldad and Medad be stopped, but Moses inter-
ceded on their behalf, saying, “Would that all Jeb’s
people were prophets!” (Nu 11 26-29). The
subject-matter of their prophecy has been variously
supplied by tradition. Cf the Pal Tgs ad loc., the
apocalyptic Book of Eldad and Modad, and Ba‘al
ha-tarim (ad loc.). Exua Davis Isaacs


MEDAN, mé’dan (772, m*dhan, “strife’”): One
of the sons of Abraham by Keturah (Gen 25 2;
1 Ch 1 32). The tribe and its place remain un-
identified, and the conjecture that the name may


2017


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Meani
Medes


be connected with the Midianites is unlikely from
the fact that in the list of the sons of Abraham and
Keturah Midian is mentioned alongside of Medan.


MEDEBA, med’é-ba (NAA, méedhbha’; Ma-
SaB4, Maidabd, MnSaBé, Médabd): The name may
mean ‘‘gently flowing water,’’ but the sense is doubt-
ful. ‘This city is first mentioned along with Heshbon
and Dibon in an account of Israel’s conquests (Nu
21 30). It lay in the Mishdr, the high pastoral
land of Moab. The district in which the city stood
is called the Mishér or plain of Medeba in the
description of the territory assigned to Reuben
(Josh 13 9), or the plain by Medeba (ver 16).
Here the Ammonites and their Syrian allies put
the battle in array against Joab, and were signally
defeated (1 Ch 19 7). This must have left the
place definitely in the possession of Israel. But
it must have changed hands several times. It was
taken by Omri, evidently from Moab; and Mesha
claims to have recovered possession of it (M §, Il.
7.8.29.30).__It would naturally fall to Israel under
Jeroboam IT; but in Isa 16 2 it is referred to as a
city of Moab. It also figures in later Jewish bis-
tory. John, son of Mattathias, was captured and
put to death by the Jambri, a robber tribe from
Medeba. This outrage was amply avenged by
Jonathan and Simon, who ambushed a marriage
party of the Jambri as they were bringing a noble
bride from Gabbatha, slew them all and took their
ornaments (1 Macc 9 36 ff; Ant, XII, i, 2, 4).
Medeba was captured by Hyrcanus “not without
the greatest distress of his army” (Ant, XIII, ix, 1).
It was taken by Jannaeus from the Nabataeans.
Hyrcanus promised to restore it with other cities
so taken to Aretas in return for help to secure him
on the Judaean throne (ib, xv, 4; XIV, i, 4).
Ptolemy speaks of it as a town in Arabia Petraea,
between Bostra and Petra. Eusebius and Jerome
knew it under its ancient name (Onom, a.v.). It
became the seat of a bishropric, and is mentioned
in the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon (451 AD),
and in other ecclesiastical lists.

The ancient city is represented by the modern
Maédeba, a ruined site with an Arab village, crowning a
low hill, some 6 miles 8S. of Heshbon, with which it was
connected by a Rom road. The ruins, which are con-
siderable, date mainly from Christian times, The sur-
rounding walls can be traced in practically their whole
circuit. There is a large tank, now dry, measuring 108
yds. X103 yds., and about 12 ft.in depth. In 1880 it was
colonized by some Christian families from Kerak, among
whom the Latins carry on mission work. In December,
1896, a most interesting mosaic was found. It proved
to be a map of Bere of Pal and Lower Egypt of the time


of Justinian. nfortunately it is much damaged. An
account of it will be found in PEFS, 1897, 213 ff, 239;


1898, 85, 177 ff, 251.
W. Ewina


MEDES, médz (", madhi; Assyr Amada,
Mada; Achaem. Pers Mada; MaSo, Médoi [Gen
102; 2K 17 6; 1811; 1Ch 15; Ear 6 2; Est
1 3.14.18.19; 102; Isa 13 17; 212; Jer 25 25;
61 11.28; Dnl 6 28; 6 1.9.13.16; 8 20; 91;
11 1]): Mentioned as Japhethites in Gen 10 2, i.e.
Aryans, and accordingly they first called themselves
“Api, Ariot (Herod. vii.62), in Avestie Airya=
Skt. Arya, “noble.” They were closely allied in
descent, language and religion with the Persians,
and in secular history preceded their appearance by
some centuries. Like most Aryan nations thcy
were at first divided into small village communities
each governed by its own chiefs (called in Assyr
hazanati by Assur-bani-pal: cf Herod. 1.96).
Shalmaneser II mentions them (Nimrod Obelisk,
1.121) about 840 BC. They then inhabited the
modern A’zarbaijan (Media Atropatene). Ram-
manu-nirari III of Assyria (Rawlinson, WAI, I,
35) declares that he (810-781 BC) had conquered
‘the land of the Medes and the land of Parsua”


“bere with the Manda (or


(Persis), as well as other countries. This probably
meant only a plundering expedition, as far as Media
was concerned. So also Assur-nirart 11 (WAI,
Il, 52) in 749-748 BC overran Namri in Southwest
Media. ‘Tiglath-pileser 1V (in Bab called Pulu,
the “Pul” of 2 K 15 19) and Sargon also overran
parts of Media. Sargon in 716
BC conquered Kisheshin, Khar-
khar and other parts of the
country. Some of the Israelites
were by him transplanted to
“the cities of the Medes” (2 K
17 6; 18 11; the LXX reading
*Op}, Oré, cannot be rendered
“mountains” of the Medes here)
after the fall of Samaria in 722
BC. It was perhaps owing to
the need of being able to resist
Assyria that about 720 BC the
Medes (in part at least) united
into a kingdom under Déiokés,
according to Herodotus (i.98).
Sargon mentions him by the
name Dayaukku, and says that
he himself captured this prince
(715 BC) and conquered his
territory two years later. After
his release, probably, Déiokés
fortified Ecbatana (formerly
Ellippi) and made it his capital.
It has been held by some that
Herodotus confounds the Medes


Umman-Manda, “hosts of the
Manda’) of the inscriptions;
but these were probably Aryan
tribes, possibly of Scythian origin, and the names
Mada and Manda may be, after all, identical.
Esar-haddon in his 2d year (679-678 BC) and Assur-
bani-pal warred with certain Median tribes, whose
power was now growing formidable. They (or
the Manda) had conquered Persis and formed a
great confederacy. nder Kyaxarés (Uvakh-
shatara—Déiokés’ grandson, according to Herodo-
tus), they besieged Nineveh, but Assur-bani-pal, with
the assistance of the Ashguza (? the Ashkenaz of
Gen 10 3), another Aryan tribe, repelled them.
The end of the Assyr empire came, however, in 606
BC, when the Manda under their king Iriba-
tukte, Mamiti-arsu “ord of the city of the Medes,”
Kastarit of the Armenian district of Kar-kassi, the
Kimmerians (Gimirra=Gomer) under Teushpa
(Téispés, Chaishpish), the Minni (Manna; cf Jer
61 27), and the Babylonians under Nabu-pal-usur,
stormed and destroyed Nineveh, as Nabu-nahid
informs us, The last king of Assyria, Sin-Sar-
iskun (Sarakos), perished with his people.

_ Herodotus says that Déiokés was succeeded by Phraor-
tés (Fravartish) his son, Phraortés by his son Kyaxares;
and the latter in turn left his kingdom to his son Astyagés
whose daughter Mandané married Cambysés, father of
the great Cyrus. Yet there was no Median empire
{such as he describes) then, or_at least it did not em-
brace all the Aryan tribes of Western Asia, as we see
from the inscriptions that in 606 BC, and even later,
many of them were under kings and princes of their
own (cf Jer 25 25; 651 11). Herodotus tells us they
were divided into six tribes, of whom the Magi were one

Herod. i.101). Kyaxares warred for 5 years (590-585

C) with the Lydians, the struggle being ended in May,
585, by the total eclipse of the sun foretold by Thales
(Herod. i.74).

The alliance between the Medes and the Baby-
lonians ended with Nebuchadnezzar’s reign. His
successor Nabu-nahid (555 BC) says that in that
year the Medes under Astyages_ (Ishtuwegu)
entered Mesopotamia and besieged Haran. Soon
after, however, that dynasty_was overthrown; for
Cyrus the Persian, whom Nabu-nahid the first
time he mentions him styles Astyages’ “youthful


Median Dress.


Media
Mediation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2018


slave” (arduSu sahru), but who was even then king
of Anshan (Anzan), attacked and in 549 BC cap-
tured Astyages, plundcred Ecbatana, and became
king of the Medes. Though of Pers descent, Cyrus
did not, apparently, begin to reign in Persia till 546
BC. Henceforth there was no Median empire
distinguished from the Pers (nor is any such men-
tioned in Dnl, in spite of modern fancies). As the
Medes were further advanced in civilization and
preceded the Persians in sovereignty, the Gr his-
torians generally called the whole nation ‘‘the
Medes” long after Cyrus’ time. Only much later
are the Persians spoken of as the predominant part-
ners. Hence it is a sign of early date that Daniel
(8 20) speaks of “‘Media and Persia,’’ whereas later
the Book of Est reverses the order (‘Persia and
Media,” Est 1 3.14.18.19; 10 2), as in the in-
scriptions of Darius at Behistiin.

Under Darius J, Phraortés (Fravartish) rebelled,
claiming the throue of Media as a descendant of
Kyaxarés. His cause was so powerfully supported
among the Medes that the rebellion was not sup-
pressed till after a fierce struggle. He was finally
taken prisoner at Raga (Rai, near Tehran), brutally
mutilated, and finally impaled at Ecbatana. After
that Median history merges into that of Persia.
The history of the Jews in Media is referred to in
Dnl and Est. 1 Macc tells something of Media
under the Syrian (6 56) and Parthian dominion
(14 1-3; cf Jos, Ant, XX, iii). Medes are last
mentioned in Acts 2 9. They are remarkable as
the first leaders of the Aryan race in its struggle
with the Semites for freedom and supremacy.

W. Sr. Crate Tispatn

MEDIA, mé'‘di-a ("TA, madhay; Acbaem. Pers
Mada; MnSta, Média): Lay to the W. and 8.W.
of the Caspian, and extended thence to the Zagrus
Mountains on the W. On the N. in later times it
was bounded by the rivers Araxes and Cyrus, which
separated it from Armenia. Its eastern bound-
aries were formed by Hyrcania and the Great Salt
Desert (now called the Kavir), and it wag bounded
on the 8. by Susiana. In earlier times its limits
were somewhat indefinite. It included Atropatene
(Armenian Airpatakan, the name, ‘Fire-guarding,”
showing devotion to the worship of Fire) to the N.,
and Media Magna to the &., the former being the
present A’zarbdijan. Near the Caspian the country
is low, damp and unhealthy, but inland most of it
is high and mountainous, Mt. Demavand in the
Alburz range reaching 18,600 ft. Atropatene was
famed for the fertility of its valleys and table-lands,
except toward the N. Media Magna is high; it
has fruitful tracts along the course of the streams,
but suffers much from want of water, though this
was doubtless more abundant in antiquity. It
contained the Nisaean Plain, famous for its breed
of horses. The chief cities of ancient Media were
Ecbatana, Gazaea, and Ragae. The Orontes
range near Ecbatana is the present Alvand. Lake
Spauta is now known as Urmi (Urumiah).

W. St. Cuair TrspaLu

MEDIAN, médi-an. See Darius; MeEpEs;
Mepia.


MEDIATION, mé-di-a’shun, MEDIATOR, mé’-
di-4-tér:
I. Invrropvuctory
1. The Terms
(1) Mediation
(2) Mediator
2. The Principle of Mediation
Il, MeEpration in THE OT
. Negative Teaching in the OT
. The Positive Teaching: Early Period
. Prophetic Mediation
. Priestly Mediation
The Theocratic King: the Messiah
The Suffering Servant


oun wh


7. Superhuman Agents of Mediation
{1) Angelic Mediation
(2) Divine Wisdom
III. In Semi- and Non-canonicat Jewisy LITERATURD
IV. Mepiation anp MepiatTor in THE NT
1. The Synoptic Gospels
(1) Christ as Prophet
(2) As King
(3) As Priest (Redeemer)
2. Primitive Apostolic Teachings
The Early Speeches in Acts
(2) Epistles of James and Jude
{3)_ 1 Peter
3. Epistles of Paul
(1) The Need of a Mediator
(2) The Qualifications E
(3) The Means, the Death of Christ
(4) The Resurrection and Exaltation b
(5) The Cosmic Aspect of Christ’s Mediator-


4, Epist to the Hebrews
5. The Johannine Writings

es The Fourth Gospel

{2) The Hpistles

(3) The Apocalypse

V. Concuvsion
LITERATURE

I, Introductory.—(1) “Mediation” in its broadest
sense may be defined as the act of intervening

between parties at variance for the

1. The purpose of reconciling them, or be-
Terms tween parties not necessarily hostile
for the purpose of leading them into
an agreement or covenant. Theologically, it has
reference to the method by which God and man are
reconciled through the instrumentality of some
intervening process, act or person, and esp. through
the atoning work of Jesus Christ. The term itself
does not occur in Bib. literature. (2) The term
“mediator” (= middleman, agent of mediation)
is nowhere found in OT or Apoe (EV), but the
corresponding Gr word wpeclrys, mesités, occurs
once in LXX (Job 9 33 AV, ‘‘Neither is there any
daysman betwixt us,” where “daysman’’ stands for
Heb mokhieh, “arbitrator,” ARV, ERVm “umpire”
[sce Daysman]; LXX has 6 ueotrys judr, ho
mesités hémén, “our mediator,” as a paraphrase
for Heb bénénu, “betwixt us’). Even in the NT,
mesités, “‘mediator,”’ occurs only 6+, viz. Gal 3 19.20
(of Moses), and 1 Tim 2 5; He 8 6; 9 15; 12 24
(of Christ).

Though the actual terms are thus very rare, the
principle of mediation is one of great significance

in Bib. theology, as well as in the Jew-

2. The ish-Alexandrian philosophy. It cor-
Principle of responds to a profound human in-
Mediation stinct or need which finds expression

: in some form or other in most religions.
It is an attempt to solve the problem raised by (1)
the idea of the infinite distance which separates God
from man and the universe, and (2) the deeply felt
want of bringing them into a harmonious relation.
The conception of mediation will differ, therefore,
according to whether the distance to be surmounted
is understood ethically or metaphysically. If it be
thought of in an ethical or religious seuse, that is,
if the emphasis be laid on the fact of human sin as
standing in the way of man’s fellowship with God,
then mediation will be the mode by which peaceful
relations are established between sinful man and the
absolutely righteous God. But if the antithesis
of God and the world be conceived of metaphysi-
cally, i.e. be based on the ultimate nature of God
and of the world conceived as essentially opposed
to each other, then mediation will be the mode by
which the transcendent God, without Himself
coming into direct contact with the world, is able
to produce effects in it through an intermediate
agent (or agents). The latter conception (largely
the result of an exaggerated Platonic dualism)
exerted an important influence on later Jewish
thought, and even on Christian theology, and will
come briefly under our consideration. But in the


2019


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Media
Mediation


main we shall be concerned with the former view,
as more in harmony with the development of Bib.
theology which culminates in the NT doctrine of
atonement. Mediation between God and man as
presented in the Scriptures has 3 main aspects,
represented respectively by the functions of the
prophet, the priest, and the theocratic king. Here
and there in the OT these tend to meet, as in Mcl-
chizedek the priest-king, and in the Suffering
Servant of Deutero-Isa, who unites the priestly
function of sacrifice with the prophctic function
of revealing the Divine will. But on the whole,
these aspects of mediation in the OT run along lines
which have no mecting-point in one person adequate
to all the demands. In the NT they intersect in
the person and work of Jesus Christ, who realizes
in Himself the full meaning of the prophetic, priestly,
and kingly ideals.
If. Mediation in the OT.—We do not find in the
OT a fixed and final doctrine of mediation univer-
sally accepted ag an axiom of religious
1. Negative thought, but only a gradual movement
Teaching toward such a doctrine, under the
inthe OT growing sense of God’s exaltation and
of man’s frailty and sinfulness. Such
a passage as 1 S 2 25 secms definitely to contra-
dict the idea of mediation. Still more striking are
the words of Job above referred to, “There is no
umpire betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us
both,” i.e. te enforce his decision (Job 9 33),
where the LXX paraphrases, ‘‘Would that there
were a mediator and a reprover and a hearer be-
tween us both.” The note of despair which char-
acterizes this passage shows that Job has no hope
that such an arbitrator between him and God is
forthcoming. Yet the words give pathetic utter-
ance to the deep inarticulate cry of humanity for a
mediator. In this connection we should note the
protests of prophets and psalmists against an un-
ethical view of mediation by animal sacrifices (Mic
6 6-8; Ps 40 6-8, etc), and their frequent direct
appeals to God for mercy without reference to any
mediation (Ps 25 7; 32 5; 103 8 ff, etc).
(1) Mediatory sacrifice——In the patriarchal age,
before the official priest had been differentiated
from the rest of the community, the


2. The function of offering sacrifice was dis-
Positive charged by the head of the family or
Teaching: clan on‘behalf of his people, as by
Early Noah (Gen 8 20), Abraham (Gen 12
Period 7.8; 15 9-11), Isaac (Gen 26 24f),

Jacob (Gen 31 54; 33 20). So Job,
conceived by the writer as living in patriarchal


antiquity, is said to have offered sacrifices vicari-
ously for his sons (Job 1 5). Melchizedek, the
priest-king of Salem (Gen 14 18-20), is a figure of
considerable theological interest, inasmuch as he
was taken by the author of Ps 110 as the forerunner
of the ideal theocratic king who was also priest,
and by the author of He as prototype of Christ’s
priesthood. . ant

(2) Intercessory prayer —Intercession is in all
stages of thought an essential element in mediation.
We have striking examples of it in Gen 18 22-33;
Job 42 8-10.

(3) The Mosaic covenant—In Moses we have for
the first time a recognized national representative
who acted both as God’s spokesman to the people,
and the people’s spokesman before God. He alone
was allowed to “come near unto Jeh,” and to him
Jeh spake “face to face, as a man speaketh unto his
friend” (Ex 33 11). He went up to, God and
“reported the words of the people” to Him, as to a
sovereign who cannot be approached save by his
duly accredited minister (Ex 19 8). We have a
striking example of his intercessory mediation in the
episode of the golden calf, when he pleaded effectively


with God to tur from His wrath (Ex 32 12-14),
and even offered to ‘make atonement for” (kippér,
lit. “cover’’) their sin by confessing their sin before
God, and being willing to be blotted out of God’s
book, so that the people might be spared (vs 30-32).
Here we have already the germs of the idca of
vicarious suffering for sin.

(4) Intercessory mediation—Samuel is by Jere-
miah classed with Moses as the chicf representative
of intercessory mediation (Jer 16 1). He is re-
ported as mediating by prayer between Isracl and
God, and succeeding in warding off the punishment
of their sin (1 S 7 5-12). On such occasions,
prayer was wont to be accompanied by confessions
of sins and by an offering to Jeh.

Samucl represents the transition from the ancient
seer or soothsayer to the prophetic order. The

prophet was regarded as the organ of
8. Prophetic Divine revelation, to consult whom
Mediation was equivalent to “inquiring of God”

(1 8 9 9)—a commissioner sent by
God (Isa 6 8 f) to proclaim His will by word and
action. In that capacity he was Jch’s reprcesenta-
tive among men, and so could speak in a tone of
authority. Prophetic revelation is essential to the
OT religion (cf He 1 1), which by it stands dis-
tinguished from a mere philosophy or natural reli-
gion. God is not merely a passive object of human
discovery, but one who actively and_ graciously
reveals Himself to His chosen people through the
medium of the authorized exponents of His mind
and will. Thus in the main the prophet stands for
the principle of mediation in its man-ward aspect.
But the God-ward aspect is not absent, for we find
the prophet mediating with God on behalf of men,
making intercession for them (Jer 14 19-22; Am
7 2£5f).

Mediation isin a peculiar sense the function of the

priest. In the main he stands for the principle in

its God-ward aspect. Yet in the early
4, Priestly period it was the man-ward aspect that
Mediation was most apparent; i.e. the pricst

was at first regarded as the medium
through which Jeh delivered His oracles to men,
the human mouthpicce of supernatural revelation,
giving advice in difficult emergencies by casting the
sacred lot. Before the time of the first literary
prophets, the association of the priests with the
ephod and the lot had receded into the background
(though the high priest theoretically retained the
gift of interpreting the Divine will through the
Urim and Thummim, Ex 28 30; Lev 8 8); but
the power they lost with the oracle they gained at
the altar. First they acquired a_ preferential
status at the local sanctuaries; then, in the Deutero-
nomic legislation, where sacrifice is limited to the
Jerus sanctuary, it is assumed that only Levite
priests can officiate. Finally, in the Levitical sys-
tem as set forth in the PC (which regulated Jewish
worship in the post-exilic times), the Aaronic
priests, now clearly distinguished from the Levites,
have the sole privilege of immediate access to God
in His sanctuary (Nu 4 19.20; 16 3-5). God’s
transcendence and holiness are now so emphasized
that between Him and the sin-stained people there
is almost an infinite chasm. Hence the people can
only enjoy its idcal right of drawing nigh unto God
and offering sacrifice to Him through the mediation
of the official priesthood. The mediatorship of
priests derived its authority, not from their moral
purity or personal worth, but from the ceremonial
purity which attached to their office. All priests
are not on the same level. A process of graduated
sanctity narrows down their number as the approach
is made to the Most Holy Place, which symbolizes
the presence chamber of Jeh. (1) Out of the sacred
nation as a whole, the priestly tribe of Levi is


Mediation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2020


elected and invested with a special sanctity to
perform all the subordinate acts of service within
the tabernacle (Nu 8 19; 18 6). (2) Within this
sacred tribe, the members of the house of Aaron are
set apart and invested with a still higher sanctity;
they alone officiate at the altar in the Holy Place and
explate the guilt of the people by sacrifice and
prayer, thus representing the people before God.
Yet even they are only admitted to the proximate
nearmess of the Holy Place. (8) The gradation of
the hierarchy is completed by the recognition of a
single, supreme head of the priesthood—the high
priest. He alone can enter the Holy of Holies, and
that alone once a year, on the Day of Atonement,
when he makes propitiation not only for himself
and the priesthood, but for the entire congregation.
The ritual of the Day of Atonement is the highest
exercise of priestly mediatorship. On that day,
the whole community has access to Jeh through
their representative, the high priest, and through
him offer atonement for their sins. Moreover, the
réle of the high priest as mediator is symbolized
by his wearing the breastplate bearing the names
of the children of Israel, whenever he goes into the
Holy Place (Ex 28 29).

Something must be said of the sacrificial system,
through which alone the priest exercised his media-
torial functions. For his mediatorship did not
depend on his direct personal influence with God,
exercised, for instance, through intercessory prayer
Gntercession is not mentioned by P as a duty of the
priest, though referred to by the prophets, Joel 2
17; Mal 1 9). It depended rather on an elaborate
system of sacrifice, of which the priest was but an
official agent. It was he who derived his authority
from the system, rather than the system from him.
The most characteristic features in the ritual of the
PC are the sin offering (hali@th, Lev 4; 5; 6 24-
30) and the guilt offering (’dsh@ém, Lev 5-7, 14, 19),
which seem peculiar to P. These are mcant to
restore the normal relation of the people or of indi-
viduals to God, a relation which sin has disturbed.
Hence these sacrifices, when duly administered by
the priest, are distinctly mediatorial or recon-
ciliiatory in character, ie. they make atonement
for or “cover” (kippér) the sin of the guilty com-
munity or individuals. This seems the case also,
though in a far less degree, even with the burnt,
peace, and meal offerings, which, though “not offcred
expressly, like the sin and guilt offerings, for the for-
giveness of sin, nevertheless were regarded ... .
as ‘covering,’ or neutralizing, the offerer’s un-
worthiness to appear before God, and so, though
in a much less degree than the sin or guilt offering,
as effecting propitiation” (Driver in HDB, IV, 132).
We must beware, however, of reading the full NT
doctrine of sin and propitiation into the sacrificial
law. Two important points of difference may be
noted: (1) The law does not provide atonement
for all sins, but only for sins of ignorance or inad-
vertence, committed within the covenant. Delib-
erate sins fall outside the scope of priestly mediation.
(2) While sin includes moral impurity, it must be
admitted that the chief emphasis falls on ceremonial
uncleanness, because it is only violation of physical
sanctity that can be fully rectified by ritual ordi-
nance. The law was essentially a civil code, and was
not adequate to deal with inward sins. Thus the
sacrificial system in itself is but a faint adumbration
of the NT doctrine of Christ’s high-priestly work,
which has reference to sin in its widest and deepest
meaning. Yet, in spite of these limitations, the
priestly ritual was, as far as it went, an organized
embodiment of the sin-consciousness, and so pre-
pared the way for the coming of a perfect Mediator.

On another plane than that of the priest is the
mediation of the theocratic king. Jeb was ideally


the sole king of Israel. But He governed the people
mediately through His vicegerent the theocratic
king, the agent of His will. The king
5. The was regarded as “Jeh’s anointed” (1
Theocratic § 16 6, etc), and his person as invio-
King: the lable. He was the ‘‘visible representa-
Messiah tive of the invisible Divine King”
(Riehm). The ideal of the theocratic
king was most nearly represented _by David, the
man after Jeh’s own heart (cf 1 8 18 14). This
fact led to Jeh’s covenant-promise that David’s
house should constitute a permanent dynasty, and
his throne be established forever (2 8 7 5-17; cf
Ps 89 19-37). The indestructibility of the Davidic
dynasty was the basal conviction on which the hope
of a Messiah was built. It led to attention being
further concentrated on one preéminent King in
David’s line, who should be the Divinely accredited
representative of Jeh, and reign in Hisname. Asa
Divinely endowed human hero, the Messiah will
possess attributes which will qualify Him to mediate
between God and His people in national life and
affairs, and so inaugurate the ideal age of peace
and righteousness. He is portrayed esp. as the
Royal Saviour of Israel, through whom the salva-
tion of the people is mediated and justice admin-
istered (e.g. Isa 11 1-10; 611-8; Ps 72 4.13;
Jer 23 5.6; 33 15.16).
In the wonderful figure of exilic prophecy, the
Suffering Servant of Jeh, the principle of mediation
is exemplified both in its man-ward


6. The and God-ward aspects. In its man-
Suffering ward aspect, his mission is the pro-
Servant phetic one of being God’s anointed


messenger to men, His witness before
the world (Isa 42 6.19; 43 10; 49 2; 50 4.5;
61 1-3). But the profound originality of the con-
ception of the Servant lies chiefly in the God-ward
significance of his suffering (Isa 63). The Servant
suffered vicariously as an atonement for the sins
ofthe people. His deathis even said to be a “guilt-
offering” (a@sham, ver 10), and he is represented as
making “intercession for the transgressors” (ver
12). Here is the profoundest expression in the OT
of the principle of mediatorship.


The substitution of voluntary, deliberate, human
sacrifice for that of unwilling beasts elevates the sacrifi-
cial idea to a new ethical plane, and brings it into far
more vital and organic relation to human life. The
basis of the mediatorship of the Servant seems to be the

rinciple of the solidarity or organic unity of the people,
involving the ideal unity of the Servant and the people
he represents. In the earlier servant-passages the
Servant is identical with the whole nation (Isa 41 8;
44 11, and often), and the unity is therefore actual, not
ideal merely. In other passages, hawever, they are
clearly to be distinguished, for while the people as a
whole is unfaithful to its mission, the Servant remains
faithful and suffers for it. Whether in Isa 53 the
Servant is the pious remnant of the people or is con-
ceived of as an individnal we need not here consider.
In either case, the tie between the Servant and the whole
nation is never. ail odie broken; the idea of their
mystical union is still the groundwork of the prophet’s
thought. In virtue of this ideal relation, the Servant
is the representative of the nation before God, not Ina
mere official sense (as in the case of the priest), but on the
ground of personal merit, as the true Israel, the embodi-
ment of the national ideal. On that ground God can
accept his suffering in lien of the deserved penalty of the
whole recple. We have here a wonderful adumbration
of the NT doctrine of atonement through the One Me-
diator, the Son of Man, the representative of the race.
See Servant or JEwovad.


In later Judaism, the growing sense of God’s
transcendence favored the tendency to introduce
supernatural intermediaries between


7. Super- God and the world.

human (1) Angelic mediation—Not until
Agents of post-exilic times did angels come to
Mediation have theological significance. Pre-


’ viously, when God was anthropo-
morphically conceived as appearing periodically on


2021


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mediation


earth in visible form, the need of angelic mediation
was not felt. The “angel” in early narrative (e.g.
Gen 16 7-11) did not possess abiding personality
distinct from God, but was God Himself tempora-
rily manifested in human form. But the more God
came to be conceived as “‘the high and lofty One
that inhabiteth eternity,” the greater was the need
for mediation between God and the world, and even
between God and His servant the prophet. In
post-exilic writers there is an increasing disposition
to fill up the gap between God and the prophet with
superhuman beings. Thus Zechariah receives all
Divine instruction through angels; and similarly
Daniel receives explanations of his dreams. We
do not in the OT hear of angels interceding with
God (God-ward mediation), but only as interme-
diaries of revelation and of the Divine will (man-ward
mediation). Modern Jewish scholars deny that
Judaistic angelology implied that God was tran-
scendent in the sense of being remote and out of
contact with the world. So, e.g., Montefiore ( Hib-
bert Lectures, 423-31), but even he admits a
‘natural disinclination to bring the Godhead down-
ward to human conditions,” and that ‘for super-
natural conversations angels formed a convenient,
substitute for God’ (p. 480). The doctrine of


angels had no influence on the NT doctrine of |


mediation, which moves on the plane of the ethical
rather than on the basis of the merely physical
transcendence of God.

(2) Divine wisdom—Of more importance as a
preparation for the theology of the NTis the doctrine
of Wisdom, in which the Jews found “a middle term
between the religion of Israel and the philosophy
of Greece.” In Prov 8 22-31 Wisdom is depicted
as an individual energy, God’s elect Son, His com-
penton and master-workman (ver 30) in creation,

ut whose chief delight is with the children of men.
Though the Noches is here purely ideal and
poetical, and the ethical interest predominates over
the metaphysical, yet we have in such a passage a
clear proof of contact with Gr thought (esp. Platon-
ism and Stoicism), and of the felt need of a mediator
between God and the visible world. This mode of
thought, linked to the Heb conception of the Divine
Word as the efficient expression of God’s thought
and the medium of His activity (Isa 55 11; Ps
33 6; 107 20), has left its mark on Philo’s Logos-
doctrine and on the NT Christology. See Wispom.


II. In Semi- and Non-canonical Jewish, Literature.—
In the Apoc, the idea of mediation is for the most part
ahsent. We have one or two references to angelic inter-
cession (Tob 12 12.15), a function not attributed to
angels in the OT, but prominent in later apocalyptic
literature (e.g. En 9 10; 15 2; 40 6). The tradition
of the agency of angels in the promulgation of the law
is first found in the LXX of Dt 33 2 (not in the Heb
original), but was greatly amplified in rabbinical liter-
ature (Jos, Ant, XV,v, 38). In Wisd a bold advance is
made toward the conception of Wisdom as a personal
mediator of creation aD: % 22-27). In later Judaism,
the idea of the Word is further developed. The Tgs
constantly refer the Divine activity to the mémera@ or
"Word" of God, where the OT refers it to God directly,
and speaks of it_as Israel's Intercessor before God and
as Redeemer. This usage seems to arise out of a reluc-
tance to bring God into immediate contact with the world;
hence God's self-manifestation is represented as medi-
ated through 2 quasi-personal agent. The tendency
finds its full development, however, not_among the Jerus
Jews, but among the Jews of Alexandria, esp. in Philo’s
Logos-doctrine. Deeply influenced by the Platonic
dualism, Philo thought of God as pure Spirit, incapable
of contact with matter, so that without mediation God
could not act on the world. To fill up the great gap he
conceived of intermediary beings which represented at
once the Ideas of Plato, the active Powers of the Stoics,
and the angels of the OT. The highest of these was the
Divine Logos, the mediator between the inaccessible,
transcendent Being and the material universe. On the
one hand, in relation to the world, the Logos is the
Mediator of creation and of rcvelation; on the other, in
his God-ward activity, he is the representative of the
world before God, its High Priest, Intercessor, and
Paraclete. Yet Philo’s Logos was probably nothing
more than a high philosophical abstraction vividly


imaged in the mind. In spite of Philo’s iufluence_on
early Christian theology, and even perhaps on some NT
writers, his doctrine of mediation movcs on quite differ-
ent lines from the central NT doctrine, which is con-
cerned ahove all with the reconciliation of God and man
on account of sin, and not with the metaphysical recon-
ciliation of the absolute and the finite world. The
Mediator of Philo is an abstraction of speculative
thonght; the Mediator of the NT is a concrete historical
person known to experience. See Partito Jupaxrus.


IV. Mediation and Mediator in the NT.—The
relatively independent lines of development which
the conception of mediation has hither-


1. The to taken now meet and coalescein Jesus
Synoptic Christ. The traditional division of
Gospels Christ’s mediatorial work into that of


prophet, priest and king (very common
since Calvin, but now often discarded) offers a con-
venient method of treating the subject, though we
must avoid making the division absolute, as if
Christ’s work fell apart into three separate and
independent functions. The unity of the work of
salvation is preserved by the fact that ‘no one of
the offices fills up a moment of time alone, but the
others are always coéperative,” although ‘“Christ’s
mediatorial work puts now this, now that side in
the foreground.’ “The triple division is of special
value, because it sets in a vivid light the continuity
between the OT theocracy and Christianity’ (Dor-
ner, System of Christian Doctrine, ET, ITI, 385 ff).
These three aspects of Christ’s mediatorship can be
distinguished in the Synoptics, although the formal
distinction is the work of later analysis.

(1) Christ as Prophet—It wasin the character of
Prophet that He mainly impressed the common
mind, which was moved to inquire “Whence hath
this man this wisdom?” and by His reply, “‘A
prophet is not without honor,” etc, He virtually
accepts that title (Mt 13 54.57). As Prophet,
Christ is the mediator of revelation; through Him
alone can men come to know God as Father (Mt
11 27) and “the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven”
(18 11). In all His teaching we feel that He speaks
within the center of truth, and hence can teach with
authority and not as thescribes(7 29), who approach
the truth from without. His teaching is part of
His redemptive work, and not something extraneous
to it, for the sin from which He redeems includes
ignorance and error.

(2) Christ as King.—The official name ‘‘Christ’’
(=Messiah, the anointed King) refers primarily
to His kingship. The Messianic hope had taught
men to look forward to the rule of God on earth
instituted and administered through His representa-
tive. Christ was the fulfilment of that hope.
Though He held an attitude of reserve in the matter,
there can be no doubt that He conceived of Himself
as the Messiah (Mk 8 27-30; 14 16f; cf His
entry into Jerus as a triumphant king, 11 1 ff; the
inscription on the cross, 16 26). But itis also clear
that He fundamentally modified the Messianic
idea, (a) by suffusing it with the thought of vicari-
ous suffering, and (6) by giving it an ethical and
spiritual rather than a national and official signif-
cance. The note of His kingship was that of
authority (Mk 127; 210; Mt 729; 28 18)
exercised in the realm of truth and conscience. His
kingship includes the future as well as the present;
He is the arbiter of human destiny (Mt 26 31 ff).

(8) Christ as Priest, or, better, as Redeemer (the
synoptists do not hint at the priestly analogy). —Our
Lord often spoke of forgiveness without mention-
ing Himself as the one through whom it was medi-
ated, as if it flowed directly from the gracious heart
of the Father (cf the parables of Lk 15). But there
are other passages which emphasize the close con-
nection of His person with men’s redemption.
Meu’s attitude to Him decides absolutely their
relation to God (Mt 10 32.40). Rest of soul is


Mediation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2022


mediated to the heavy laden through Him (Mt 11
28-30). He claims authority on earth to forgive
sins (Mk 2 10). We have no evidence that He
spoke definitely of His death until after Peter’s con-
fession at Caesarea (Mk 8 31, “began to teach,”
etc), though we seem to have vague allusions earlier
(e.g. the allegory of the bridegroom, Mk 2 19.20).
This may be partly due to conscious reserve, in
accordance with the true pedagogical method by
which He adapted His teaching to the progressive
receptivity of His followers. But imasmuch as
we must think of Him as subject to the ordinary
laws of human psychology, the idea of His death
must have been to Him a growth, matured partly
by outward events, and partly by the development
of His inner consciousness as the Suffering Messiah.
In His later ministry, He frequently taught that
He must suffer and die (Mk 9 12.31; 10 32f;
12 8; 14 8 and || passages; cf Mk 10 38; Lk 12
49f). There are two important passages which
expressly connect His death with His mediatorial
work. ‘The first is Mk 10 45 || Mt 20 28, ‘The
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto but
to minister, and to give his life a ransom for
many.” The context shows that it was while the
thought of His approaching death filled His mind
that Our Lord uttered these words (cf Mk 10 33.
38f). As tothe exact meaning of ransom (AU7poy,
litron) there are two circles of ideas with which
it may be associated. (a) It may mean a sacrificial
offering, representing Heb képher (lit. “covering,”
“propitiatory gift’) which it translates several
times in LXX (eg. Ex 30 12). Thus Ritschl
defines it as “an offering which, because of its
specific worth to God, is a protection or covering
against sin” (Rechifertigung und Verséhnung, Vl,
68-88). (6) It may mean ransom price, the purchase-
money paid for the emancipation of a slave. In
LXX, lutron in most cases stands for some form of
the roots g@’al, “‘to deliver,” padhah, ‘‘to redeem”
(eg. Lev 25 51; Nu 351). Hence Wendt ex-
plains the “ransom” as the price by which Jesus
redeemed His disciples from their bondage to suffer-
ing and death (Teaching of Jesus, II, 226 ff). This
analogy certainly suits the context better than that
drawn from the Levitical ritual, for it brings out the
contrast between the liberating work of Christ and
the enslaving work of those who “ord it over’’ men.
We must not press the analogy in detail or seek
here an answer to the question, who was the recip-
ient of the ransom price (e.g. whether the devil, as
many Fathers, notably Origen and Gregory of
Nyssa; God, as Anselm and later theologians; the
“eternal law of righteousness,” as Dale). The
purpose of the passage is primarily practical, not
speculative. It is certainly pressing the figurative
language of Jesus too far to insist that the ransom
rice ig the exact quantitative equivalent of the
ives liberated, or of the penalty they had deserved
regarded as a debt. This is too prosaic and liter-
alistic an interpretation of a passage which has its
setting in the ethical rather than in the commercial
realm, and which breathes @ spirit closely akin to
that of Isa 53, where suffering and service are, as
here, combined.

The other passage in which Christ definitely con-
nects His mediatorship with His death is that which
reports His words at the Last Supper (Mk 14 22-
24; Mt 26 26-28; Lk 22 19f; cf 1 Cor 11 24f).
The reported words are not identical in the several
narratives. But even in their simplest form (in
Mk), there is evidently a threefold allusion, to the
paschal lamb, to the sacrifice offered by Moses
at the ratification of the covenant at Sinai (Ex 24
8), and to Jeremiah’s prophecy of a new covenant
(81 31-34). There can be little doubt that the
paschal feast, though it does not conform in detail


to any of the Levitical sacrifices, was regarded as a
sacrifice, as is indicated by the blood ceremonial
(Ex 12 21-27). The blood of the covenant, too,
is sacrificial; and, as we have seen, it is probable
that all blood sacrifices, and not those of the sin
and guilt offerings only, were associated with pro-
pitiatory power. Wendt denies that there is here
any reference to sin and its forgiveness (Teachings
of Jesus, IJ, 241f). It must be admitted that the


- words in Mt “unto remission of sins,’”’ which have


no counterpart in the other reports, are probably
an explanatory expansion of the words actually
uttered. But they are a true interpretation of their
Meaning, as is attested by the fact that the new
covenant of Jeremiah’s prophecy was one of for-
giveness and justification (Jer 31 34), and that
Christ speaks of His blood as shed for others.
And as the Passover signified deliverance from
bondage to an earthly power (Egypt), so the Supper
stands for forgiveness and deliverance from a
spiritual power (sin). Clearly Christ here repre-
sents Himself as the Mediator of the new covenant,
through whom men are to find acceptance with
God, though the exact modus operandi of His
sacrifice is not indicated.

The Synoptics give special prominence to those
historical events which are most intimately asso-
ciated with Christ’s mediatorship—not only the
agony in the garden and the crucifixion, but also the
resurrection and ascension (which make possible
His intercessory mediation in heaven).

(1) The early speeches in Acts reveal a primitive
stage of theological reflection. Yet they are essen-

tially Christocentric. (a) It is the
2. Primitive Messianic Kingship of Christ that is
Apostolic chiefly emphasized. The main thesis
Teaching is that Jesus is the Messiah (the

“anointed one”; cf Acts 4 27; 10 38),
and that His Messiahship was realized in the cruci-
fixion and attested by the resurrection. An im-
portant feature is the use of the title “Servant” for
Christ (3 13.26; 4 27.30; cf 8 30-35), in evident,
reference to the Suffering Servant of Deutero-Isa.
In the phrase, “‘thy holy Servant .. . . whom thou
didst anoint,” coming immediately after the Mes-
sianic quotation, “against the Lord, and against
his Anointed” (4 26 f), we have a concise instance of
that coalescing of the ideaof the Messiah with that
of the Suffering Servant which gave the Messianic
idea an entirely new meaning. As Messiah, Jesus
was the sole Mediator of salvation (412). (b)
Another OT type which finds its fulfilment in Jesus
is that of the “prophet like unto”’ Moses (3 22; 7 37;
ef Dt 18 15.18). (c) But the priestly functions of
Christ are not explicitly touched on. The questions
are not faced, What is the God-ward sipnitica ce of
Hisdeath? Howis it effective for man’s salvation?
It is rather the man-ward significance that is made
explicit, ic. Jesus as Messiah mediates salvation
to men from His place of exaltation at the right
hand of God. Yet the germs of a God-ward me-
diation are found in the identification of the Messiah
with the Suffering Servant.

(2) Episiles of James and Jude.—In these epp.
the doctrine of Christ’s mediation does not occupy
a prominent place. To James, Christianity is
the culmination of Judaism. Christ’s mediatorial
functions are set forth more by way of presupposi-
tion than by explicit statement, and the whole
weight is laid on the kingly and prophetic offices.
The Messiahship of Jesus is assumed to such an
extent that the title “Christ”? has become part of
the proper name, and His Lordship is also implied
(11; 21). Nothing definite is said of His function
in salvation; it is God Himself who regenerates
but the medium of regeneration is “the word of
truth,” “the implanted word” (1 18.21), which


2023


must refer to the word which Jesus had preached.
This implies that Jesus as prophetic teacher is the
Mediator of salvation. Nothing is said of the death
on the cross or its saving significance. The Ep. of
Jude assumes the Lordship of Christ, through whom
God's Saviourhood works, and whose mercy results
in eternal life (vs 4.21.25).

(3) 1 Peter.—In 1 Pet we have the early apostolic
teaching touched with Paulinism. The fact that
salvation is mediated through the sufferings and
death of Christ is now explicitly stated. Christ
has suffered for sins once for all, the righteous for
the unrighteous (3 18). The suffering has sig-
nificance both God-ward and man-ward. Rela-
tively to God it is a sacrificial offering which opens
up a way of access to Him; He suffered “that he
might bring us to God” (3 18), and that through
His representative priesthood the ideal “holy priest-
hood”’ of all God’s people might be realized, for it
is “through Jesus Christ’? that men’s “spiritual
sacrifices” become “acceptable to God” (2 5). So
the elect are sprinkled with the blood of Christ, i.e.
brought into communion with God by His sacrifice
(1 2). Relatively to man, it is a means of ran-
soming or liberating man from the bondage cf sin.
“Knowing that ye were redeemed [édurpdéyre,
elutréthéte, lit. “ransomed,” from lutron, “ransom,”
an echo of Mk 10 45]... . with precious blood,
as of a lamb without blemish and without spot”
(1 18.19). The sacrificial language is simple and
undeveloped, and it is not clear whether the figure
of “lamb” implies a reference to the paschal lamb or
toIsa 63 7, or to both. The effect on man is, how-
ever,clear. Christ “bare our sins in his body upon
the tree, that we, having died unto sins, might live
untorighteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed”
(2 24; see the whole passage, vs 21-24, reminiscent,
of the figure of the Suffering Servant of Isa ch 53).

Christ’s mediatorship stands at the very center
of Paul’s gospel; this in spite of the fact that only

once dees he apply the term “medi-
3. Epistles ator’ to Christ (1 Tim 2 5), and that
of Paul in the only other passage where he

uses the word, he applies it to Moses,
in a sense which might seem to be inconsistent with
the idea of Christ’s mediatorship, viz. where he
discusses the relation of law to promise. The law
was “ordained through angels by the hand of a
mediator. Now a mediator is not .... of one;
but God is one’ (Gal 3 19.20).

This passage has had to undergo about 300 different
interpretations. The view that the ‘‘mediator”’ here
Is Christ (Origen, Augustine and most of the Fathers,
Calvin, etc) is clearly untenable. Modern exegetes
agree that the reference is to Moses (cf Lev 26 46, where
LXX has ‘‘by the hand of Moses’’; Philo calls Moses
“mediator and reconciler."’ De Vit. Moys, iii.19), who, ac-
cording to arabbinical tradition, received the Law through
the intermediation of angels (cf Acts 7 53; He 2 2). Nor
is it likely that Paul meant the reader to realize the glory
ot the law and the solemnity of its ordination (Meyer).
The point is rather the inferiority of the law to the evan-
gelical promise to Abraham. Mediation implies at ieast
two parties between whom it is carried on. The law
was given by a double mediatorship, that of the angels
and that of Moses, and was thus two removes from its
Divine source, But in relation to the promise God
stood alone, i.e. acted freely, unconditionally, inde-
pendently, and for Himself alone. The promise is no
agreement between two, but the free gift of the one God
(so Schleiermacher, Lightfoot, etc). _Thisis by no means
a denial of the Divine origin of thelaw (Ritschi), for the
mediation of angels and of Moses was Divinely author-
ized; but it does seem to make the method of mediation
inferior to that of the_direct communication of God's
gracious will to man. Paul is not, however, treating of
the principle of mediation in the abstract, but only that
form of it which implies a contract hetween two parties.
Christ is not Mediator in the same sense as Moses, for the
tree and unconditioned character of the forgiving grace
which Christ mediates is by no means diminished by the
fact of His mediation.


What, then, is Paul’s positive teaching on Christ's
Mediatorship ?


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mediation


(1) The need of a Mediator arises out of the fact


of sin. Sin interrupts the harmonious relation
between God and man. It results in a state of
mutual alienation. On the one hand, man is in a
state of enmity to God (Rom 6 10; 8 7; Col 1 21).
On the other hand, God is moved to righteous
wrath in relation to the sinner (Rom 1 18; 6 9;
Eph 5 6; Col 3 6). Hence the need of a mutual
change of attitude, a removal of God’s displeasure
against the sinner as well as of the sinner’s hostility
to God. God could not restore man to favor by a
mere fiat, without some public exhibition of Divine
righteousness, and vindication of His character as
not indifferent to sin (cf Rom 3 25.26). Such
exhibition demanded a Mediator.

(2) The qualification of Christ to be the Mediator
depends on His intimate relation to both parties
at variance.

(a) Christ’s relation to man: Firstly, He is Him-
self a man, i.e. not merely “man” generically, but
an individual man. The “one mediator between
God and men” is “himself man, Christ Jesus’’ (1
Tim 2 5), “born of a woman” (Gal 4 4), “in the
likeness of sinful flesh”? (Rom 8 3, where the word
‘Jikeness’”’ does not make ‘‘flesh’” unreal, but
qualifies “sinful’’), i.e. bore to the eye the aspect
of an ordinary man; secondly, He bore a particular
relation to a section of humanity, the Jews (Rom 1
8; 95); thirdly, He bore a universal relation to
mankind in general. He was more than an indi-
vidual among many, like a link in a chain. He
was the Second Adam, the archetypal, universal,
representative Man, whose actions therefore had
significance beyond Himself and were ideally the
actions of humanity, just as Adam’s act had, on a
lower plane, a significance for the whole race (Rom
5 12-21; 1 Cor 16 22.45).

(b) His relation to God: Paul very frequently
speaks of Christ as the “Son of God,’’ and that in a
unique sense. Moreover, He was the “image of
God” (2 Cor 44; Col 115), and _ subsisted
originally ‘iu the form of God” (Phil 2 6). He is
set alongside with God over against idols (1 Cor
8 5.6), and is coérdinated with God in the bene-
diction (2 Cor 13 14). Clearly Paul sets Him in
the Divine sphere over against all that is not God.
Yet he assigns Him a certain subordination, and
even asserts that His mediatorial kingship will come
to an end, that God may be all in all (1 Cor 15
24.28). But this cessation of His function as
Mediator of salvation, when its end shall have been
attained, cannot affect, His Divine dignity, “since
the mediatorial sovereignty which is now ceasing
was not its cause, but its consequence” (B. Weiss,
IT, 396).

(3) The means of effecting the reconciliation was
mainly the death on the cross. Paul emphasizes the
mediating value of the death both on its objective
(God-ward) side and on its subjective (man-ward)
side. Firsi, it is the objective ground of forgiveness
and favor with God. On the basis of what Christ
has done, God ceases to reckon to men their sins
(2 Cor 6 19). Paul’s view of the death may be
seen by considering some of his most characteristic
expressions. (a) Itis an act of reconciliation. This
involves a change of attitude, not only in man, but
in God, a relinquishing of the Divine wrath without
which there can be no restoration of peaceful rela-
tions (though this is disputed by many, e.g. Ritschl,
Lightfoot, Westcott, Beyschlag), but not a change
of nature or of intention, for the Divine wrath is
but a mode of the eternal love, and moreover it is
the Father Himself who provides the means of
reconciliation and undertakes to accomplish it
(2 Cor 6 19; cf Col 1 20.21; Eph 2 16). (6) It
is an act of propitiation (Rom 3 25, lAracripior,
hilastérion, from iddoxerOu, hildskesthat, “to ren-


Mediation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2024


der favorable” or “‘propitious’’). Here there is a
clear though tacit reference to a change of atti-
tude on God’s part. He who was not formerly
propitious to man was appeased through the death
of Christ. Yet the propitiatory means are pro-
vided by God Himself, who takes the initiative in
the matter (‘whom God set forth,’ etc). (c) It is
aransom. ‘The Mediator “gave himself a ransom
for all” (1 Tim 2 6). The idea of payment of a
ransom price is clearly implied in the word ‘“Te-
demption” (Rom 3 24; 1 Cor 130; Eph 17;
Col 1 14, drodtrpwors, apolhitrisis, from Lutron,
“ransom’’). It is not alone the fact of liberation
(Westcott, Ritschl), but also the cost of liberation
that is referred to. Hence Christians are said to
be “redeemed,” “bought with a price” (Gal 3 13;
45; 1 Cor 6 20; 723; cf 1 Pet 118f). Yet
the metaphor cannot be pressed to yield an answer
to the question to whom the ransom was paid. All
that can safely be said is that it expresses the tre-
mendous cost of our salvation, viz. the self-surren-
dered life (“the blood’’) of Christ. (d) Strong sub-
stitutionary language is sometimes used, notably
in Gal 3 13 (“having become a curse for us’’) and
in 2 Cor 5 21 (‘Him who knew no sin he made to
be sin on our behalf”). But the sinless substitute
is not regarded as actually punished (that would be
a moral contradiction). His death was not penal
substitution, but a substitute for penalty. It had
the value to God of the punishment of sinners, in
virtue of His oneness with the race. It was the
recognition from within humanity of the sinfulness
of sin, and expressed the Divine righteousness as
fully as penalty would have done. The secret
seems to be Christ’s sympathetic love by which
He identified Himself with man’s sin and doom of
death. (e) Sacrificial language is used, as in 1 Cor
5 7; Eph 5 2, and in the references to Christ’s
“blood.” Not often, however, does Paul explicitly
speak of the death in terms of the Levitical ritual,
which would be Jess congenial to his mind than the
prophetic conception of the Suffering Servant. Yet
he does seem to regard the death of Christ as the
cnlmination of all that the sacrifices of the OT had
imperfectly realized. Secondly, the subjective as-
pect of Christ’s work is emphasized quite as much
as the objective. The death of Christ, being in-
wardly assimilated by faith, becomes to the be-
liever the principle of ethical transformation, so
that he may become worthy of the Divine favor
which he now enjoys. Asa result of his subjective
identity with Christ through faith, the objective
state of privilege is changed into actual liberation
from sin (Gal 2 20; 6 14; Rom 6 6.7; Col 3 8).

(4) The resurrection and exaltation of Christ are
essential to His mediatorial work (1 Cor 16 17).
It is not alone that the resurrection “proves that
the death of Christ was not the death of a sinner,
but the vicarious death of the sinless Mediator-of
salvation” (B. Weiss, I, 486), but that salvation
cannot be realized except through communion with
the living, glorified Christ, without which the sub-
jective identity of the believer with Christ by which
redemption is personally appropriated would not
be possible (Gal 2 20; Rom 6 4.5; Phil 3 10; Col
31). The exaltation also makes possible Hig
continuous heavenly intercession on our behalf
(Rom 8 384), which is the climax of His mediatorial
activities,

(5) The cosmic aspect of Christ’s mediatorship.—
In his later epp. (esp. Col and Eph), Paul lays
stress on Christ’s mediatorial activity in creation
and providence, though the germs of his later teach-
ing are found in the earlier epp. (1 Cor 8 6). He
is resisting a kind of nascent gnostic dualism,
according to which God could communicate with
the world only through a hierarchy of intermediate


powers. Against this he proclaims Christ as the
one and only Mediator between God and the uni-
verse, having, on the one hand, a unique relation to
God (“the image of the invisible God,’”’ Col 1 15;
in whom the fulness of God dwells, 1 19; 2 9), and,
on the other hand, a unique relation to the world,
as its creative agent, its immanent principle of
unity, and its ultimate goal (1 15-17). Here the
apostle shows affinity with the Logos-doctrine of
Philo, though the differences are marked and funda-
mental. Corresponding to this wider view of
Christ’s person, there is a wide view of the recon-
ciliation wrought through Him. It even extends
to the world beyond man, and restores the broken
harmony of the universe (Col 1 20; Eph 1 10).
The main thesis of He is the absoluteness and
finality of the gospel and its superiority over Juda-


ism. The finality of Christianity
4, The depends on the fact that it has a perfect
Epistle Mediator, who is the substance of
to the which the various Jewish forms of
Hebrews mediation were types and shadows.


He illustrates this by a series of con-
trasts between Christ and the mediators of the old
system (hy the application of principles and exe-
getical methods which reveal the influence of the
school of Philo). In each contrast, Christ’s supe-
riority is based on His Sonship. (1) Christ is
superior to the prophets as Mediator of revelation.
The OT revelation was fragmentary and multiform,
while now God speaks, not through many agents,
but through One, and that one a Son. As Son He
is the perfectly adequate expression of the Father.
The author takes us at once to the high tran-
scendental sphere of Christ’s relationg to God and
the universe, in virtue of which He is God’s Me-
diator in creation, providence, revelation and re-
demption (1 1-3). (2) He is superior to the
angels, through whose mediation the law was given
(1 4-14). (8) Heissuperior to Moses, the human
agent in the giving of the law (3 1-6). (4) He is
greater than Aaron the high priest, the people’s
representative before God. This leads to the cen-
tral doctrine of the ep., the high-priesthood of
Jesus. The following are the salient points in the
elaborate treatment of this subject:

(1) Christ’s qualification for the high-priesthood
is twofold: (a) His participation in all human expe-
rience (except sin), which guarantees His power
of sympathy. Every high pose as men’s repre-
sentative before God, must be “taken from among
men” (6 1). Hence the author lays great stress
on the human nature and’ experiences of Christ
(cf 2 10.17.18; 415; 6 7.8). (6) His Divine
appointment. Every priest must have a call from
God. So Christ has been appointed priest, not
indeed in the Aaronic line, but after the order of
Melchizedek (5 1-10).

(2) The nature of His priesthood, its superiority
to the Levitical priesthood.—The priests of the OT
themselves needed atonement, for they were not
sinless; Christ is holy, gnileless, undefiled, and need
not make atonement for His own sins. They were
priests only for a time, and were many in number,
for they were mortal; but He abideth forever, and
His priesthood is eternal. They were dependent
on the law of physical descent; He was a priest
after the order of Melchizedek, whose priesthood
did not depend on genealogy or pedigree, and who
combined the functions of king with those of priest.
In a word, their order was transient, temporary,
shadowy; His belonged to the world of unchanging
reality (ch 7).

(3) The realization of His high-priesthood.—A
high priest implies a sacrifice; hence Christ must
“have somewhat to offer” (8 3). In the Levitical
system, the priest and the sacrifice are distinct from


2025


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mediation


eachother. But Christ offered not an external gift,
but Himself. Much stress is laid on Christ’s vol-
untary obedience (5 8; 10 7), progressively at-
tained through suffering, and culminating in the
absolute surrender of His life (“blood”) in death.
His sacrifice harmonizes with the principle that
“apart from shedding of blood there is no remission”
(9 22), although the principle is lifted from the
physical to the spiritual realm. In working this
out, the author makes use of analogies drawn from
three parts of the Levitical ritual. (@) Christ’s
death was a sin offering. He has offered one final
sacrifice for sins (10 12.18). As priest, he has
“made propitiation for the sins of the people” (2
17); as victim He was “once {for all] offered to
bear the sins of many’ (9 28). (b) The Sinaitic
covenant (Ex 24 8) is made use of. Christ is
“the mediator of a new [better] covenant’’ (8 6;
9 15; 12 24), ic. the agent interposing hetween
God and man in the establishment of a new rela-
tionship analogous to Moses in the old covenant.
Even the first covenant was dedicated with blood
and so the blood of the Son of God was “the blood
of the covenant” (10 29; ef Mk 14 24). On the
double meaning of the word diathéké (“‘covenant,”
“testament’’), the author bases a twofold argu-
ment for the necessity of Christ’s death (9 15ff).
(c) The ritual of the Day of Atonement fur-
nishes another analogy. As the high priest once
@ year entered the most holy place of the earthly


people, so Christ has entered once for all the true.


spiritual sanctuary in heaven, and there He presents
Himself to God as the Mediator able to make inter-
cession for us with the Father (9 12.24-26; ef
7 25). He is a ministering pricst in the true
tabernacle, the immediate presence of God (8 2).
Thus the ascension and session make possible the
culmination of the mediatorial work of Christ in
the eternal sacrifice and intercession within the veil.
(4) The man-ward efficacy of His mediatorship.—
The effect of Christ’s death on man is described by
the words ‘‘cleanse,” “‘sanctify,’’ ‘“perfect’’ (9 14;
10 10.14.29; 13 12), words which have a ritualistic
quite as much as an ethical sense, meaning the re-
moval of the sense of guilt, dedication to God, and
the securing of the privilege of full fellowship with
Him. The ultimate blessing that comes to man
through the work of Christ is the privilege of free,
unrestricted access to God by the removal of the
obstacle of guilt (4 16; 10 19 ff).
(1) The Fourth Gospel—Aspects of Our Lord’s
teaching unassimilated by the other disciples, and
therefore but meagerly touched on in
5. The the Synoptics, find prominence in the
Johannine Gospel of Jn, but colored by his own
Writings meditations. Great} emphasis is laid
on the idea of salvation by revelation
mediated through Jesus Christ. The historical
revelation of God in the person and teaching of
Jesus is the main suhject of the Gospel. But in the
Prologue we have the eternal background of the
historical manifestation in the doctrine of the Logos,
who, as Son in eternal fellowship with the Father,
His mediator in creation, and the immanent prin-
ciple of revelation in the world, is fitted to become
God’s Revealer in history (vs 11-18). His work
on earth is to dispense light and life, knowledge of
God and salvation. Through Him God gives to
the world eternal life (3 16). He is the Water of
Life (4 14; 7 37), the Bread of Life (6 48 ff), the
Light of the World (8 12); it is by inward appro-
priation of Him that salvation is mediated to men
(6 52 ff). He is the perfect revealer of God, hence
the only means of access to the Father (14 6.9).
Tt is on salvation by illumination and communion,
rather than on salvation by reconciliation and
atonement that chief stress is laid. Sacrificial or


propitiatory language is not used of Christ’s death.
Yet emphasis is laid on the voluntary and vicarious
character of His death. He lays down His life
of Himself (10 18); ‘The good shepherd layeth
down his life for [=on behalf of] the sheep” (10 11;
ef 15 13). Christ’s death was the supreme example
of the law that self-sacrifice is necessary to the
highest and most fruitful life (12 23 ff). In ch 17
we have a unique instance of Our Lord’s inter-
eessory prayer.

(2) The epistles—In 1 Jn we find more explicit
statements with regard to the connection between
the death of Christ and sin. ‘The blood of Jesus
his Son cleanscth us from all sin’ (1 7); ‘He was
manifested to take away sins” (3 5); “If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,” i.e. a
pleader who will mediate with God on our behalf,
the ground of His intercessory efficacy being that
He is the “propitiation for our sins” (2 2; 4 10, a
term which links the Johannine doctrine to that of
Paul, though 1 Jnrepresents Christ Himself, and not
merely His death on the cross, as the propitiation).
This latter term shows that an objective value is
attached to the atonement, as in some way neutral-
izing or making amends for sin in the eyes of God,
yet in such a way as not to contradict the principles
er ecuaal (cf “Jesus Christ the righteous,”
(3) The Apocalypse presents both aspects of
Christ’s mediation. On the one hand, He is asso-
ciated with God in the government of the world
and in judgment (8 21; 7 10; 6 16), holds the
keys of death and Hades (1 18), is the Lord of
lords and King of kings (17 14; 19 16), and is the
Mediator of creation (3 14). On the other hand,
by His sacrificial act He represents men before God.
The most characteristic expression of this is the
title “the Lamb” (29 t). By His blood the guilty
are cleansed and made saints, purchased unto God
(6 9; 714). The lamb is the symbol of the
sacrificial love which is the heart of God’s sover-
eignty (6 6). It is not clear whether the allusion
in this title 1s. to the paschal lamb or to the Suffering
Servant pictured as a lamb led to the slaughter
(Isa 63 7), or to hoth. In any case it contains the
idea of Christ’s redemptive sacrifice, which is de-
clared to be an essential part of God’s eternal
counsel (18 8m, ‘the Lamb that hath been slain
from the foundation of the world’’).

V. Conclusion.—Our inquiry will have shown
how central and prominent is the idea of mediation
throughout the Scriptures. We might even say
it supplies the key to the unity of the Bible. In the
OT the principle is given “in divers portions and in
divers manners,” but in the NT it converges in the
doctrine of the person and work of the One final
Mediator, the Son of God. Amid all the rich di-
versity of the various parts of the NT, there is one
fundamental conception common to all, that of
Christ as at once the interpreter of God to men and
the door of access for men to God. Especially is
Christ’s self-sacrifice presented as the effective
cause of our salvation, as a means of removing the
guilt and sin which stand as a barrier in the way
of God’s purpose concerning man and of man’s
fellowship with God. There is a tendency in some
influential writers of today to speak disparagingly
of the doctrine of the one Mediator, on the ground
that it injures the direct relationship of man with
God (eg. R. Eucken, Truth of Religion, 583 ff).
Here we ean reply only that the doctrine properly
defined is attested in universal Christian experience,
and that, so far from standing in the way of our
personal approach to God, it is a simple historical
fact that apart from the work of Jesus we would not
enjoy that free access to Him which is now our
privilege.


Medicine
Megiddo


THE INTERNATLONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2026


LiteraTturse.—Besides the comms.,such works on OT
Theology as those of Oehler, Schultz, A. B. Davidson,
and on NT Theology by B. Weiss, Beyschlag, Holtz-
mann, W. B. Stevens, Weinel; Wendt, The Teaching
of Jesus; A. B. Bruce, St. Paul's Conception of Chris-
tianity and The Ep. to the He; J. Denney, The Death of
Christ; Du Bose, The Gospel in the Gospels, The Gospel
accarding to St. Paul, High-Priesthood and Sacrifice. For
the idea of mediation in Jewish religion, Oesterley, The
Jewish Doctrine of Mediation; Toy, Judaismand Chris-
tianity. Much material on the Bib. doctrine may be
found in such works as Dorner, System of Christian
Doctrine; Ritschl, Die christliche Lehre von der Recht~
ertigung und Verséhnung, 3 vols (vols J and III, ET);

ale, The Atonement; McLeod Campbell, The Nature
of the Atonement; F. D. Maurice, The Doctrine of Sac-
rifices Moberly, Atonement and Personality; J. Scott Lid-
Bete The Spiritual Principle of the Atonement; G. B.

tevens, Christian Doctrine of Salvation; arts. in HDB,
DCG, and in this Encyclopaedia on '' Mediation’'; '' Me~
diator"’; ‘‘Atonement’’; ‘Messiah’; ‘' Propitiation"’;
*“Prophets''; ‘' Priests"’; ‘‘ Ransom"; "' Reconciliation '’;
“Sacrifice’’; Salvation,'’ etc.


D. Misti Epwarps

MEDICINE, med‘i-sin, med’i-s’n (TW, géhah,
MDI, Uraphah, MRD, rephwah): These words
are used in the sense of a remedy or remedies for
disease. In Prov 17 22 AV;a merry heart is said
to do good “‘like a medicine.’ There is an alterna-
tive reading in AVm, “‘to a medicine,” RV ‘is a
good medicine’; RVm gives another rendering,
“causeth good healing,” which is the form that
occurs in the LXX and which was adopted by
Kimchi and others. Some of the Tgs, substituting
a waw for the first h in géha@h, read here “doeth good
to the body,” thus making this clause antithetic to
the latter half of the verse. In any case the
meaning is that a cheerful disposition is a powerful
remedial agent.

In the figurative account of the evil case of Judah
and Israel because of their backsliding (Jer 30 13),
the prophet says they have had no rphu’ah, or
“healing medicines.” Later on (Jer 46 11), when
pronouncing the futility of the contest of Neco
against Nebuchadrezzar, Jeremiah compares Egypt
to an ineurably sick woman going up to Gilead to
take balm as a medicine, without any benefit. In
Ezekiel’s vision of the trees of life, the leaves are
said (AV) to be for medicine, RV reads “‘healing,”’
thereby assimilating the language to that in Rev 22
2, “leaves of the tree . . . . for the healing of the
nations” (cf Ezk 47 12).

Very few specific remedies are mentioned in the
Bible. “Balm of Gilead’ is said to be an anodyne
(Jer 8 22; cf 618). The love-fruits, ‘“man-
drakes’’ (Gen 30 14) and “caperberry” (Eccl 12
5m), myrrh, anise, rue, cummin, the “oil and wine”
of the Good Samaritan, soap and sodic carbonate
(“natron,”’ called by mistake “nitre’’) as cleansers,
and Hezekiah’s ‘‘fig poultice’ nearly exhaust the
catalogue. In the Apoc we have the heart, liver
and gall of Tobit’s fish (Tob 6 7). In the Egyp
pharmacopoeia are the names of many plants which
cannot be identified, but most of the remedies used
by them were dietetic, such as honey, milk, meal,
oil, vinegar, wine. The Bab medicines, as far as
they can be identified, are similar. In the Mish
we have references to wormwood, poppy, hemlock,
aconite and other drugs. The apothecary men-
tioned in AV (Ex 30 25, etc) was a maker of per-
fumes, not of medicines. Among the fellahin many
common plants are used as folk-remedies, but
they put most confidence in amulets or charms,
which are worn by most Palestinian peasants to
ward off or to heal diseases. ALEX. MACALISTER


MEDITATION, med-i-ta’shun (M49, haghuth,
TWIN , sihah): “Meditation” is the tr of haghath,
from haghah, “to murmur,” “to have a deep tone,”
hence ‘‘to meditate’ (Ps 49 3); of haghigh, “sigh-
ing,” “moaning” (Ps 5 1; see ver 2); of higgayan,
“the murrour” or dull sound of the harp, hence


meditation (Ps 19 14, “Let... . the meditation
of my heart be acceptable in thy sight’’); of s7h,
“speech,’”’ “meditation” (Ps 104 34, “Let my medi-
tation be sweet unto him’); of sthah, a “bowing
down,” “musing” (Ps 119 97.99; 2 Esd 10 5).
“To meditate” is the tr of haghah (Josh 1 8; Ps
12; 68 6; Isa 33 18 AV); of sah (Gen 24 63);
of stp (Ps 119 15.23, etc; 143 5, AV “muse”;
1 Ch 16 9; Ps 105 2m). In Apoc we have “‘to
meditate” (Ecclus 14 20, “Blessed is the man that
shall meditate in wisdom,” RVm “most authorities
read come to an end” [teleutései]; 39 1, “meditateth
in the law of the Most High” [dianoéomai]). The
lack of meditation is a great want in our modern
religious life. In the NT, we have ‘“‘to meditate”
(rpoueherdw, premeletdd, ‘to take care beforehand’’),
Lk 21 14, and‘ meditate” (uederdw, meletdé, “to take
care’), 1 Tim 415 AV (RV “be diligent”); cf
Phil 4 8; Col 3 2. W. L. WaLk=R


MEDITERRANEAN, med-i-te-ra’né-an, SEA
(4% Q@dAacca, hé ithdlassa): To the Hebrews the
Mediterranean was the sea, as was natural from their
situation.


Hence they speak of it simply as ‘the sea” (D5,
ha-yam), e.g. Gen 49 13, Nu 18 29; 34 5; Jgs 5 17;
or, again, it is ‘the great sea" on DM, ka-yam
ha-gadhél, e.g. Nu $4 6.7; Josh 9 1: 15 12.47; Ezk
47 10.15.19.20; 48 28); or, hecause it lay to the W. of
Pal, as '‘the great sea toward the going down of the
sun” (Josh 1 4; 23 4), and, since the west was regarded
as the ‘'back,”’ in contrast to the east as the "front,’’ as
“hinder [or **western’’ RV, '‘uttermost”’ or ‘‘utmost’’ AV]


sea’ hbatm tym) OMT. ha-yam ha-'ahdrén), Dt 11 24; 34
2; Zec 14 8; Joel 2 20, in the last two passages con-
trasted with ‘‘the former [AV, ‘‘eastern" RV] sea”
ora ps Dn, ha-yam ha-kadhméni), i.e. the Dead Sea.
See Former. That portion of the Mediterranean
directly W. of Pal is once (Ex 23 31) referred to as ‘' the
sea of the Philis” (D°MWS DY, yam pelishtim). AV
has ‘sea of Joppa” (Ezr 3.7) where RV correctly
renders ‘'to_the sea, unto Joppa” (cf 2 Ch 2 16).
Similarly, AV “the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia”’ (Acts
27 5) is better rendered ‘the sea which is off Cilicia and
Pamphylia"” (RV).

In the NT, references to the Mediterranean are
common, esp. in the accounts of Paul’s voyages, for
which see PauLt. Jesus once (Mk 7 24 ff) came
to or near the sea,

The Mediterranean basin was the scene of most
ancient civilizations which have greatly influenced
that of the western world, excepting those whose
home was in the valleys of the Tigris and the
Euphrates; and even these continually thrust
themselves into it, so far as they could. As its
name implies, it is an inland area, united to the
Atlantic only by the narrow Straits of Gibraltar.
In comparatively recent geological time it was also
joined to the Red Sea, the alluvial deposits of the
Nile, which have extended the line of the Delta,
having with the aid of drifting desert sands sub-
sequently closed the passage and joined the con-
tinentsof Asiaand Africa. ‘The total length of the
Mediterranean is about 2,300 miles, its greatest
breadth about 1,080 miles, and its area about 1,000,-
000 sq. miles. It falls naturally into the western
and eastern (Levant) halves, dividing at the line
running from Tunis to Sicily, where it is compara-
tively shallow; the western end is generally the
deeper, reaching depths of nearly 6,000 ft. On the
N. it 1s intersected by the Italian and Balkan
peninsulas, forming the Gulf of Lyons, the Adriatic
and the Aegeau. Jn ancient times these and other
divisions of the Mediterranean bore specific names
given by the Greeks and Romans, but from the
nature of the case their limits were ill defined. The
temperature of the Mediterranean is in summer
warmer, in winter about the same as that of the


2027


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Medicine
Megiddo


Atlantic. Its water has a slightly greater speeific
gravity, probably because of a larger proportionate
evaporation. WixuiamM ArTHur HEIpEL


MEEDA, mé-é'da.


MEEDDA, mé-ed’a (Mce88é, Mecddd, but Swete,
Ac584, Deddd, following B; AV Meeda): The head
of one of the families of Nethinim (temple slaves)
who went up with Zerubbabel from the captivity
(1 Esd 5 32); identieal with ‘‘“Mehida” of Ezr 2
52 and Neh 7 54.


MEEKNESS, mék’nes (W392, ‘éndwah; wpaérys,


pradtés, mpavtns, praiiés): ‘“Meekness” in the OT
(‘dnawah, ‘anwah) is from ‘anaw, “suffering,” “op-
pressed,”’ “‘afflicted,’”’ denoting the spirit produced
under sueh experiences. The word is sometimes
tr “poor? (Job 24 4, RVm “meek”; Am 8 4);
“humble” (Ps 9 12.18, RVm “meek’’); “lowly”
(Prov 3 34; 16 19, RV “poor,” m “meek’). It
is generally associated with some form of oppres-
sion. The “meek” were the special objects of the
Divine regard, and to them special blessings are
promised (Ps 22 26, “The meek shall eat and be
satisfied”; 25 9, “The meek will he guide in justice;
and the meek will he teach his way’; 37 11, ‘The
meek shall inherit the land”; 147 6, “Jeh up-
holdeth the meek’’; 149 4, “He will beautify the
meek with salvation,” RVm ‘victory’; cf Isa 11
4; 29 19; 61.1, “Jehovah hath anointed me to
preach good tidings unto the meek,’’ RVm “poor’’;
Zeph 23; Ps 45 4, “because of [RVm “in behalf
of”] truth and meekness and righteousness”). Of
Moses it is said he ‘‘was very meek, above all the
men that were upon the face of the earth,” notwith-
standing the Divine revelations given him, and in
the faee of opposition (Nu 12 3; ef 2 Cor 12 1-6).
Meekness is aseribed even to Jeh Himself (2 8 22
36, ‘Thy gentleness [‘dnadwah] hath made me great”;
ef Ps 18 36 [‘dnwah], RVm “‘condescension’’); men
are exhorted to seek it (Zeph 2 3, “Seck righteous-
ness, seek meekness’; cf Prov 16 1; 16 14; 25
15; Bel 10 4).

In the Apoc also ‘‘meekness’’ holds a high place
(Ecclus 1 27, “The fear of the Lord is wisdom and in-
struction: faith and meekness are his delight,’’ RV ‘‘in
faith and meekness is his good pleasure’’; Ecclus 3 19,
“Mysteries are revealed unto the meek"’ [RV omits]; cf
10 14).

““Meekness” in the NT (praotés, praités) is not
merely a natural virtue, but a Christian “grace’’;
it is one of the “fruits of the Spirit”? (Gal 6 23).
The conception of meekness, as it had been defined
by Aristotle, was raised by Christianity to a much
higher level, and associated with the commonly
despised quality of humility (see s.v.). It was the
spirit of the Saviour Himself (Mt 11 29): “J am
meek [prdos} and lowly in heart” (cf 2 Cor 10 1,
“by the meekness and gentleness of Christ”); it
presupposes humility, flows from it, and finds ex-
pression in moderation (sees.v.). (See Trench, Syn.
of NT, 145; WH, NT Lexicon, s.v.) Christians
are exhorted to cherish it and show it in their rela-
tions to one another (Eph 4 2; Col 3 12; 1 Tim
611: Tit 3 2, “showing all meekness toward all
men”); it ought to characterize Christian teachers
or those in authority in “instructing [RV “‘eor-
reeting,”’ m “‘instructing”] them that oppose them-
selves” (2 Tim 2 25); the saving, ‘implanted’
(RVm “inborn’’) word is to be reeeived “with meck-
ness” (Jas 1 21); a manis to “show by his good
life his works in meekness of wisdom” (3 13), and
to give a reason for the hope that is in him, “with
meekness and fear” (1 Pet 3 15).

The interchangeableness of ‘‘meck’’ with “poor,” etc,


in the OT ought to be specially noted. Our Lord's open-
ing of His malnistry at Nazareth (Lk 4 18, ''He anointed


See MEEppa.


me to preach good tidings to the poor''), and His mes-
sage to John (Mt 11 5, ‘The poor have good tidings
preached to them"’) are in harmony therewith.

W. L. WALKER

MEET, mét, adj. (1W?, ydshar; atvos, daios):
Various words are employed to express meetness,
the sense of what is proper, worthy, or fit. We
have ydshar, “straight,” “upright,” “right’’ (2 K
10 3, “meetest”; Jer 26 14, RV “right”); yashar
(Jer 27 5, RV ‘“Tight’’); ydsher (Prov 11 24, RVm
“what is justly due’); ‘drikh, Aram. “meet” (Ezr
4 14); bené, “sons of’ (Dt 3 18, AV “meet for the
war,’’ m ‘Heb sons of power,”’ RV “men of valor”);
kan, “to be right,’’ ete (Ex 8 26); ‘ash, ‘to be
made,” “used” (Ezk 16 5 bis, RVm ‘made into”);
caléh, “to be good or fit for’ (Ezk 16 4, RV
profitable’); ra’ah, “seen,”’ “looked out,” “ehosen”
(Est 2 9); azios, “worthy” (Mt 38; Acts 26
20, RV ‘worthy’; 1 Cor 16 4; 2 Thess 1 3);
dikaios, ‘just,’ “right”? (Phil 17, RV “right”;
2 Pet 118, RV ‘Tight’”’); etithetos, “well set’
(He 6 7); etichréstos, “very useful,’’ “‘profitable”’
(2 Tim 2 21, ‘meet for the master’s use’’); hi-
kanés, “sufficient” (1 Cor 16 9); hikandd, “to
make sufficient”? (Col 1 12); kalés, “beautiful,”
“honest”? (Mt 15 26; Mk 727); det, “it be-
hooveth” (Lk 15 32; Rom 1 27, RV “due’’).
For “meet” (supplied) (Jgs 6 30), RV has ‘on’;
for ‘Surely it is meet to be said unto God’”’ (Job 34
31), “For hath any said unto God?” In 2 Macc
9 12, we have dikaios, RV “right.”

W. L. WaLker

_MEGIDDO, mé-gid’6, MEGIDDON, mé-gid’on
(198, méghiddd, JVI0, mghiddin; May.880,
Magiddé, MayeS8dév, Mageddin, May56, Magdé):
A royal city of the Canaanites, the king of which
was slain by Joshua (Josh 12 21). It lay within
the territory of Issachar, but was one of the cities
assigned to Manasseh (Josh 17 11; 1 Ch 7 29).
Manasseh, however, was not able to expel the
Canaanites, who therefore continued to dwell in
that land. later, when the children of Israel were
waxen strong, the Canaanites were put to taskwork
(Josh 17 12f; Jgs 1 27f). The host of Sisera was
drawn to the river Kishon, and here, “by the waters
of Megiddo,”’ the famous battle was fought (6 19).
By the time of Solomon, Israel’s supremaey was
unquestioned. Megiddo was included in one of
his administrative districts (1 K 4 12), and it was
one of the cities which he fortified (9 15). Ahaziah,
mortally wounded at the ascent of Gur, fled to
Megiddo to die (2 K 9 27). At Megiddo, Josiah,
king of Judah, attempted to arrest Pharaoh-necoh and
his army on their march to the Euphrates against
the king of Assyria. Here the Egyp monarch
“slew him ... . when he had seen him,” and from
Megiddo went the sorrowful procession to Jerus
with Josiah’s corpse (2 K 23 29f; 2 Ch 36 20 ff).
The sad tale is told again in 1 Esd 1 25ff. ‘The
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megid-
don” became a poetical expression for the deepest
and most despairing grief (Zec 12 11). See also
ARMAGEDDON.

The constant association of Megiddo with
Taanach (Tell Ta‘anek) points to a position on the
south edge of the plain of Esdraelon. In confirma-
tion of this, we read (# P, Ist series, II, 35-47) that
Thothmes III eaptured Megiddo, after having
defeated the Palestinian allies who opposed him.
He left his camp at Aruna (possibly ‘Ar‘arah), and,
following a defile (possibly Wady ‘Arah), he ap-
proached Megiddo from the 8. We should thus
look for the city where the pass opens on the plain;
and here, at Khan el- Lejjiin, we find extensive ruins
on both sides of a stream which turns several mills
before falling into the Kishon. We may identify
the site with Megiddo, and the stream with “the


Mehetahel
Melody


waters of Megiddo.’”? Pharach-necoh would natu-
rally take the same line of march, and his advance
could be nowhere more hopefully opposed than at
ol-Lejjin. Tell el-Mutasellim, a graceful mound
hard by, on the edge of the plain, may have formed
the acropolis of Megiddo.

The name Mujadda' attaches to a site 3 miles S.
of Beisénin the Jordan valley. Here Conder would
place Megiddo. But while there is a resemblance
in the name, the site really suits none of the Bib.
data. The phrase “Taanach by the waters of


Megiddo” alone confines us to a very jimited area. .


No position has yet been suggested which meets
all the conditions as well as ef- Lejjiin.

The Khan here shows that the road through the
pass from Esdraelon to the plain of Sharon and the
coast was still much frequented in the Middle Ages.

W. Ewine

MEHETABEL, méhet’a-bel, MEHETABEEL,
mé-het'a-bal ONIQ TA, m*hétadh’ al, “whom God
makes happy”):

(1) Daughter of Matred, wife of Hadad or Hadar,
the 8th and apparently last of the kings of Edom
(Gen 36 39; 1 Ch 1 50).

(2) Grandfather of that Shemaiah who played
a treacherous part against Nehemiah at the sug-
gestion of Tobiah and Sanballat, by trying to per-
suade Nehemiah to commit sacrilege (Neh 6 10-
13).


MEHIDA, mé-hi/da (NTA, m*hidha’, “re-
nowned”; “Meeda” [1 Esd 6 32]): Ancestor and


patronymic of a family of Nethinim who came back
from Babylon with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 52; Neh
T 54).


MERIR, mé’hér (1°10, mehir, “price,” “hire’’):
A descendant of Judah, son of Chelub, nephew of
Shuah (1 Ch 4 11). Perug, a Chaldee name of
equivalent, meaning, is given for this person in the
Tg of R. Joseph.


MEHOLATHITE, mé-h6la-thit (M259, m*hs-
latht): The gentile designation of Adriel, the son
of Barzillai, who married Merab, the daughter of
King Saul (1 § 18 19; 2 $21 8), the name Michal
in 2S 21 8 being doubtless a copyist’s error. See
ABEL-MEHOLAH.


MEHUJAEL, mé-hi'ja-el ONIN, mhayd'al,
Sema » mehiyda él, “smitten of God”): A descendant
of Cain through Enoch and Irad (Gen 4 18). The
list in Gen 6 12 ff is a working-over of the same
material of genealogy by another hand at a differ-
ent date of spelling (cf spelling of Chaucer and that
of today). In that case, Mehalalel would be the
correspondent name to Mehujael (see Expos T,
X, 353).


MEHUMAN, méhi’man (JO), mhtiman
[Est 1 10]): A eunuch of Ahasuerus, the first of the
seven chamberlains.


MEHUNIM, mé&hi’nim (OIA, minim).
See Mrunmm.


ME-JARKON, mé@jar’kon (PTT “2, ma
ha-yarkén; @ddarca ‘Tepdxwv, thdlassa Hierdkon):
The Heb may mean “‘yellow water.’ The phrase is
lit. “the waters of Jarkon.” LXX reads ‘‘and from
the river, Jarkon and the boundary near Joppa.”
From this possibly we should infer a place called
Jarkon in the lot of Dan; but no name resembling
this has been found. The text (Josh 19 46) is
corrupt.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


i


2028


MEKONAH, mé-ké’na (M323, mkhdnah). See
MeEconaa,


MELATIAH, mel-a-ti’a (MPO2"2, mélatyah, “Jeh’s
deliverance’’): A Gibeonite who assisted in building
the wall of Jerus under Nehemiah (Neh 3 7).


MELCHI, mel’ki (Tisch., Treg., WH, Medxet,
Melchei; TR, Medxt, Melcht): The name of two
ancestors of Jesus according to Lk’s genealogy,
one being in the 4th generation before Joseph, the
husband of Mary, the other being in the 3d gen-
eration before Zerubbabel (Lk 3 24:28).


MELCHIAH, mel-ki’a (apse) , malkhiyah, “Jeh’s
king’): A priest and father of Pashur (Jer 21 1
AV); elsewhere and in RV called Matcutan and
Matucuisaa (q.v.).


MELCHIAS, mel-ki’as (B, MeAxelas, Melchetas,
BPA, -las, -ias): Name of three men who had taken
“strange wives”:

(1) 1 Esd 9 26=‘Malchijah” (Ezr 10 25).

(2) 1 Esd 9 32=‘‘Malchijah” (Ezr 10 31).

(3) One of those who stood at Hzra’s left hand
when the law wasread (1 Esd 9 44)=“Malchijah’”’
(Neh 8 4), possibly identical with (1) or (2).


MELCHIEL, mel’ki-el (MeAxw{A, Melchiél, B,
MeAxerhA, Melcheiél): The father of Charmis, one
of the governors of Bethulia (Jth 6 15). Other
readings are ZeAdju, Sellém, and Moxtojr, Mochisél.


MELCHISHUA, mel-ki-shoo’a (P70 D5D, mal.
kisha*’, ‘‘king’s help’). See MaLcutsava.


MELCHIZEDEK, mel-kiz’é-dek, and (AV in
He) MELCHISEDEC (p727729, malki-cedhek,
“Cedhek, or Cidhik is my king’ [Gen 14 18 ff;
Ps 110 4]; MedxioéSex, Meichisédek [He 6 6.10;
6 20; 7 1.10.11.15.17]): The name is explained in
He 7 2 as “king of nghteousncss,’”’ with -2 as the
old genitive ending; but the correct explanation is
no doubt the one given above; cf Adoni-zedek in
Josh 10 1, where LXX with Jgs 1 5-7 has Adoni-
bezek. M. was king of Salem (= Jerus) and ‘a
priest unto ’El ‘Elyon’ (Gen 14 18). He brought
bread and wine to Abraham after the latter’s vic-
tory over the kings, and also bestowed upon him
the blessing of "E] ‘Elyon. Abraham gave him “a
tenth of all,” i.e. of the booty probably, unless it
be of all his possessions. Gen rH 22 identifies Jeh
with ’El ‘Elyon, the title of the Deity as worshipped
at Jerus; and so He 7 1 ff, following LXX of Gen
1418 ff, calls M. “priest of God Most High,’’ i.e. Jeh.

Skinner (Gen, 271, where Jos, Ant, XVI, vi, 2, and Asm
M 6 1 are cited) points out that the Maccabees were
called ‘‘high priests of God most high.”” Hence some
hold that the story of M. is an invention of Judaism, but
Gunkel (Gen’, 285 ff) maintains that he is a traditional,
if not @ historical, character.

Ps 110 4 makes the king-priest who is addressed
there a virtual successor of M., and the kings of
Jerus might well, as Gunkel suggests, have been
considered successors of M. in the same way that
Charlemagne was regarded as the successor of the
Caesars, and the latter as successors of the Pharachs
in Egypt. This leads naturally to an early date
being ascribed to Ps 110.

The thought of a priest after the order of M. is
taken up by the author of He. He wanted to prove
the claim of Christ to be called priest. It was im-
possible, even had he so wished, to consider Jesus
as an Aaronic priest, for He was descended from the
tribe of Judah and not from that of Levi (7 14).
The words of Ps 110 4 are taken to refer to Him


TRADITIONAL MEGIDDO—RUINS OF PALACE AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS


2029


(5 5f), and in 7 5 ff the order of M. is held to be
higher than that of Aaron, for the superiority of M.
was acknowledged by Abraham (a) when he paid
tithes to M. and (b) when he was blessed by M.,
for “the less is blessed of the better.” It might
be added that Jesus can be considered a priest after
the order of M. in virtue of His descent from David,
if the latter be regarded as successor to M. But
the author of He does not explicitly say this.
Further, Aaron is only a “type” brought forward in
He to show the more excellent glory of the work of
Jesus, whereas M. is “made like unto the Son of
God” (7 3), and Jesus is said to be “after the like-
ness of Melchizedek”’ (7 15).

He 7 1ff presents difficulties. Where did the
author get the matcrial for this description of M.?
(1) M. is said to be “without father, without
mother, [i.e.] without genealogy”; and (2) he is
described as “having neither beginning of days nor
end of life’; he “abideth a priest continually.” The
answer is perhaps to be had among the.Am Tab,
among which are at least 6, probably 8, letters from
aking of Urusalim to Amenophis IV, king of Egypt,
whose “slave” the former calls himself. Urusalim
is to be identified with Jerus, and the letters belong
to c 1400 BC. The name of this king is given as
Abd-Khiba (or Abd-hiba), though Hommel, quoted
by G. A. Smith, Jerus, II, 14, n. 7, reads Arad-
Chiba. Zimmer, in ZA, 1891, 246, says that it can
be read Abditaba, and so Sayce (HDB, III, 335d)
calls him ‘Ebhedh tébh. The king tells his Egyp
overlord, “Neither my father nor my mother set me
in this place: the mighty arm of the king [or, accord-
ing to Sayce, “the arm of the mighty king’’} es-
tablished me in my father’s house” (Letter 102 in
Berlin collection, }]. 9-13; also no. 103, Il. 25-28;
no. 104, ll. 13-15; see, further, H. Winckler, Die
Thontafeln von Tell-el- Amarna; Knudtzon, Bei-
trdge zur Assyriologie, IV, 101 ff, 279 ff, cited by
G. A. Smith, Jerus, II, 8,n. 1).

It thus becomes clear that possibly tradition
identified M. with Abd-Khiba. At any rate the
idea that M. was ‘‘without father, without mother,
[i.e.] without genealogy” can easily be explained
if the words ot Abd-Khiba concerning himself can
have been also attributed to M. The words meant
originally that he acknowledged that he did not
come to the throne because he had a claim on
it through descent; he owed it to appointment.
But Jewish interpretation explained them as im-
plying that he had no father or mother. Ps 110 4
had spoken of the king there as being “a priest
for ever after the order of Melchizedek,” and this
seems to have been taken to involve the perpetuity
of M. also as priest. M. was then thought of as
“having neither beginning of days” = “without
father, without mother, without genealogy,” and
again as not having “end of life” =“‘abideth a priest
continually.” Hence he is “made like unto the son
of God,” having neither beginning of days nor end
of life. We get another NT example of Jewish
interpretation in Gal 4 21ff. We have no actual
proof that M. is identical with Abd-Khiba; possibly
the reference to the former as being “without
father,” etc, is not to be explained as above. But
why should M., and he alone, of all the OT charac-
ters be thought of in this way?

Westcott, He, 199, has a suggestive thought about M,:
“The lessons of his appearance lie in the appearance itself.
Abraham marks a new departure... .. _But before the
fresh order is established we have a vision of the old in
its superior majesty; and this, on the cve of disappear-
ance, gives its blessing to the new.”’

On the references to M. in Philo see Westcott, op. cit.,
201; F. Rendall, He, App., 58 ff; and esp. (with the pas-
sages and other authorities cited there) G. Milligan,
Theology of Ep. to the He, 203 ff. :


The conclusions we come to are: (1) There was a


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mehetabel
Melody


tradition in Jerns of M., a king in pre-Israelitish
times, who was also priest to ’El ‘Elyon. This is
the origin of Gen 14 18 ff, where ’El ‘Ely6n is
identified with Jeh. (2) Ps 110 makes use of this
tradition and the Psalmist’s king is regarded as
M.’s successor. (3) The Ep. to the He makes use
of (a) Ps 110, which is taken to be a prophecy of
Christ, (6) of Gen 14 18 ff, and (c) of oral tradition
which was notfoundintheOT. Itis this unwritten
tradition that is possibly explained by the Am Tab.
See, further, arts. by Sayce, Driver, and Hommel
in Expos T, VII, VIII._ See also JERUSALEM.
Davip Francis RoBERTS

MELEA, mé'lé-a, mel’é-a (Medeé, Meled): An an-

cestor of Jesus in Lk’s genealogy (Lk 3 31).


MELECH, mélek (12, melekh, “‘king”): Great-
grandson of Jonathan, son of Saul, grandson of
Mephibosheth or Meribbaal (1 Ch 8 35; 9 41).


MELICU, mel’i-ka (13°0A, mlakhia, also "372%
mlakhi, “regnant’”’): Same as Mauiucat (q.v.).


MELITA, mel‘i-ta (MeAtrn, Melité, Acts 28 1):
Is now generally identified with Malta. The former
error in attributing the reference to the island of
Meleda on the E. coast of the Adriatic Sea was
due to the ancient practice of employing the term
Adria to include the Ionian and Sicilian seas. 3

Malta is the largest of a group of islands including
Gozo and the islets Comino, Cominotto and Filfla,
lying about 56 miles from the southern extremity of
Sicily, 174 from the mainland of Italy, and 187
from the African coast. Malta itself is 173 miles
long and 91 broad, and contains an area of 95 sq.
miles. Its modern capital, Valetta, is situated in
35° 54’ N. lat. and 14° 31’ E. long.

The central position of Malta in the Mediter-
ranean Sea gave it great importance as a naval
station. It was probably at first a Phoen colony,
and later passed under the influence, if not dom-
ination, of the Sicilian Greeks. But the Romans
captured it from the Carthaginians in 218 BC (Livy
xxi.51) and attached it definitely to the province of
Sicily. Under Rom rule the inhabitants were
famous for their industry, esp. in the production of
textile fabrics, probably of native cotton. The cele-
brated vestis melitensis was a fine and soft ma-
terial for dresses and for the covering of couches
(Cicero Verr. ii.72.176; ii.74.183; iv.46.103; Dio-
dorus v.12.22). At the time when Paul visited the
island it would seem that the administration was
intrusted to a deputy of the propraetor of Sicily,
who is referred to as prétos Melitaton (Acts 28 7;
CIG, 5754), or Melitensium primus omnium (CIL
x, 7495) (see Pustius). A bay 2% miles N.W. of
Valetta, the mouth of which is held by tradition
to be the place where the vessel that bore Paul ran
ashore, tallies admirably with the description of the
locality in Acts. The Admiralty charts indicate
places near the west side of the entrance to the bay,
where the depth is first 20 ft. and then 15 ft., while
the rnsh of the breakers in front of the little island
of Salmoneta and behind it suit the reference to a
place ‘“‘where two seas met’? (Acts 27 41). The
inlet is called the Bay of St. Paul. The topo-
graphical question has been exhaustively treated
by Ramsay in St. Paul the Traveller.

Grorce H. Atten

MELODY, mel’é-di: VAT, zimrah, a rousical
piece or song to be accompanied by an instrument
(Isa 61 3); an instrument of praise (Am 5 23);
422, naghan, “to play on a stringed instrument,”
“Make sweet melody, sing many songs” (Isa 23
16); Ya\dw, psdlld, to celebrate the praises of God
with music (Eph 6 19). See Music.


Melons
Menahem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2030


MELONS, mel’unz (TNOAN, *abhagtihim; cf
Arab. battikh, the ‘‘water melon” wéwoves, pé-
pones): In Nu 11 5, the melon is ‘referred to as
common in Egypt, and there can be no doubt that
the variety indicated is the watermelon (Citrullus
vulgaris) which is indigenous in tropical Africa.
It has been cultivated in Egypt since the earliest
times.


MELZAR, mel’zir (AE294, ha-melcar; LXX
*ABrer Spl, Abiesdré, Theod. B, ‘Apetod8, Hamel-
séd): Possibly a transliteration of the Bab Amelu-
usur, the officer to whom was intrusted the bringing-
up of Daniel and his three companions (Dnl 1
11 AV, RV “the steward,” m “Heb Hammelzar’).
It has been suggested that the name is not the name
of a person, but denotes the office of guardian, like
the Bab magsaru. In this case the / would come
by dissimulation from the first of the two s sounds,
which on its side has come from an assimilated n,
the root being nagaru, ‘‘to protect,’’ “to guard.”

Dick WILson

MEM, mim, mem (0, 0): The 13th letter of the
Heb alphabet, ‘transliterated in this Encyclopaedia
asm. It came also to be used for the number 40.
For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


MEMBER, mem’bér ({1] “X¥?, yacur; péhos,
mélos; [2] rbpy, shaphekhah, “membrum virile”
[Dt 23 1)]): The first Heb word is derived from a
root meaning ‘‘to knead,” “to mold in clay,” “to
create.” It therefore denotes any feature or part of
the body. “So the tongue also is a little member,
and boasteth great things’ (Jas 3 5). ‘“The mem-
bers’’ is equivalent with ‘‘the body” (which see; ef
Ps 189 16 AV). The members are not self-govern-
ing, but execute the orders of the mind, obeying
either the lower nature in the commission of sin or
iniquity, unrighteousness and uncleanness (Rom
6 13.19), or following the higher nature, the Divine
impulses in the fulfilling of the law of Christ (6 19).


By nature, the ‘‘law in my members’’ (Rom 7. 23)
is opposed to the better nature (Jas 4 1) until by “‘re-
generation’? (which see) this condition is changed,
when the Spirit of Christ becomes the governing power,
using our members, i.e. all our abilities, in the execution
of His plans. This is not done while we remain passive,
but only when we have actively presented or yielded
our members to His service (Rom 6 19). Therefore
our bodies must not he desecrated hy bhaser uses (1 Cor
6 15.19.20). The Lord Jesus illustrates the severe
discipline which is needed to suhdue the members of
even the regenerate to perfect submission under the
higher law of the Spirit by the simile of the right eye,
which is to be plucked out, and_the right hand, which is
to he cut off (Mt 5 29.30), ‘and St. Paul speaks of putting
to death (AV ‘‘mortifying”) the ‘‘members which are
upon the earth’? (Col 3 5


It is the difference in character and gifts of indi-
vidual Christians which leads St. Paul to speak of
the variety of members, which, though of manifold
functions, are equally important to the complete-
ness of the body. Itis thus in the manifold variety
of the body of Christ (1 Cor 12 12-27; Eph 4
16), and Christians being members of Christ, who
is the head (Eph 1 22; 4 15; 5 23), are members
one of another (Rom 12 5; Eph 4 25).


In Dt 23 1 the Israelitish Law against emascula-
tion is referred to, and a religious disability is stated
for the eunuch. Heathen Semites and other neighbors
of Israel often castrated for religious purposes in the
temple service of various divinities and for functions in
princely palaces and harems. Heathen monarchs almost
invariably had large numbers of these unfortunates, who
frequently attained to positions of high power and re-
sponsibility. Herodotus states their frequent occur-
rence pemone the Persians (Hist. vi.32), and in the light
of 2 K 20 18 and Dnl 1 3 it appears as not impossible
that Daniel and his friends belonged to this class. In
later years their existence is certain in Israel (1 8 8 15
RVm; Jer 38 7; Mt 19 12). See also Concis10Nn;


HEunucs.
H. L. E. Lugrine


MEMEROTH, mem/éroth (A, Mapepd?, Mare-
réth; B here omits Memeroth and two other names;
AV ’Meremoth): A name in the genealogy of Ezra
(1 Esd 8 2)=‘‘Meraioth” in Ezr 7 3, also ‘‘Mari-
moth” in 2 Esd 1 2.


MEMMIUS, mem’‘i-us, QUINTUS, kwin’tus
(Kéwros Mépptos, Kéintos Mémmios): One of the
2 Rom legates who bore a letter to the Jews after
their victory over Lysias 163 BC (2 Mace 11 34).
No Quintus Memmius is otherwise known to his-
tory, and no Memmius among the list of legates
sent to Asia. Polybius (xxxi.18) mentions a Quin-
tus and a Canuleius as sent to Egypt, 162 BC,
and again (xxxiii.15) the same Quintus as sent as an
ambassador to Rhodes, 153 BC. A Titus Mem-
mius had been an envoy of the senate to Achaia and
Macedonia before the date of this letter (Livy
xliii.5). None of these is likely to be the one re-
ferred to in 2 Mace 11 34, and it is possible that
no such person was sent with the letter, which is
spurious. See Mantvus. 8S. Aneus


MEMORIAL, mé-m0O’ri-al, MEMORY, mem’é-
ri (WIDTR, ‘azkarah, bah zélcher, sat, zelcher,
s3T, zikkarén; pvypdcuvov, mnémésunon): ‘“Me-
morial’” as the tr of ’azkarah is a sacrificial
term, that which brings the offerer into remem-
brance before God, or brings God into favorable
remembrance with the offerer; it is used of the
burning of a portion of the meal offering, RV (AV

‘“meat- offering”) ; better, cereal offering, on the altar
(Lev 2 2, RV “as the memorial”; 29.16; 5 12,
RV a) 24 7; Nu 5 26, RV a5?) 5 as’ the tr
of zékher (cekher), zikkaron, ‘itis a memorial in the
sense of a remembrance (zékher, zekher, Ex 3 15;
the memorial [name] of Jeh); hence we have in RV
“memorial name’ for ‘‘remembrance’”’ (Ps 30 4
ARV; 97 12, ERV “holy name,” m ‘Heb me-
morial’; 102 12; 135 13; Isa 26 8; Hos 12 5,
ERV “memorial’); for “memorial”? (Est 9 28;
Ps 9 6, ARV ‘“remembrance’’); zikkdron, “a remem-
brance” (Ex 12 14; 13 9; Lev 23 24; Nu 5 15
[of the meal offering]; Josh 4 7; Neh 2 20; Zee
6 14); the Passover feast was to be in this sense
“a, memorial... . for ever’ (Ex 12 14; 13 9);
so also the sh¢ema‘ (Dt 6 4f); “memorial” occurs in
Wisd 4 1 (mnémé), RV “memory”; 4 19; Ecclus
45 1 (mnémosunon); 49 1; 1 Mace 37; 12 53,
RV “memorial.”

“Memorial” occursin the NT as the tr of mnémo-
sunon, ‘‘a token of remembrance’”’ (Mt 26 13; Mk
14 9; Acts 10 4, ‘“Thy prayers and thine alms are
gone up for a memorial before God,” which suggests
the sense in which “‘memorial’’ was used in the
sacrificial ritual, and also the “better sacrifices”
of the new dispensation).

Memory is the tr of ee eexher) ae 109 | 15; 145
7; Prov 10 7; Eccl 9 5; Isa 26 RV ‘‘remem-
brance’’); it occurs also in 1 Macc 13 29; 2 Macc 7
20. Katécho, ‘to have, or hold fast,”’ is ‘rendered in


1 Cor 15 2. AV' ‘keep in memory,”’ m ‘hold fast,’’ ARV
“hold fast,”” ERV “hold it fast,’’ i.e. the word preached


to them.
W. L. WALKER

MEMPHIS, mem’fis: The ancient capital of
Egypt, 12 miles 8. of the modern Cairo. This Gr
and Rom form of the name was derived
from the Coptic form Menji (now Arab.
Menf), the abbreviation of the Egyp
name Men-nofer, “the good haven.” This name
was applied to the pyramid of Pepy I, in the
cemetery above the city; some have thought the
city name to have been derived from the pyramid,
but this is unlikely, as the city must have had a
regular name before that. It may perhaps mean
“the excellence of Mena,” its founder. It appears
still more shortened in Hos (9 6) as Moph (méph),


1. Name


2031


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Melons
Menahem


and iu Isa (19 18), Jer (2 16), and Ezk (30 13) as
Noph (néph).

The elassical statements show that the city in

Rom times was about 8 miles long and 4 miles wide,

: and the indications of the site agree

2. Political with this. It was the sole capital of

Position Egypt from the Ist to the XVIIth

_ Dynasty; it shared supremaey with

Thebes during the XVIIIth to XXVth Dynasties,

and with Sais to the XXXth Dynasty. Alexandria


Statue of Rameses II at Memphis.


then gradually obscured it, but the governor of
Egypt signed the final capitulation to the Arabs in
the old capital. While other cities assumed a polit-
ical equality, yet commercially Memphis probably

remained supreme until the Ptolemies.
The oldest center of settlement was probably
the shrine of the sacred bull, Apis or Hapy, which
was in the 8S. of the city. This wor-


3, The ship was doubtless prehistoric, so that
Founders when the first king of all Egypt, Mena,
and the founded his capital, there was already
City anucleus. His great work was taking


in land to the N., and fouudiug the
temple of the dynastic god Ptah, which was ex-
tended until its inclosure included as mueh as the
great temple of Amon at Thehes, about 3 furlougs
long and 2 furlongs wide. To the N. of this was
the sacred lake; beyond that, the palace and camp.
Gradually the fashionable quarters moved northward
in Egypt, in search of fresher air; the rulers had
moved 10 miles N. to Babylon by Rom times,
then to Fostat, then Cairo, and lastly now to
Abbasiyeh and Kubkeh, altogether a shift of 18
miles in 8,000 years. :

After the shrine of Apis the next oldest center is
that of Ptah, founded by Mena. This was recently

cleared in yearly sections by the
4, Archaeo- British School, finding principally
logical sculptures of the XVIIIth and XIXth
Results Dynasties. The account of the north

gate given by Herodotus, that it was
built by Amenemhat III, has been verified by find-
ing his name on the lintel. An immeuse sphinx of
alabaster 26 ft. long has also beenfound. To the
E. of this was the temple.of the foreign quarter,
the temple of King Proteus in Gr accounts, where
foreign pottery and terracotta heads have beeu
found. Other temples that are known to have
existed in Memphis are those of Hathor, Neit,
Amen, Imhotep, Isis, Osiris-Sokar, Khnumu,
Bastel, Tahuti, Anubis and Sebek.

A large building of King Siamen (XXIst Dynasty)
has been found 8. of the Ptah temple. To the N.
of the great temple lay the fortress, and in it the
palace mound of the XXVIth Dynasty covered two
acres. It has been completely cleared, but the
lower part is still to be examined. The north end


of it was at least 90 ft. high, of brickwork, filled up
to half the height by a flooring raised on cellular
brickwork. The great court was about 110 ft.
square, and its roof was supported by 16 columns
45 ft. high.

The principal sights of Memphis now are the
great colossus of Rameses II, the lesser eolossus of
the same, and the immense alabaster sphinx. The
cemetery of the city is the most important in Egypt;
it lies 2 miles to the W. on the desert, and is kuown
as Saqqareh, from So-kar, the god of the dead.
See SAQQaREH. W. M. FLInners PETRIE


MEMUCAN, mé-mt’kan (J370'9, m*makhan; der-
ivation unknowu but probahly of Pers origin [Est
1 14.16.21]): One of “the seven princes of Persia
and Media, who saw the kiug’s face, and sat first
in the kingdom.” Ahasuerus consults these meu,
as those “that knew law and judgment,” as to the
proper treatment of the rebellious Vashti. Me-
mucan is the spokesman of the reply. He recom-
mends Vashti’s deposition so that ‘‘all the wives
will give to their husbands honor, both to great and
small.” This advice is adopted and incorporated
into a royal decree—with what success is not said.


MENAHEM, men’a-hem (O%729, mnahém,
“one who comforts’; Mavatp, Manaém; 2 K 16
14-22): Son of Gadi and 16th king of


1. Acces- Israel. He reigned 10 years. Mena-
sion and _— hem was probably the officer in charge
Reign of the royal troops in Tirzah, oue of the


king’s residences, at the time of the
murder of Zechariah by Shallum. Hearing of the
deed, he brought up his troops and avenged the
death of his master hy putting Shallum to death in
Samaria. He then seized the vacant throne. His
first full year may have been 758 BC (others, as
seen below, put later).

The country at this time, as depicted by Hosea
and Amos, was in a deplorable condition of anarchy
and lawlessness. Menahem, with a
strong hand, enforced his occupation of
the throne. One town only seems to
have refused to acknowledge him. This
was Tiphsah, a place 6 miles S.W. of Shechem, now
the ruined village of Khurbet Tafsah. As Menahem
is said to have attacked this inclosed city from
Tirzah, lying to its N., it is probable that he took
it on the way to Samaria, before proceeding to do
battle with Shallum. If this was so, it is some
explanation of the eruelty with which he treated its
inhabitants (ver 16). One such iustance of severity
was enough. The whole kingdom was at his feet.
He proved to be a strong and determined ruler,
and during the 9 or 10 years of his governorship
had no further interneciue trouble to contend with.

But there was another source of disquiet. Assyria,
under Pul, had resumed her advance to the W. aud

threatened the kingdoms of Palestine.


2. Early
Acts


3. Mena- Menahem resolved on a policy of
hem and diplomacy, and, rather than risk a war
Assyria with the conqueror of the East, agreed


to the payment of a heavy tribute of
1,000 talents of silver. To raise this sum he had
to assess his wealthier subjects to the extent of 50
shekels each. As there are 3,000 shekels in a talent
of silver, it is obvious that some 60,000 persons,
“mighty men of wealth,”’ must have beeu laid under
eontribution iu this levy—au indication at once of
the enormity of the tribute, and of the prosperity
of the country at the time. However short-
sighted the poliey, its immediate purpose was at-
tained, which was that the hand of the Assyrian
king “might be with him to confirm the kingdom in
his hand” (ver 19).


Menan 5
Mephibosheth THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2032


A difficulty attaches to the dates of this period.
The Pul of 2 K 16 19 and 1 Ch 5 26 is now
identified with Tiglath-pileser III,


4. A Con- who took this title on ascending the
flict of throne of Assyria in 745 BC. In an in-
Dates scription of Tiglath-pileser, Menahem


appears as Minehimmu Samarind
(Menahem the Samarian), together with Rasunnu
(Rezin) of Damascus and Hirfimu (Hiram) of Tyre.
The date given to this inscription is 738 BC, where-
as the last year we can give to Menahem is 749, or
10 years earlier.
The chronological difficulty which thus arises
may be met in one of two ways. Either the in-
scription, like that on the black obelisk
6. Proposed of Kurlh (see Janu), was written some
Solutions years after the events to which it refers
and contains records of operations in
which Tiglath-pileser took part before he became
king; or Pekah—who was on the throne of Israel
in 738 (?)—is spoken of under the dynastic name
Menahem, though he was not of his family. The
former of these hypotheses is that which the present
writer is inclined to adopt. (By others the dates
of Menahem are lowered in conformity with the
inscription; see CHRONOLOGY oF THE OT.)
Menahem attempted no reformation in the na-
tional religion, but, like all his predecessors, ad-
hered to the worship of the golden
6. Character calves. On this account, like them,
he incurs the heavy censure of the
historian. W. SHaw Cabpgcott
MENAN, mé’nan.


MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN, mé’n2,
mé’né, té’kel, t-fir’sin, men’a, men’a, tek’el, 66-
far’sin (POT opm NIA NN, mene mene tekél
tphargin; Theod., Mavh, OexéA, hapés, Mané, thekél,
pherés): These are the words that, according to
Daniel’s reading, were inscribed on the walls of
Belshazzar’s palace and that caused the great com-
motion on the occasion of his last feast (Dn! 5 25).
As the only authority that we have for the reading
is that of Daniel, it seems but fair that the inter-
pretation of the terms be left to the person who
gave us the text. According to his interpretation,
there is a double sense to be found in the three
different words of the inscription (Dnl 5 26-28).

Mené’, which, however it is pointed, must be
taken from the verb m¢nah (Heb manadh; Bab manu)
is said to have indicated that God had numbered
(the days of) Belshazzar’s kingdom and finished it
(or delivered it up). Both of these meanings can
be shown to be proper to the 7/ m*nah.

Tekél, on the contrary, is interpreted as coming
from two roots: the first, ikal, “to weigh,’’? and
the second, kal, “to be light or. wanting” (Heb
kalal; Bab kaldlu).

Perés (or parsin) also is interpreted as coming
from two roots: first, p*ras, ‘‘to divide” (Heb paras
or pdrash; Bab pérasu), and the second as denoting
the proper. name Paras, ‘Persia.’ Thus inter-
preted, the whole story hangs together, makes good
sense, and is fully justified by the context and by
the language employed. If the original text was
in Bab, the signs were ambiguous; if they were in
Aram., the consonants alone were written, and hence
the reading would be doubtful. In either case, the
inscription was apparent but not readable, except
by Daniel with the aid of God, through whom also
the seer was enabled to give the proper interpre-
tation. That Daniel’s interpretation was accepted
by Belshazzar and the rest shows that the interpre-
tation of the signs was reasonable and convincing
when once it had been made. We see, therefore,


See Manna.


no good reason for departing from the interpreta-
tion that the Book of Dnl gives as the true one.

As to the interpretation of the inscription, it
makes no difference whether the signs represented
a mina, a shekel, and two perases, as has been
recently suggested by M. Clermont-Ganneau. In
this case the meaning was not so apparent, but the
puns, the play upon the sounds, were even better.
We doubt, however, if it can be shown that t*kel
means shekel. On the old Aram. documents of
Egypt and Assyria, it is with one exception spelled
shekel. In the Tg of Onkelos, shekel is always
rendered by sela‘; in the Pesh and Arab. VSS, by
mathkal; in the Samaritan Tg, by mathkal (except
only perhaps in Gen 28 16, where we have ethkel).
In the Tg of Onkelos, wherever tzkla@’ occurs, it
translates the Heb beka* (Gen 24 22 and Ex 38
26 only). Mné’, to be sure, may have meant the
mina, and p*rés, the half-mina. The pérash is
mentioned in the inscription of Panammu and in
an Aram. inscription on an Assyr weight. Besides
this, it is found in the New Heb of the Mish. It is
not found, however, in the Tg of Onkelos, nor in
Syr, nor in the OT Heb; nor 1m the sense of half-
shekel in the Aram. papyri. While, then, it may
be admitted that Daniel may have read, “A mina,
a mina, a shekel, and two half-minas,” it is alto-
gether unlikely, and there is certainly no proof that
he did. Yet, if he did, his punning interpretations
were justified by the usage of ancient oracles and
interpreters of signs, and also by the event.

R. Dick WILson

MENELAUS, men-é-la’us (Mevédaos, Menélaos):
According to the less likely account of Jos (Ant,
XII, v, 1; XV, iii, 1; XX, x, 3), Menelaus was a
brother of Jason and Onias IIT, and his name was
really Onias. But it is very unlikely that there
should be two brothers of the same name. The
account of 2 Macc is more credible—that Menelaus
was the brother of the notorious Simon who sng-
gested to the Syrians the plundering of the temple;
he was thus of the tribe of Benjamin (2 Mace 4
23; cf with 3 4) and not properly eligible to the
high-priesthood. He was intrusted by Jason (171
BC), who had supplanted Onias, with contributions
to the king of Syria, Antiochus Epiphanes, and by
outbidding Jason in presents he secured the office
of high priest for himself (4 23 f), 171 BC. Mene-
laus returned with “the passion of a cruel tyrant’’
to Jerus, and Jason fled. But as Menelauns failed
to pay the promised amount, both he and Sostratus,
the governor, were summoned to appear before the
king. Lysimachus, the brother o enelaus, was
left at Jerus in the meantime as deputy high priest.
The king was called from his capital to suppress an
insurrection of Tarsus and Mallus. Menelaus
took advantage of his absence to win over Andro-
nicus, the king’s deputy, by rich presents stolen
from the temple. For this sacrilege Onias III
sharply reproved him and fled to a sanctuary,
Daphne, near Antioch. Andronicus was then
further persuaded by Menelaus to entice Onias from
his retreat and murder him (4 34 f)—-an act against
which both Jews and Greeks protested to the king
on his return, and secured deserved punishment
for Andronicus. Meanwhile, the oppression of
Lysimachus, abetted by Menelaus, caused a bloody
insurrection in Jerus, in connection with which a
Jewish deputation brought an accusation against
Menelaus on the occasion of Antiochus’ visit to
Tyre. Menelans bribed Ptolemy, son of Doryme-
nes, to win over the king to acquit himsclf and
secure the execution of “those hapless men, who, if
they had pleaded even before Scythians, would
have been discharged uncondemned’”’ (4 39 ff).
Menelaus returned in triumph to his office. But
Jason, taking advantage of Epiphanes’ absence in


2033


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Menan
Mephibosheth


Egypt and a false rumor of his death, made a bloody
but unsuccessful attempt upon the city, in order to
secure his office again; his rival took refuge in the
citadel. The king returned in fury, caused a three
days’ slaughter of the citizens, rifled the temple
with Menelaus as guide, and left, him as one of his
agents to keep the Jews in subjection (2 Macc 6
1 ff). He appears next and for the last time in the
reign of Eupator in 162 BC. Lysias, the king’s
chancellor, accused him to the king as the cause of
all the troubles in Judaea (2 Macc 13 3-8).
Eupator caused him to be brought to Beroea and
there—before, according to 2 Mace, loc. cit., or
after, according to Jos, Ant, XTI, ix, 7, the invasion
of Judaea by Eupator and Lysias—to be put to
death by being flung from the top of a high tower
into the ashes of which it was full—a fitting end for
such a wretch. ANGus


MENESTHEUS, mé-nes’this, mé-nes’thé-us
(MeveoOets, Menesthetis, A, Mever@eréws, Menes-
thesé6s): The father of Apollonius, a general of
Epiphanes (2 Mace 4 21 andin 2 Macc 4 4 RV,
following a conjecture of Hort [Mevec@éws, Menes-
théds, for palveréa ws, mainesthai héds; the latter
isretained in Swete and Fritzsche]). ‘Son of Menes-
theus” is added to distinguish this Apollonius from
“A.son of Thrasaeus” (2 Macc $8 5) and “‘A. son of
Gennaeus” (12 2). See APOLLONIUS.


MENI, mé‘ni: Destiny, a god of Good Luck,
possibly the Pleiades (Isa 65 11m). See AsTRoi-
ogy, 10; Gap.


MENNA, men’a (Mewd, Mennd, WH, Treg.,
Tisch.; Maivév, Maindn, TR; AV Menan): An
ancestor of Jesus, a great-grandson of David (Lk
3 31).


MENUHAG, men-i’ha (290, menahah, “place
of rest’’?; AV Menuchah, men-i’k4): Rendered in
Jgs 20 43 AV “with ease,” RV “at their resting-
place.”’ Both, however, have a marginal suggestion
which would make the word a place-name, which
would then more naturally read “from Nuhah over
against. Gibeah,” thus describing the ground over
which the slaughter of the Benjamites occurred. In
1 Ch 8 2 the word “Nohah” occurs as that of a
Benjamite clan. The place intended is perhaps
MANABATH (q.V.).


MENUHOTH, men-i’hoth (MM, menuhath,
“dwellings”; AV "IA22, maénahti, Manahethites) :
The first form is the RV transliterated in the name;
the second form is AV retained by RV in the pas-
sages where the word occurs (1 Ch 2 52; cf ver
54). The people here spoken of by AV as “half of
the Manahethites” are mentioned as descendants
of Salma (ver 54), while those mentioned as Menu-
hoth are mentioned as descendants of Judah through
Shobal, father of Kiriath-jearim. Both words are
from the same root. AV keeps the same designa-
tion for both passages, while RV has marked the

. difference in spelling by changing the first passage
and following AV in the second. Both sections of
the family belong to the clan Caleb, and it would
geem that they became the dominant people in the
otherwise unknown town of Manahath, so that it
came to be regarded as Deloneine te Judah. It may
be connected with the Menuchah (RV ‘““Menuhah’’)
suggested as a place-name in Jgs 20 43 m. In the
LX-X between vs 59 and 60 of Josh ch 15 the names of
11 cities are inserted, among them being a Manocho
whose Heb equivalent gives the word. It is diffi-
cult to identify, and the Vulg cuts the knot by trans-
lating “dimidium requietionum’’! See ManaBaTH.

Henry WALLACE


MEONENIM, mé-on’é-nim, mé-d’né-nim, OAK
OF: (B°3759%9 FON, lon m*onenim; B, "Hdwv-
powvenelv, Elénmadnemein, A, Spvds droBderdv-
wav, drués apoblepénttn; AV Plain of): This was
a sacred tree which apparently could be seen from
the gate of Shechem (Jgs 9 37). No doubt it took
its name from the soothsayers who sat under it,
practising augury, etc. Several times mentiou is
made of sacred trees in the vicinity of Shechem
(Gen 36 4; Josh 24 26; Jgs 96, etc). Where


this tree stood is not known. See Aucurs’ Oak.


MEONOTHAI, mé-on’é-thi, mé-d’né-thi, mé-
6-nd'thi ONIWA, me‘ondthai, “my dwellings’): A
son of Othniel, nephew of Caleb (1 Ch 4 14).
Possibly, as AVm_ suggests, and the Vulg and
Complutensian LXX say, vs 13.14 should read ‘“‘the
sons of Othniel, Hathath and Meonothai; and
Meonothai begat Ophrah,” etc. The latter may
be founder of the town of that name.


MEPHAATH, mef’a-ath, mé-fa’ath (MYDA and
MmYb A, mépha'ath, MYDWA, mopha‘ath; B, Ma-
400, Maiphdath, Mydbdab, Méephdath): A city of the
Amorites in the territory allotted to Reuben, named
with Kedemoth and Kiriathaim (Josh 13 18), and
given to the Merarite Levites (21 37; 1 Ch 6 79).
Tt appears again as a Moabite town in Jer 48 21.
It was known to Euscbius and Jerome (Onom) as
cerapiee by a Rom garrison, but the site has been
ost.


MEPHIBOSHETH, mé-fib’é-sheth (MW2"59,
mphibhosheth, ‘‘idol-breaker,” also MErRIB-BAAL
[q.v.]; MepotBdobe, Memphibésthe) :

(1) Son of Saul by his concubine Rizpaw (q.v.),
daughter of Aiah (2 § 21 8). See also ARMonI.

(2) Grandson of Saul, son of Jonathan, and
nephew of Mephibosheth (1) (28 4 4). He was
5 years old when his father and grandfather were
slain. He was living in charge of a nurse, possibly
because his mother was dead. Tidings of the dis-
aster at Jezreel and the onsweep of the Philis terri-
fied the nurse. She fled with her charge in such
haste that a fall lamed the little prince in both
feet for life. His life is a series of disasters, dis-
appointments, and anxieties. It isa weary, broken,
dispirited soul that speaks in all his utterances.
The nurse carried him to Lo-debar among the
mountains of Gilead, where he was brought up by
Machir, son of Ammiel (2 § 9 4). There he evi-
dently married, for he had a son Mica when he
returned later at David’s request. When David
had settled his own affairs and subdued his enemies,
he turned his inquiries to Saul’s household to see
whether there were any survivors to whom he might
show kindness for Jonathan’s sake (28 9 1). The
search caused the appearance of Ziba, a servant of
Saul’s house (ver 2), who had meanwhile grown

rosperous by some rapid process which can only
Be guessed at (vs 9.10). From him David learned
about Mephibosheth, who was sent for. His
humble bearing was consistent with his chronically
broken spirit. David put Ziba’s property (which
had belonged to Saul) at Mephibosheth’s disposal
and made Ziba steward thereof. Mephibosheth
was also to be a daily guest at David’s table (2 8
9 11-13). Seventeen years pass, during which
Mephibosheth seems to have lived in Jerus. Then
came Absalom’s rebellion. David determined to
flee, so distraught was he by the act of hisson. At
the moment of flight, in great depression and need,
he was opportunely met by Ziba with food, refresh-
ment and even means for travel. Naturally, the
king inquired for Ziba’s master. The treacherous
reply was made (2 8 16 1-4) that Mephibosheth


Merab
Mercy, Mercifu


, THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2034


had remained behind for his own ends, hoping the
people would give him, Saul’s grandson, the king-
dom. David believed this and restored to Ziba
the property lost. Not till many days after did
the lame prince get his chance to give David his
own version of the story. He met David on his
return from quelling Absalom’s rebellion. He had
not dressed his feet, trimmed his beard tior washed
his clothes since the hour of David’s departure
(2 § 19 24). At David’s anxious request Mephib-
osheth told his story: his servant had deceived
him; he wanted to go with David, had even asked
for his beast to be saddled; but Ziba had left him,
and had slandered him to the pnee But he would
not plead his cause any more; David is ‘as an
angel of God”; whatever he decides will be well!
(2 8 19 26.27). Thus characteristically continued
the speech of this lame, broken, humble man, son
of a proud family (ver 28). David wearily settled
the matter by dividing the property between the
prince and his servant, the prince expressing utmost
content that Ziba should take all so long as David
remained friendly (vs 29.30). That David accepted
Mephibosheth’s explanation and was drawn out in
heart toward the character of the broken man is
shown by the fact that when some expiation from
Saul’s household was considered necessary to turn
away the famine sent by an offended deity, Mephib-
osheth is spared when other members of Saul’s
household were sacrificed (2 S 21 7). The char-
acter of Mephibosheth well illustrates the effect of
continued disaster, suspicion and treachery upon
a sensitive mind. Henry WALLACE


MERAB, mérab (A7A, mérabh, “increase”;
MepéB, Meréb): The elder daughter of Saul (1 S
14 49), promised, though not by name, to the man
who should slay the Phili Goliath (1 S 17 25).
David did this and was afterward taken by Saul
to court (1 S 18 2), where he was detained in great
honor. Merab was not, however, given to him as
quickly as the incident would lead one to expect,
and the sequel showed some unwillingness on the
part of some persons in the contract to complete the
promise. The adulation of the crowd who met
David on his return from Phili warfare and gave
him a more favorable ascription than to Saul
(1 8 18 6-16) awoke the angry jealousy of Saul. He
“eyed David from that day and forward” (ver 9).
Twice David had to “avoid” the “evil spirit”? in
Saul (ver 11). Sanl also feared. David (ver 12),
and this led him to incite the youth to more danger-
ous deeds of valor against the Philis by a renewed
promise of Merab. He will have David's life, but
rather by the hand of the Philis than his own (ver
17). Merab was to be the bait. But now another
element complicated matters—Michal’s love for
David (ver 20), which may have been the retarding
factor from the first. At any rate Merab is finally
given to Adriel the Meholathite (ver 19). The pas-
sage in 2S 21 8 doubtless contains an error—
Michal’s name occurring for that of her sister
Merab—though the LXX, Jos, and a consistent
Heb text all perpetuate it, as well as the concise
meaning of the Heb word Yéladh, which is a physio-
logical word for bearing children, and cannot be
tt “brought up.” A Tg explanation reads: “The
5 sons of Merab (which Michal, Saul’s daughter
brought up) which she bare,” etc. Another sug-
gestion reads the word “sister” after Michal in the
possessive case, leaving the text otherwise as it
stands. It is possible that Merab died compara-
tively young, and that her children were left in the
care of their aunt, esp. when it is said she herself
had none (2 S 6 23). The simplest explanation
is io assume a scribal error, with the suggestion
referred to as a possible explanation of it. The


lonely Michal (2 8 6 20-23) became so identified
with her (deceased) sister’s children that they
became, in a sense, hers. Henry Wauace


MERAIAH, mé-ra’ya, mé-ri’a (19, meraych,
“contumacious”’): A priest in the time of Joiakim
son of Jeshua, and head of the priestly house of
Salas which Ezra belonged (Neh 12 12; ef

zr 7 1).


MERAIOTH, méri’yoth, mér’dth (AMA,
mrayoth): The name varies much in the Gr.

(1) A Levite, a descendant of Aaron (1 Ch 6 6f;
Ezr 7 3), called ‘“Memeroth” in 1 Esd 8 2; and
“Marimoth”’ in 2 Esd 1 2.

4 i The son of Ahitub and father of Zadok (1 Ch
1).


(3) A priestly house of which, in the days of
Joiakim, Helkai was head (Neh 12 15). In ver 3
the name is given as ‘“Meremoth.”


MERAN, mé’ran. See Mrrran.


MERARI, méra'ri (7710, m*rari, “bitter”;
Mapapel, Mararet): ;

(1) The 3d son of Levi, his brothers, Gershon and
Kohath, being always mentioned together with him
(Gen 46 11; Ex 6 16 ff). He was among those
70 who went down to Egypt with Jacob (Gen 46
8.11; cf ver 26 and Ex 1 5).

(2) The family of Merari, descendants of above,
and always—with one exception, for which see
Merarites—spoken of as ‘sons of Merari” in
numerous references, such as 1 Ch 6 1.16.19.29,
which only repeat without additional information
the references to be found in the body of this article.
We early find them divided into two families, the
Mahli and Mushi (Ex 6 19; Nu 3 17.20.33). At
the exodus they numbered, under their chief Zuriel,
6,200, and they were assigned the north side of the
tabernacle as a tenting-place (Nu 3 34.35), thus
sharing in the honor of those who immediately sur-
rounded the tabernacle—the south side being given
to the Kohathites, the west to the Gershonites, and
the east—toward the sun-rising—being reserved for
Moses, Aaron and his sons (Nu 3 23.29.35.38).
To the Merarites was intrusted the care of the
boards, bars, pillars, sockets, vessels, pins and cords
of the tabernacle (Nu 8 36.37; 4 29-33). They
and the Gershonites were ‘‘under the hand’ of
Ithamar, son of Aaron, the sons of Gershon having
charge of the soficr material of the tabernacles—
curtains, covers, hangings, ete (Nu 3 25.26).
When reckoned by the number fit for service, i.e.
between 30 and 50 years, the sons of Merari were
3,200 strong (Nu 4 42-45). Because of the weight
of the material in their charge they were allowed 4
wagons and 8 oxen for carriage (Nu 7 8). In
marching, when the tabernacle was taken down, the
standard of Judah went first (Nu 10 14); then
followed the Merarites bearing the tabernacle (ver
17), and after them came the standard of Reuben
(ver 18). After the settlement in Canaan they had
12 cities assigned them out of Gad, Reuben and
Zebulun (Josh 21 7.34-40; 1 Ch 6 63.77-81), just
as the other two branches of Levi’s family had
their 12 cities respectively assigned out of the other
tribes (Josh 21). The names of these Merarite cities
are given (loc. cit.), and among them is Ramoth-
gilead, one of the cities of refuge (ver 38). It is
evident from 1 Ch 6 44-47; 16 41; 25 1.3.6.9.11.
15.19.21 f; cf 15 6.17-19 that they had charge
under Ethan or Jeduthun of the temple music in
the service. In David’s time Asaiah was their
chief (1 Ch 15 6). Himself and 220 of the family
helped David to bring up the Ark. David divided


2035


the Levites into courses among the Gershonites,
Kohathites and Merarites (1 Ch 23 6; cf vs 21-23;
24 26-30). The functions of certain Merarites
are described in 1 Ch 26 10-19. They also took
part in cleansing the temple in Hezekiah’s time
(2 Ch 29 12) as well asin the days of Josiah (2 Ch
34 12), helping to repair the house of the Lord.
Among the helpers of Ezra, too, we find some of
them numbered (Ezr 8 18.19). The family seems
to have played a very important part in keeping
seedy, and true such faithfulness as remained in
srael,
(3) The father of Judith (Jth 8 1; 16 7).
Henry Wa.ace


MERARITES, mé-ra’rits (YTV, m*rari, “bitter”) :


The descendants of MERaRr (q.v.), son of Levi.
The only place where this form of the word occurs
is Nu 26 57. Elsewhere they are always referred


to as “‘sons of Merari.”’


MERATHAIM, mer-a-tha’/im (E°079, m*ra-
thayim, ‘‘double rebellion”): A name used for Baby-
lon in Jer 50 21. According to Delitzsch it may
be equivalent to the Bab Marratin, i.e. land by the
nar Marratu, “the bitter river’ (Pers Gulf)=
Southern Babylonia (OAL, s.v.).


MERCHANDISE, mir’chan-diz ([1] Wa?, ‘amar,
[2] 130, sakar, [3] 3, sahar, [4] WIND, sharah,
[5] m2, rkhullah, [6] 273, ma'drabh, [7]
m25a, markéleth; [8] euwopla, emporia, [9] e-
wéptov, empdrion, [10] yépos, gémos): There seem
to be 4 distinct meanings of the word according to
RV, viz.: (1) The products, i.e. goods or things sold
or exchanged, and so merchandise in the present-
day usage: (a) sahar is tr? thus in Prov 31 18;
Isa 23 18; (b) sahar is tr¢ thusin Isa 45 14; these
two are from a 7/ meaning to travel about as a
peddler; (c) rkhulldh, tr? thus in Ezk 26 12, from
ay meaning to travel for trading purposes; (d)
ma‘dérabh, tr? thus in Ezk 27 9.27.33.34, from a 7/
meaning to intermix, to barter; (¢) markdleth,
tr? thus in Ezk 27 24 (the above 5 Heb words are
all used to designate the goods or wares which were
bartered); (f) ‘amar, occurring in Dt 21 14; 24 7,
trdin AV “make merchandise of,” but in RV “deal
with as a slave,” or RVm ‘‘deal with as a chattel”;
(9) emporia, tr’ ‘merchandise’ in Mt 22 5; (h)
emporion, likewise in Jn 2 16 (the same Gr word is
used in 2 Pet 2 3 for ARV ‘make merchandise
of you”); (4) gomos, “merchandise,” m “‘cargo.”

(2) The process of trade itself, i.e. the business:
rekhullah has in it the 7/ meaning of itinerant trad-
ing, and so in Ezk 28 16 the correct tr is not “mer-
chandise,” as in AV, but “traffic,” “abundance of
thy traffic,” ie. doing a thriving business: ‘‘trade
was good.” ay ¥

(3) The place of trading, i.e. emporium, mart,
etc: shérah in Ezk 27 15 is tr? “mart.” In Jn
2 16 reference is made to the “house of merchan-
dise.”’

(4) The profits of trading: In Prov 3 14, sahkar
is tr? “gaining.” Referring to wisdom, ‘For the
gaining of it is better than the gaining of silver,
and the profit thereof than fine gold’; AV “mer-
chandise.” WiLit1aAM Evwarp RarretTy


MERCHANT, mir’chant, MERCHANTMAN,
midr’chant-man. See Commerce; MERCHANDISE;
TRADE.


MERCURY, mir’kii-ri, MERCURIUS, mér-ki’-
ri-us: The tr of ‘Epufjs, Hermés, in Acts 14 12:
“They called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercury,
because he was the chief speaker.” Hermes was the
god of eloquence (and also of theft), the attend-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Aaceey, Merciful


ant, messenger and spokesman of the gods. The
more commanding presence of Barnabas (cf 2 Cor
10 10) probably caused him to be identified with
Zeus (the Rom Jupiter), while his gift of eloquence
suggested the identification of Paul with Hermes
(the Rom Mercury). The temple of Jupiter was
before Lystra, and to him the Lycaonians paid their
chief worship. Cf the legend of Baucis and Phile-
mon (Ovid, Metam. viii.611f) and see Hermes;
Jupiter; Greece, Revicion in. M. 0. Evans


MERCY, mtr’si, MERCIFUL, mér’si-fo0l (O77,
hesedh, TIN, raham, J, hanan; feos, éleos,
Acéw, eleés, olxteppds, oiktirmés): “Mercy” is a dis-
tinctive Bible word characterizing God as revealed
to men.

In the OT it is oftenest the tr of hesedh, kindness,”
‘loving-kindness” (see LovineKINDNESS), but rahdmim,
lit. “‘bowels” (the sympathetic region), and fdnan, “to
be inclined to,"’ ‘to be gracious,'' are also frequently tr4
‘‘mercy''; eleos, ‘‘kindness,’’ '‘beneficence,"' and eleeé,
“to show kindness,'’ are the chief words rendering
‘“‘mercy'' in the NT; otktirmos, “' pity,’’ ‘‘ compassion,”
occurs a few times, also oiktirmén, *'pitiful,”” eleémon,
‘‘kind,’”’ “compassionate,’’ twice; hileds, forgiving,"’
and antleos, ‘not forgiving,”’ ‘‘ without mercy,’’ once
each (He § 12; Jas 2 13).


(1) Mercy is (a) an essential quality of God (Ex
34 6.7; Dt 4 31; Ps 62 12, etc); it is His delight
(Mic 7 18.20; Ps 52 8); He is ‘‘the Father of
mercies” (2 Cor 1 3), “rich in mercy” (Eph 2 4),
“full of pity, and merciful” (Jas 6 11); (6) it is
associated with forgiveness (Ex 34 7; Nu 14 18;
1 Tim 1 13.16); (c) with His forbearance (Ps 145
8, ‘Jeh is gracious and merciful, slow to anger
and of great lovingkindness’”’; cf Rom 2 4; 11 32);
(d) with His covenant (1 K 8 23; Neh 1 5),
with His justice (Ps 101 1), with His faithfulness
(Ps 89 24), with His truth (Ps 108 4); mercy and
truth are united in Prov 8 3; 14 22, etc (in Ps
85 10 we have ‘‘Mercy and truth are met together’);
(e) it goes forth to all (Ps 145 9, “Jeh is good to
all; and his tender mercies are over all his works’;
ef ver 16, ‘“Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest
the desire of every living thing,” RVm “satisfiest
every living thing with favor’’); (f) it shows itself
in pitying help (Ex 3 7; Ezr 9 9f), supremely in
Christ and His salvation (Lk 1 50.54.58; Eph 2
4);_ (g) it is abundant, practically infinite (Ps 86
5.15; 119 64); (h) it is everlasting (1 Ch 16 34.
41; Ezr 3 11; Ps 100 5; 136 repeatedly).

(2) ‘‘Mercy” is used of man as well as of God, and
is required on man’s part toward man and beast
(Dt 25 4; Ps 37 21; 109 16; Prov 12 10; Dnl
4 27; Mic 6 8; Mt 6 7, ‘‘Blessed are the merciful:
for they shall obtain mercy”; 25 31-46; Lk 6 36,
“Be ye merciful, even as your Father is merciful’;
10 30f, the Good Samaritan; 14 12-16; Jas 3 17).

(3) In the NT “mercy” (eleos, usually the LXX
tr of hesedh) is associated with “grace’’ (chdris) in
the apostolical greetings and elsewhere. Trench
points out that the difference between them is that
the freeness of God’s love is the central point of
charis, while eleos has in view misery and its relief;
charis is His free grace and Eu displayed in the for-
giveness of sins—extended to men as they are
guilty; His eleos (is extended to them) as they are
miserable. The lower creation may be the object
of His mercy (eleos), but man alone of His grace
(charis); he alone needs it and is capable of re-
ceiving 1t (Synonyms of the NT, 163 f).

(4) From all the foregoing it will be seen that
mercy in God is not merely His pardon.of offenders,
but His attitude to man, and to the world gener-
ally, from which His pardoning mercy proceeds.
The frequency with which mercy is enjoined on
men is specially deserving of notice, with the ex-
clusion of the unmerciful from sonship to the all-


Mercy-Seat
Mesha


merciful Father and from the benefits of His merci-
fulness. Shakespeare’s question, ‘How canst thou
hope for mercy rendering none?” is fully warranted
by Our Lord’s teaching and by Scripture in general;
cf esp. the parable of the Unmerciful Servant (Mt
18 21-35).

(5) As the rule, ARV has “lovingkindness”’ for
“mercy” when hesedh is used of God, and ‘'kindness"’
when it is used of men in relation to each other. ‘'Com-
passion" (tr of raham) is also in several instances substi-
tuted for ‘‘mercy” (Isa 9 17; 14 1; 27 11; Jer 13 14;
30 18), also a ea (tr-of hesedh referring to man)


(Hos 4 1; 6 6
W. L. WALKER

MERCY-SEAT, mir’si-sét, THE (MED, kap-
poreth; NT tdaorhpiov, hilastérion, He 9 5): The
name for the lid or covering of the ark of the cove-
nant (Ex 26 17, etc). The OT term means
“covering,” then, like the NT word, “propitiatory”
(cf kippér, “to cover guilt,” “to make atonement’).
The ark contained the two tables of stone which
witnessed against the sin of the people. The blood
of sacrifice, sprinkled on the mercy-seat on the great
day of atonement, intercepted, as it were, this con-
demning testimony, and effected reconciliation be-
tween God and His people. See ATONEMENT;
ATONEMENT, Day oF; PROPITIATION; ARK OF
Covenant. In Rom $3 25, Jesus is said to be set
forth as “a propitiation [lit. “propitiatory’’], through
faith, in his blood,” thus fulfilling the idea of the
mercy-seat (cf He 9 5.7.11.12, etc).

W. Suaw Catprecorr

MERED, mé’red (179, meredh, ‘‘rebellion”;
LXX has at least four variants in 1 Ch 4 17.18):
A descendant of Judah through Caleb, and men-
tioned as a ‘‘son of Ezrah” (ver 17).

RV, rightly following the orthography of the Heb
which has here hé Ro Rie of ‘dleph (a), as in the name
of the well-known Ezra, saves us from confusing this
Ezrah with the other by giving him the correct termi-
nal letter. _Moreover, even if the question of spelling
were waived, the abseuce of the mentiou of children in
any known passages of the life of the scribe Ezra should
settle the question, since this passage (ver 17) is asso-
ciated with progeny.

A difficulty meets us in ver 18, where Mered is
mentioned as taking to wife ‘‘Bithiah the daughter of
Pharaoh.” That Pharaoh is not the proper name
of some individual but the official title of Egypt’s
sovereign seems evident from the fact that AVm
and RV text agree in translating the other wife of
Mered as “‘the Jewess,” rather than as a proper
name Jehudijah, as if to distinguish the “Jewess”
from the Egyptian. Probably ‘“Hodiah” also is
a corruption of Jehudijah in ver 19, and should be
tr! again “the Jewess.” Tgs and traditions have so
changed and transposed and “interpreted” this
passage that a sufficiently confused text has become
worse confounded, and the only solid fact that
emerges is that once a comparatively obscure Judah-
ite (though the founder of even towns—Gedor,
Soco, Eshtemoa, etc, ver 18) married an Egyp
princess, whether as a captive or a freewoman we
do not know. See Bitaian. Henry WaLLace


MEREMOTH, mer’é-moth, me-ré’moth (N19,
mremoth, “heights”; Meperpa0, Mereiméth):

(1) Son of Uriah (Ezr 8 33), who was head of the
7th course of priests appointed by David (1 Ch 24
10, Hakkoz=Koz; cf Neh 3 4.21). The family of
Koz were among those unable to prove their pedi-
gree on the return from Babylon, and were therefore
deposed ag polluted (Ezr 2 61.62). Meremoth’s
division of the family must, however, have been
scatheless, for he is employed in the temple after the
return as weigher of the gold and the vessels (Ezr
8 33), a function reserved for priests alone (Ezr 8
24-28). He takes a double part in the reconstruc-
tion under Nehemiah, first as a builder of the wall


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2036


of the city (Neh 3 4), then as a restorer of that part
of the temple abutting on the house of Ehashib the
priest (Neh 3 21); “Marmoth” in 1 Esd 8 62.

(2) A member of the house of Bani, and, like so
many of that house, among those who married and
put away foreign wives (Ezr 10 36). He seems to
be named Carahasion (!) in the corresponding list
of 1 Esd 9 34.

(3) The name occurs in Neh 10 5 among those
who “‘seal the covenant” with Nehemiah (Neh 10 1).
It may there be the name of an individual (in which
case there were 4 of the name), or it may be a family
name. Certainly a ‘‘Meremoth” came back under
Zerubbabel 100 years before (Neh 12 3), and the
signatory in question may be either a descendant
of the same name or a family representative. The
name recurs later in the same list (Neh 12 15) as
‘Meraioth” through a scribal error confusing the
two Heb letters yidh and hélem for mem. A com-
parison of Neh 12 1-3 and 12-15 shows clearly
that it is the same person. Note that in ver 15
“Helkai” is the name of the contemporary leader.

(4) For Meremoth (1 Esd 8 2 AV), see MEmE-
ROTH. Henry WALLACE


MERIBAH, mer’i-bd, me-ré’bi.
AND MERIBAH.


MERIB-BAAL, mer-ib-ba‘al (DYD"2"77A, m*ribh-
ba‘al; also Spa" , mri-bha‘al, ‘Baal contends”):
The spelling varies in a single verse; 1 Ch 9 40
contains the name twice: first, in the first form
above; second, in the second form. The name is
given also in 1 Ch 8 34. Itis the other name of
MepuisosHets (2) (q.v.).

In Jer 11 13 and Hos 9 10 the terms ‘Baal’? and
“Bosheth” seem to stand in apposition, the latter form
being a_ slightly contemptuous alternative rendered
‘*shame.’”’ ‘This is akin to other like changes, such as
Esh-baal for Ish-bosheth, Jeruh-besheth for Jerub-baal,
etc. The change in the first part of the name could occur
chroue a clerical confusion of aspirate pé and résh in

ebrew.


See Massan


Henry Watuace
MERIBATH-KADESH, mer’i-bath-ka’desh,
MERIBOTH-KADESH, mer'i-both-k. (Ezk 48 28;
47 19): The southern limit of Ezekiel’s ideal land
of Israel. See Murrpan.


MERODACH, mé-ro’dak, mer’é-dak (7TVA,
mérédhakh): ‘The supreme deity of the Babylonians
(Jer 50 2); the Nimrod of Gen 10 8-12; and among
the constellations, Orion. See Astronomy, II,
11; BasyrnonrA AND Assyria, RB5LIGION oF;
Nimrop.


MERODACH-BALADAN, mé-ri’dak-bal’a-dan,
mer’é-dak-b. (FIND JINN, méra’dhakh bdal’d-
dhan; Mapw8dx BadaSév, Maraddch Baladdn): The
son of Baladan, is mentioned in Isa 39 1, as a king
of Babylon who sent an embassy to Hezekiah, king
of Judah, apparently shortly after the latter’s ill-
ness, in order to congratulate him on his recovery
of health, and to make with him an offensive and
defensive alliance. This Merodach-baladan was a
king of the Chaldaeans of the house of Yakin, and
was the most dangerous and inveterate foe of Sargon
and his son Sennacherib, kings of Assyria, with
whom he long and bitterly contested the possession.
of Babylon and the surrounding provinces. M.-b.
seems to have seized Babylon immediately after
the death of Shalmaneser in 721 BC; and it was
not till the 12th year of his reign that Sargon suc-
ceeded in ousting him. From that time down to
the 8th campaign of Sennacherib, Sargon and his
son pursued with relentless animosity M.-b. and
his family until at last his son Nabushumishkun.
was captured and the whole family of M.-b. was


2037


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mercy~Seat
Mesha


apparently destroyed. According to the monu-
ments, therefore, it was from a worldly point of view
good politics for Hezekiah and his western allies
to come to an understanding with M.-b. and the
Aramaeans, Elamites, and others, who were con-
federated with him. From a strategical point of
view, the weakness of the allied powers consisted
in the fact that the Arabian desert lay between the
eastern and western members of the confederacy,
so that the Assyr kings were able to attack their
enemies when they pleased and_to defeat them in
detail. R. Dick W1ison


MEROM, mé’rom, WATERS OF (OM A7%,
mé-mérom; %8op Mappov or Meppav, hiiddr Marrin
or Merrén): The place which was the scene of
Joshua’s victory over Jabin and his confederates
(Josh 11 7), commonly identified with Lake Huleh
in the upper part of the Jordan valley, but with
doubtful propriety. Jos says (Ant, V, i, 18) that
the camp of the allies was at Beroth in upper


|


Waters of Merom.


Galilee, and that Beroth was not far from Kadesh,
which is upon the summit of the Galilean hills.
According to the Scriptural account, the pursuit
was to Sidon and Hazor on the W. of the mountains
(see Hazor), while the names of the confederates
are those of places in lower Galilee and the mari-
time plain. It seems improbable that a force of
chariots should be brought over to be hemmed in
by the rugged mountains which border the narrow
plain of Huleh on both sides, plains that are made
still narrower by the swamps surrounding the lake
(see JORDAN VALLEY) in Joshua's time, when they
were much larger than they are now after having
been filled with the accumulation of sediment
brought down by mountain streams for 3,000 years.
Conder, with much reason, supposes the ‘‘waters of
Merom”’ to be the perennial stream Wédy el-Melek,
near Shimrom-Merom (Semdnich), 5 miles W. of
Nazareth. Were Lake Huleh referred to, the
proper phrase would be Sea (yam) of Merom, rather
than waters (mayim).
Grorce FREDERICK WRIGHT

MERONOTHITE, mé-ron’6-thit, mé-r6’n6-thit
mda, mérénotht, ¥ meaning “fertility”): The
designation of two persons in the OT:

(1) Jehdeiah, who was in charge of the royal
asses under David (1 Ch 27 30). :

(2) Jadon who was among the repairers of the
wall under Nehemiah (Neh 3 7). No place of the
name Meronoth can be identified. That Jadon
worked on the wall near Gibeonites and Mizpahites
affords no clear clue to the place, unless it be shown
that there was some geographical rota in the wall
repairers.


MEROZ, mé’roz (7119, mérdz; B, Mnpot, Méréz,
A, Matép, Mazér): This name occurs only once in
Scripture. The angel of the Lord is represented as
invoking curses upon Meroz because the inhabit-
ants “came not to the help of Jeh” on the day of
Deborah and Barak’s victory (Jgs 5 23). It isa
strange fate, shared with Chorazin, to be preserved
from oblivion only by the record of a curse. The
bitterness in the treatment of Meroz, not found
in the references to any of the other delinquents,
must be due to the special gravity of her offence.
Reuben, Gilead and Dan were far away. This,
however, is not true of Asher, who was also absent.
Perhaps Meroz was near the field of battle and, at
some stage of the conflict, within sight and hearing
of the strife. If, when Zebulun “‘jeoparded their
lives unto the death, and Naphtali, upon the high
places of the field,” they turned a deaf ear and a
cold heart to the dire straits of their brethren, this
might explain the fierce reproaches of Deborah.

Meroz may possibly be identified with el-Murus-
sus, a mud-built village about 5 miles N.W. of
Beisdn, on the slopes to the N. of the Vale of Jez-
reel. If the Kedesh where Heber’s tent was

itched be identical with Kadish ta the W. of the

ea of Galilee, Sisera’s flight, avoiding the Israelites
in the neighborhood of Mt. Tabor, may have car-
ried him past el-Murussus. If the inhabitants had
it in their power to arrest him, but suffered him to
escape (Moore, ‘“Jgs,”’ [CC, 163), such treachery to
the nation’s cause might well rouse the indignation
of the heroic prophetess. Ewina


MERRAN, mer’an (Meppdv, Merrdn; AV Meran):
Many identifications have been suggested on the
assumption that the text as it stands is correct.
Some of these are the Sidonian Meareh (Grotius),
Marane, a city of which Pliny speaks as being near
the Red Sea (Keil), and the desert of Mahrah in
Arabia (Fritzsche). It is very probable, however,
that the name represents an error in transcription
from the original Sem text, confusing the 7 with the
‘, so that we should read Meddan, or Medan, ie.
Midian. The phrase will then run, “the merchants
of Midian and Teman” (Bar 3 23). The mer-
chants of Midian are referred to in Gen 37 28.

W. Ewine

MEROTH, mé’ruth. See Emmerura.


MESALOTH, mes’a-loth (Meooadd8, Messaléth,
Maicadd), Maisaléth): A place mentioned in the
account of the march of Bacchides and Alcimus
into Judah, as “in Arbela” (1 Macc 9 2). If
Arbela be identical with Irbil or Irbid on the south-
ern lip of Wady el-Hamam, W. of the Sea of Galilee,
this fixes the locality; but no name resembling
Mesaloth has been found.


MESECH, mé’sek. See Mrsuecu.


MESHA, mé’sha:

(1) (99, mésha‘'; B, Mapid, Marisd, A, Ma-
picds, Marisds): Caleb’s firstborn son, the father
of Ziph, probably the ancestor of the Ziphites
(1 Ch 2 42).

(2) (NWA, masha’; B, Mid, Misd, A, Macd,
Mésd): A Benjamite, son of Shaharaim by his wife
Hodesh, born in the land of Moab (1 Ch 8 9).

(3) (WA, méshat; Mwod, Mésd): A king of
Moab. All the Bib. information regarding this mon-
arch is contained in 2 K 3. Here we gather that
Mesha was contemporary with Ahab, Ahaziah and
Jehoram. He was tributary to Israel, his annual
contribution consisting of 100,000 Iambs and 100,-
000 rams. After the death of Ahab he asserted his
independence. Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, and


Meshach
Messiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2038


the king of Edom joined forces with Jehoram in an
attempt to quell the rebellion. At the instance of
Elisha, who accompanied the host, water was
miraculously provided when the army of the allies
was ready to perish of thirst. Mesha came out
against them and fell upon the camp. His attack
was repulsed with heavy slaughter, and the defeated
king was chased by the victors until he took refuge
in the great fortress of Kir-hareseth. A vigorous
siege was begun. Seeing that his case was des-
perate, Mesha attempted, with 700 men, to break
through the lines. Failing in this, he offered his
firsthorn as a burnt offering upon the wall. Then
“there came great wrath upon Israel” (by which,
probably, panic is meant), and the besiegers retired,
leaving their conquest incomplete.

In his inscription—see Moasire Stone—~Mesha
gives an account of his rebellion, naming the places
captured and fortified by him. It is not surprising
that he says nothing of his defeat by Jehoram and
his allies. There is, however, one serious dis-
crepancy. The time Moab was under the suprem-
acy of Israel, during the reign of Omri and half
the reign of Ahab, he puts at 40 years. According
to Bib. chronology, Omri and Ahab together reigned
only 34 years. If, with Mesha, we deduct half the
reign of Ahab, the period is reduced to 23 years.
It is impossible to add to the length of either reign.
So great a difference cannot be explained by the use
of round numbers. Why Mesha should wish to
increase the time of his people’s subjection is not
clear, unless, indeed, he thought in this way to
magnify the glory of their deliverer.

In Mesha the sentiment of patriotism was wedded
to some measure of military capacity. Judging
by his inscription, he was also a deeply religious
man according to his lights. Substitute “Jehovah”
for ‘‘Chemosh,” and his phraseology might be that
of a pious Heb king. The sacrifice of his son is at
once the mark of the heathen and an index of the
strength of his devotion.

(4) (RW, mésha’; Macoh, Massé): This appears
to mark the western boundary of the land occupied
by the descendants of Joktan (Gen 10 30). No
certain identification is possible, but several more
or less probable have been suggested: e.g. (a) The
Gr Mesene, on the Pers Gulf, not far from the mouth
of the Tigris and the Euphrates; (b) the Syro-
Arabian desert, called Mashu in the Assyr inscrip-
tions; the name here, however, could hardly cover
such a vast tract as this; more probably it denoted
a place; (c) Dillmann would alter the vowels and
identify it with Massa’, a branch of the Ishmaelite
stock (Gen 25 14; 1 Ch 1 30). This, however,
furnishes no clue to the locality, the territory of that
tribe being also unidentified. W. Ewine


MESHACH, mé’shak (7, méshakh): Pos-
sibly the Sumerian form of the Bab Sil-Asharidu,
“the shadow of the prince,’ just as Shadrach
probably means “‘the servant of Sm,” and Abednego
the ‘servant of Ishtar.’? Meshach was one of the
three Heb companions of Daniel, whose history is
given in the first chapters of the Book of Dnl. See,
further, under SHapRACcH.


MESHECH, mé’shek, MESECH, mé’sek (729,
meshekh, “long,” “tall”; Méeox, Mésoch): Son of
Japheth (Gen 10 2; 1 Ch 1 5; ver 17 is a scribal
error for “Mash”; ef Gen 10 22.23). His de-
scendants and their dwelling-place (probably some-
where in the neighborhood of Armenia [Herod.
iii.94]) seem to be regarded in Scripture as syno-
nyms for the barbaric and remote (Ps 120 5; ef
Isa 66 19, where Meshech should be read instead
of “that draw the bow’). It is thought that the


“Tibareni and Moschi” of the classical writers refer
to the same people. Doubtless they appear in the
annals of Assyria as enemies of that country under
the names Tabali and Mushki—the latter the de-
scendantsof Meshech and the former those of Tubal
to whom the term ‘‘Tibareni” may refer in the
clause above. This juxtaposition of names is in
harmony with practically every appearance of the
word in Scripture. It is seldom named without
some one of the others—Tubal, Javan, Gog and
Magog. It is this which forms a good justification
for making the suggested change in Isa 66 19,
where Meshech would be in the usual company of
Tubal and Javan. Ezekiel mentions them several
times, first, as engaged in contributing to the trade
of Tyre (Tiras of Gen 10 27), in ‘‘vessels of brass”
and—very significantly—slaves; again there is the
association of Javan and Tubal with them (Ezk
27 18); second, they are included in his weird
pieture of the under-world: “them that go down into
the pit” (32 18.26). They are mentioned again
with Gog and Magog twice as those against whom
the prophet is to “set his face’ (Ezk 38 2.3; 39 1).
Henry WALLACE

MESHELEMIAH, mié-shel-é-mi’a (T7020,
méshelemyah, ‘‘Jeh repays”): Father of Zechariah,
one of the porters of the tabernacle (1 Ch 9 21;
26 1.2.9). In the latter passage Meshelemiah, with
a final u, is credited with “sons and brethren,
valiant men, 18.” He is the ‘‘Shelemiah”’ of ver 14,
the ‘“Shallum” of 1 Ch 9 17.19.31, and the ‘‘Me-
shullam” of Neh 12 25.


MESHEZABEL, mé-shez’a-bel ONAT UA, meshe-
zébh”’ él, “God a deliverer”; AV Meshezabeel, mé-
shez'a-bél):

(1) A priest, ancestor of Meshullam, who assisted
Nehemiah in rebuilding the wall of Jers (Neh 3 4).

(2) One of the chiefs of the people giving name to
the family which sealed the covenant with Nehe-
miah (Neh 10 21).

(3) A descendant of Judah through Zerah, and
father of Pethahiah (Neh 11 24).


MESHILLEMITH, mé-shil’é-mith (mada,
m'shillémith, “retribution”): A priest, son of Im-
mer, ancestor, according to 1 Ch 9 12, of Adaiah
and Pashhur, and according to Neh 11 13, of
Amashai. In the latter passage this name is spelled
MESHILLEMOTH (q.V.).


MESHILLEMOTH, mé-shil’é-moth, mé-shil’é-
moth (nna, méshillémoth, ‘recompense’”):

(1) An Ephraimite ancestor of Berechiah, chief
of the tribe in the reign of Pekah (2 Ch 28 12).

(2) The ‘‘Meshillemith” of Neh 11 13.


MESHOBAB, mé-sho’bab (A2W'A, m*shabhabh) :
A Simeonite (1 Ch 4 34). This name heads the
list of those who, for the sake of wider pasture-
lands, occupied a Hamitic settlement in the neigh-
borhood of Gerar (MT Gepor [q.v.]), and a Maonite
settlement in Edomite territory (1 Ch 4 39-41).
The latter event is dated in the days of Hezekiah
(see Curtis, Chron., in loc.).


MESHULLAM, mé-shul’am (D202, m:shullam,
“resigned” or “devoted”; cf Arab. Muslim; Me-
codhdGp, Mesollém): An OT name very common in
post-exilic times.

(1) The grandfather of Shaphan (2 K 22 3).

(2) A son of Zerubbabel (1 Ch 3 19).

(8) A Gadite (1 Ch 6 13).

(4) (5) (6) Three Benjamites (1 Ch 8 17; 9 7.8).
Te The father of Hilkiah (1 Ch 9 11; Neh 11


2039


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Meshach
Messiah


(8) A priest, son of Meshillemith (1 Ch 9 12):
the parallel list (Neh 11 13) omits the name.

(9) A Kohathite appointed by Josiah as one of the
ane to direct the repairs of the temple (2 Ch

(10) One of the chief men sent by Ezra to pro-
cure Levites to go up with him to Jerus (Ezr 8 16;
cf 1 Esd 8 44).

(11) A Levite opposed to Ezra’s regulations
anent Iarriage with foreigners (Ezr 10 15; 1
Esd 9 14). ;

(12) One of those who had married foreign wives
(Ezr 10 29; ef 1 Esd 9 30).

(13) One of the repairers of the wall (Neh 3
4.30). His daughter was married to Jehohanan,
the son of Tobiah the Ammonite (Neh 6 18).

(14) One of the repairers of the Old Gate (Neh 3 6).

(15) A supporter of Ezra at the reading of the
Law (Neh 8 4).

(16) One of those who subscribed the Covenant
(Neh 10 20).

(17) A priest who subscribed the Covenant
(Neh 10 7).

(18) (19) Two priests at the time of the high
priest Joiakim (Neh 12 13.16).

(20) A porter at the time of the high priest
Joiakim (Neh 12 25).

(21) A processionist at the dedication of the wall
of Jerus (Neh 12 383). Joun A. LrEs


MESHULLEMETH, mé-shul’é-meth (rebtia ,
mshullemeth): The wife of King Manasseh and
mother of Amon (2 K 21 19). She is further desig-
nated ‘‘daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.” This is the
earliest instance of the birthplace being added to
the designation of the queen mother. The name
is properly the fem. of the frequently oceurring
ME&sHULLAM (q.V.).


MESOBAITE, mé-si’ba-it.
MESOPOTAMIA, mes-6-pé-t4’mi-a.
MESS, mes (MN WA, mas’éh): Any dish of food
sent (Lat missum; Fr. messe) to the table. It occurs


in the OT in Gen 43 84 (bis); 2 8 11 8 EV, and
in the NT in He 12 16, translating Apdos, brdsis.


See Mezonairs.


See Syria.


MESSENGER, mes’en-jér: The regular Heb word
for “messenger” is J820, mal’akh, the Gr &yyedos,
dggelos. This may be a human messenger or a
messenger of God, an angel. The context must
decide the right tr. In Hag 1 13 the prophet is
called God’s messenger; Job 33 23 changes AV
to “angel” (m ‘‘messenger”); and Mal 3 1m, sug-
gests “angel”? instead of “messenger.” The Mal
passages 2 7; 3 1 (bis) have caused a great deal
of comment. See Maxacur. The Gr drécrodos,
apéstolos, “apostle,” is rendered ‘messenger’ in
2 Cor 8 23; Phil 2 25; 18 4 17 tr®lit. from Heb
“W , basar, “to tell good news,” “he that brought
the tidings.” Gen 60 16 reads ‘“message’’ instead
of ‘‘messenger.” A. L. BREsLIcH


MESSIAH, mé-si’a (O°W'A, méashith; Aram.
NIM, meshiha’; LXX Xpiorés, Christés, “anoint-
ed”; NT “Christ”):

1. Meaning and Use of the Term
2. The Messianic Hope

I. Tue Messiag 1n tus OT
1. The Messianic King

(1) Isaiah :

(2) Jeremiah and Ezekiel

(3) Later Prophets 4
. Prophetic and Priestly Relations
. Servant of Jeh "

. Transformation of the Prophetic Hope Into the
Apocalyptic


BAN


j (Lev 4 3.5.16; 6 22 [Heb 15)]).


II. Tue Messtau In THE Pre-Curistian AGE
1. Post-prophctic Age
2. Maccabeau Times
3. Apocalyptic Literature
III. Tus Messiau 1n toe NT
1. The Jewish Conception
(1) The Messiah as King
2) His Prophetic Character
& The Title ‘‘Son of God”
. Attitude of Jesus to the Messiahship
. The Christian Transformation
. New Elements Added
(1) Future Manifestation
(2) Divine Personality
(3) Heavenly Priestheod
5. Fulfilment in Jesus


LITERATURE


“Messias”’ (Jn 1 41; 4 25 AV) is a transcription
of Mecclas, Messias, the Gr representation of the
Aramaic. ‘Messiah’ is thus a modifiea-
1. Meaning tion of the Gr form of the word,
and Use of according to the Heb.
the Term The term is used in the OT of kings
and priests, who were consecrated to
office by the ceremony of anointing. It is applied
to the priest only as an adj —“the anointed priest”
Its substantive use
is restrieted to the king; he only is called “the
Lord’s anointed,” e.g. Saul (1 S 24 6.10 [Heb 7.11],
etc); David (2 8 19 21 [Heb 22]; 231, “the
anointed of the God of Jaeob’’); Zedekiah (Lam
4 20). Similarly in the Pss the king is designated
“mine,” “thine,” “his anointed.” Thus also even
Cyrus (Isa 45 1), as being chosen and commissioned
by Jeh to carry out His purpose with Israel. Some
think the sing. “mine anointed” in Hab 3 13 de-
notes the whole people; but the Heb text is some-
what obscure, and the referenee may be to the king.
The pl. of the subst. is used of the patriarchs, who
are ealled “‘mine anointed ones” (Ps 106 15; 1 Ch
16 22), as being Jeh’s chasen, consecrated servants,
whose persons were inviolable.

It is to be noted that “Messiah” as a special title
is never applied in the OT to the unique king of the
future, unless perhaps in Dnl 9 25f (mashith
naghidh, “Messiah-Prinee’’), a difficult passage, the
interpretation of which is very uncertain. It was
the later Jews of the post-prophetie period who,
guided by a true instinct, first used the term in a
technical sense.

The Messiah is the instrument by whom God’s
kingdom is to be established in Israel and in the

world. The hope of a personal de-


RON


2. The liverer is thus inseparable from the
Messianic wider hope that runs through the OT.
Hope The Jews were a nation who lived in


the future. In this respect they stand
alone among the peoples of antiquity. No nation
ever cherished such strong expectations of a good
time eoming, or clung more tenaciously amid defeat
and disaster to the certainty of final triumph over
all enemies and of entrance upon a state of perfect
peace and happiness. The basis of this larger hope
is Jeh’s covenant with Israel. “I will take you
to me for a people, and I will be to you a God”
(Ex 6 7). On the ground of this promise the
prophets, while declaring God’s wrath against His
people on account of their sin, looked beyond the
Divine chastisements to the final era of perfect sal-
vation and blessedness, which would be ushered in
when the nation had returned to Jeh.

The term ‘‘Messianic’’ is used in a double sense
to deseribe the larger hope of a glorious future for
the nation, as well as the narrower one of a personal
Messiah who is to be the prominent figure in the
perfected kingdom. It may be remarked that many
writers, both prophetie and apocalyptic, who picture
the final consummation, make no allusion whatever
to a coming deliverer.

This art. will treat of the personal Messianic hope


Messiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2040


as it is found in the OT, in the pre-Christian age,

and in the NT.
I. The Messiah in the OT.—The chief element in
the conception of the Messiah in the OT is that
of the ‘king. Through him as head


1. The of the nation Jeh could most readily
Messianic work out His saving purposes. But
King the kingdom of Israel was a theocracy.


: In earlier times Moses, Joshua, and
the judges, who were raised up by Jeh to guide His
people at different crises in their history, did not
claim to exercise authority apart from their Divine
commission. Nor was the relation of Jeh to the
nation as its real ruler in any way modified by the
institution of the monarchy. Jt was by His Spirit
that the king was qualified for the righteous govern-
ment of the people, and by His power that he would
become victorious over all enemies. The passage
on which the idea of the Messianic king who would
rule in righteousness and attain universal dominion
was founded is Nathan’s oracle to Davidin2 8 7
11 ff. In contrast to Saul, from whom the kingdom
had passed away, David would never want a de-
scendant to sit on the throne of Israel. How strong
an impression this promise of the perpetuity of his
royal house had made on David is seen in his last
words (2 S 23); and to this “everlasting covenant,
and sure,” the spiritual minds in Israel reverted in
all after ages.

(1) Zsaiah.—Isaiah is the first of the prophets to
refer to an extraordinary king of the future. Amos
(9 11) foretold the time when the shattered fortunes
of Judah would be restored, while Hosea (3 5)
looked forward to the reunion of the two kingdoms
under David’s line. But it is not till we reach the
Assyr_ age, when the personality of the king is
brought into prominence against the great world-
power, that we meet with any mention of a unique
personal ruler who would bring special glory to
David’s house.

The kings of Syria and Israe] having entered into a
league to dethrone Ahaz and supplant him by an obscure
adventurer, Isaiah (7 10-17) announces to the king of
Judah that while, by the help of Assyria, he would sur-
vive the attack of the confederate kings, Jeh would, for
his disobedience, bring devastation upon his own land
through the instrumentality of his ally. But the
prophet’s lofty vision, though limited as in the case of
other seers to the horizon of his own. time, reaches be-
yond Judah's distress to Judah’s deliverance. To the
spiritual mind of Isaiah the revelation is made of a true
king, Immanuel, “‘ God-with-us,'’ who would arise out of
the house of David, now so unworthily represented by
the profligate Ahaz. While the passage is one of the
hardest to interpret in all the OT, perhaps too much has
been made by some scholars of the difficulty connected
with the word ‘almah, “virgin.” It is the mysterious
personality of the child to which prominence is given in
the prophecy. The significance of the name and the
pledge of victory it implies, the reference to Immanuel
as ruler of the land in 8 8 (if the present rendering he
correct), as well as the parallelism of the line of thought
in the prophecy with that of ch 9, would seem to point
to the identity of Immanuel with the Prince of the four
names, ‘ Wonderful Counsellor, Mighty God, Father of
Eternity, Prince of Peace"' (9 6 RVYm). These Divine
titles do not necessarily imply that in the mind of the
prophet the Messianic ving Js God in the metaphysical
sense—the essence of the Divine nature is not a dog-
matic conception in the OT—but only that Jeh is present
in Him in perfect wisdom and power,so that He exercises
over His people forever a fatherly and peaceful rule. In
confirmation of this interpretation reference may be
made to the last of the great trilogy of Isaianic prophe-
cies concerning the Messiah of the house of David (11 2),
where the attributes with which He is endowed by the
Spirit are those which qualify for the perfect discharge
of royal functions in the kingdom of God. See Im-
MANUEL


A similar description of the Messianic king is
given by Isaiah’s younger contemporary Micah
(5 2 ff), who emphasizes the humble origin of the
extraordinary ruler of the future, who shall spring
from the Davidic house, while his reference to her who
is to bear him confirms the interpretation which re-
gards thevirgin in Isaiah asthemotherof the Messiah.


(2) Jeremiah and Ezekiel—After the time of
Isaiah and Micah the throne of David lost much
of its power and influence, and the figure of the
ideal king is never again portrayed with the same
definiteness and color. Zephaniah, Nahum, and
Habakkuk make no reference to him at all. By the
great prophets Jeremiah and Ezekiel, however, the
hope of a Davidic ruler is kept before the people.
While there are passages in both of these writers
which refer to a succession of pious rulers, this fact
should not dominate our interpretation of other
utterances of theirs which seem to point to a par-
ticular individual. By Jeremiah the Messiah is
called the “righteous Branch” who is to be raised
unto David and be called “Jehovah [is] our right-
eousness,”’ that is, Jeh as the one making righteous
dwells in him (Jer 28 5f; cf 30 9). In Ezk he is
alluded to as the coming one “whose right it is”
(21 27), and as Jeh’s “servant David” who shall be
“prince” or “king” forever over a reunited people
(84 23f; 37 24). It is difficult to resist the 1m-
pression which the language of Ezekiel makes that
it is the ideal Messianic ruler who is here predicted,
notwithstanding the fact that afterward, in the
prophet’s vision of the ideal theocracy, not only
does the prince play a subordinate part, but pro-
vision ig made in the constitution for a possible
abuse of his authority.

(3) Later prophets.—After Ezekiel’s time, during
the remaining years of the exile, the hope of a pre-
eminent king of David’s house naturally disappears.
But it is resuscitated at the restoration when
Zerubbabel, a prince of the house of David and the
civil head of the restored community, is made by
Jeh of hosts His signet-ring, inseparable from Him-
self and the symbol of His authority (Hag 2 23).
In the new theocracy, however, the figure of the
Messianic ruler falls into the background before
that of the high priest, who is regarded as the sign
of the coming Branch (Zec 3 8). Still we have
the unique prophecy of the author of Zec 9 9, who
pictures the Messiah as coming not on a splendid
charger like a warrior king, but upon the foal of an
ass, righteous and victorious, yet lowly and peace-
ful, strong by the power of God to help and save.
There is no mention of the Messianic king in Joel
or Mal; but references in the later, as in the
earlier, Pss to events in the lives of the kings or the
history of the kingdom prove that the promise
made to David was not forgotten, and point to one
who would fulfil it in allits grandeur.

The Messianic king is the central figure in the
consummation of the kingdom. It is a royal son

of David, not a prophet like unto
2. Prophetic Moses, or a priest of Aaron’s line,
and Priestly whose personal features are portrayed
Relations in the picture of the future. The

promise in Dt 18 15-20, as the con-
text shows, refers to a succession of true prophets
as opposed to the diviners of heathen nations.
Though Moses passed away there would always be
a prophet raised up by Jeh to reveal His will to the
people, so that they would never necd to have
recourse to heathen soothsayers. Yet while the
prophet is not an ideal figure, being already fully
inspired by the Spirit, prophetic functions are to
this extent associated with the kingship, that the
Messiah is qualified by the Spirit for the discharge
of the duties of His royal office and makes known
pa of God by His righteous decisions (Isa 11

It is more difficult to define the relationship of the
priesthood to the kingship in the final era. They
are brought into connection by Jeremiah (80 9.21)
who represents the new “David” as possessing the
priestly right of immediate access to Jeh, while the
Levitical priesthood, equally with the Davidic king-


2041


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Messiah


ship, is assured of perpetuity on the ground of the
covenant (Jer 33 18 ff). But after the restoration,
when prominence is given to the high priest in the
reconstitution of the kingdom, Joshua becomes the
type of the coming “Branch” of the Davidic house
(Zee 3 8), and, aceording to the usual interpreta-
tion, receives the crown—a symbol of the union of
the kingly and priestly offices in the Messiah (Zec
6 11 ff). Many scholars, however, holding that the
words ‘“‘and the counsel of peace shall be between
them both” can only refer to two persons, would
substitute ‘“Zerubbabel” for “Joshua” in ver 11, and
read in ver 13, “there shall be a priest upon his
right hand” (ef RV, LXX). The prophet’s meaning
would then be that the Messianic high priest would
sit beside the Messianic king in the perfected king-
dom, both working together as Zerubbabel and
Joshua were then doing. There is no doubt, how-
a fet the Messiah is both king and priest in
's 110.


The bitter experiences of the nation during the
exile originated a new conception, Messianic in
the deepest sense, the Servant of Jeh
3. The (Isa chs 40-66; chiefly 41 8; 42 1-7.19f;
Servant 43 8.10; 44 17.21; 49 3-6; 50 4-9;
of Jehovah 62 13—653). As to whom the prophet
refers in his splendid delineation of
this mysterious being, scholars are hopelessly di-
vided. The personification theory—that the Serv-
ant represents the ideal Israel, Israel as God meant
it to be, as fulfilling its true vocation in the salvation
of the world—is held by those who plead for a con-
sistent use of the phrase throughout the prophecy.
They regard it as inconceivable that the same title
should be applied by the same prophet to two
distinct subjects. Others admit that the chief
difficulty in the way of this theory is to conceive
it, but they maintain that it best explains the use
of the title in the chief passages where it occurs.
The other theory is that there 1s an expansion and
contraction of the idea in the mind of the prophet.
In some passages the title is used to denote the whole
nation; in others it is limited to the pious kernel; and
at last the eonception culminates in an individual,
the ideal yet real Israelite of the future, who shall
fulfil the mission in which the nation failed.

What really divides expositors is the interpre-
tation of 62 13—63. The question is not whether
this passage was fulfilled in Jesus Christ—on this
all Christian expositors are agreed—but whether
the “Servant”’ is in the mind of the prophet merely
the personification of the godly portion of the na-
tiou, or a person yet to come.

May not the unity argument be pressed too hard?
If the Messiah came to be conceived of as aspecific
king while the original promise spoke of a dynasty,
is it so inconceivable that the title “Servant of
Jeh” should be used in an individual as well as in
a collective sense? It is worthy of note, too, that
not only in some parts of this prophecy, but all
through it, the individuality of the sufferer is made
prominent; the collective idea entirely disappears.
The contrast is not between a faithful portion and
the general body of the people, but between the
“Servant” and every single member of the nation.
Moreover, whatever objections may be urged
against the individual interpretation, this view best
explains the doctrine of substitution that runs
through the whole passage. Israel was Jeh’s elect

eople, His messenger of salvation to the Gentiles,
and its faithful remnant suffered for the sins of the
mass; even “Immanuel” shared in the sorrows of
His people. But here the ‘Servant’? makes atone-
ment for the sins of individual Israelites; by his
death they are justified and by his stripes they are
healed. To this great spiritual conception only the
prophet of the exile attains.


It may be added that in the Suffering Servant,
who offers the sacrifice of himself as an expiation
for the sins of the people, prophetic activity and
kingly honor are associated with the priestly func-
tion. After he has been raised from the dead he
becomes the great spiritual teacher of the world—
by his knowledge of God and salvation which he
eommunicates to others he makes many righteous
(63 11; cf 42 1 ff; 49 2; 60 4); and as ‘a reward
for his sufferings he attains to a position of the
highest royal splendor (62 15); 53 12a; cf 49 7).
See SERVANT OF JEHOVAH.

In the Book of Dnl, written to encourage the
Jewish people to stedfastness during the persecution

of Antiochus Epiphanes, the Messianic
4, Trans- hope of the prophets assumes a new
formation form. Here the apocalyptic idea of
of the Pro- the Messiah appears for the first time
phetic Hope in Jewish literature. The coming
into the ruler is represented, not as a deseend-
Apocalyptic ant of the house of David, but as a

person in human form and of super-
human character, through whom God is to estab-
lish His sovereignty upon the earth. In the
prophet’s vision (DnI 7 13 f) one “like unto a son
of man,” k*bhar’énash (not, as in AV, “like the son
of man’’), comes with the clouds of heaven, and is
brought before the ancient of days, and receives
an imperishable kingdom, that all peoples should
serve him.

Scholars are by no means agreed in their interpretation
of the prophecy. In support of the view that the ‘‘one
like unto a son of man"’ is a symbol for the ideal Israel,
appeal is made to the interpretation given of the vision
in vs 18.22.27, according to which dominion is given to
“the saints of the Most High."' Further, as the four
heathen kingdoms are represented by the brute creation,
it would be natural for the higher power, which is to take
their place, to be symbolized by the human form.

But strong reasons may be urged, on the other hand,
for the personal Messianic interpretation of the passage.
A distinction seems to be made between ‘‘one like unto a
son of man" and the saints of the Most High in ver 21,
the saints being there represented as the object of per-
secution from the little horn. Thescene of the judgment
is earth, where the saints already are, and to which the
ancient of days and the ‘‘one like unto a son of man”
descend (vs 22.13). And it is in accordance with the
Interpretation given of the vision in ver 17, where refer-
ence is made to the four kings of the bestial kingdoms,
that the kingdom of the saints, which is to be established
in their place, should also be represented by a royal head.

It may be noted that a new idea is suggested
by this passage, the preéxistenee of the Messiah
before His manifestation.

Hl, The Messiah in the Pre-Christian Age.—
After prophetic inspiration ceased, there was little

in the teaching of the scribes, or in the


1. Post- reconstitution of the kingdom under
prophetic the rule of the high priests, to quicken
Age the ancient hope of the nation. It


would appear from the Apoc that
while the elements of the general expeetation were
still cherished, the specific hope of a preéminent
king of David’s line had grown very dim in the con-
sciousness of the people. In Ecclus (47 11) men-
tion is made of a “covenant of kings and a throne
of glory in Israel which the Lord gave unto David’;
yet even this allusion to the everlasting duration of
the Davidic dynasty is more of the nature of a
historieal statement than the expression of a con-
fident hope. _
In the earlier stages of the Maceabean uprising,
when the struggle was for religious freedom, the
people looked for help to God alone,


2. Macca- and would probably have been content
bean to acknowledge the political suprem-
Times acy of Syria after liberty had been


granted them in 162 BC to worship
God according to their own law and ceremonial.
But the successful effort of the Maccabean leaders


Messiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2042


in achieving political mdependence, while it satis-
fied the aspirations of the people generally ‘until
there should arise a faithful prophet’? (1 Macc 14
41; cf 2 57), brought religious and national ideals
into conflict. The ‘Pious’ (hdstdhim), under the
new name of Pharisees, now became more than
ever devoted to the Law, and repudiated the claim
of a Maccabean to be high priest and his subse-
quent assumption of the royal title, while the Mac-
cabees with their political ambitions took the side
of the aristocracy and alienated the people. The
national spirit, however, had been stirred into fresh
life. Nor did the hope thus quickened lose any of
its vitality when, amid the strife of factions and the
quarrels of the ruling family, Pompey captured
Jerus in 63 BC. The fall of the Hasmonean house,
even more than its ascendancy, led the nation to
set its hope more firmly on God and to look for a
deliverer from the house of David.

The national sentiment evoked by the Maccabees
finds expression in the Apocalyptic lit. of the cen-
tury and a half before Christ.


3. Ay -

l ia In the oldest parts of the Sib Or (3
yP 652-56) there occurs a brief prediction of a
Literature king whom God shall send from the sun,


who shall ‘‘cause the whole earth to cease
from wicked war, killing some aud exacting faithful
oaths from others. And this he will do, not according
to his own counsel, but in ohedience to the beneficent
- decrees of God.’ And in a later part of the same book
(3 49) there is an allusion to ‘‘a pure king who will wield
the sceptre over the whole earth forever.'' It may be the
Messiah also who is represented in the earlier part of the
Book of En (90 37 f) as a glorified man under the symbol
of a white hull with great horns, whichis feared and wor-
shipped by all the other animals (the rest of the religious
comnminity) and into whose likeness they are trans~
formed.

But it is in the Ps Sol, which were composed in
the Pompeian period and reveal their Pharisaic
origin by representing the Hasmoneans as a race
of usurpers, that we have depicted in clear outline
and glowing colors the portrait of the Davidic king
(Ps Sol 17 18). The author looks for a personal
Messiah who, as son of David and king of Israel,
will purge Jerus of sinners, and gather together a
holy people who will all be the “‘sons of their God.”
He shall not conquer with earthly weapons, for the
Lord Himself is his King; he shall smite the earth
with the breath of his mouth; and the heathen of
their own accord shall come to see his glory, bring-
ing the wearied children of Israel as gifts. His
throne shall be established in wisdom and justice,
while he himself shall be pure from sin and made
strong in the Holy Spirit.

It is evident that in these descriptions of the
coming one we have something more than a mere
revival of the ancient hope of a preéminent king of
David’s house. The repeated disasters that over-
took the Jews led to the transference of the national
hope to a future world, and consequently to the
transformation of the Messiah from a mere earthly
king into a being with supernatural attributes.
That this supernatural apocalyptic hope, which
was at least coming to be cherished, exercised an
influence on the national hope is sccn in the Ps
Sol, where emphasis is laid on the striking indi-
viduality of this Davidic king, the moral grandeur
of ae person, and the Divine character of his
rule.

We meet with the apocalyptic conception of the
Messiah in the Similitudes of Enoch (chs 37-71)
and the later apocalypses. Reference may be
made at this point to the Similitudes on account of
their unique expression of Messianic doctrine,
although their pre-Christian date, which Charles
puts not later than 64 BC, is much disputed. The
Messiah who is called “the Anointed,” “the Elect
one,” “the Righteous one,” is represented, though
in some sense man, as belonging to the heavenly


world. His preéxistence is affirmed. He is the
supernatural Son of Man, who will come forth from
His concealment to sit as Judge of all on the throne
of His glory, and dwell on a transformed earth with
the righteous forever. For further details in_the
conceptions of this period, see ApocaLyrtic_Lrr-
ERATURE (JEwisH); EscHaTroLocy oF THE OT.

II, The Messiah in the NT.—To the prevalence
of the Messianic hope among the Jews in the time
of Christ the Gospel records bear ample testimony.
We see from the question of the Baptist that “the
coming one’”’ was expected (Mt 11 3 and ||), while
the people wondered whether John himself were
the Christ (Lk 3 15).

(1) The Messiah as king—In the popular -con-
ception the Messiah was chiefly the royal son of

David who would bring victory and
1. The prosperity to the Jewish nation and
Jewish set up His throne in Jerus. In this
Conception capacity the multitude hailed Jesus

on His entry into the capital (Mt 21
9 and ||); to the Pharisees also the Messiah was the
son of David (Mt 22 42). It would seem that
apocalyptic elements mingled with the national
expectation, for it was supposed that the Messiah
would come forth suddenly from concealment and
attest Himself by miracles (Jn 7 27.31).

But there were spiritual minds who interpreted
the nation’s hope, not in any conventional sense,
but according to their own devout aspirations.
Looking for “the consolation of Israel,” ‘the re-
demption of Jerus,’”’ they seized upon the spiritual
features of the Messianic king and recognized in
Jesus the promised Saviour who would deliver the
nation from its sin (Lk 2 25.30.38; cf 1 68-79).

(2) His prophetic character—From the state-
ments in the Gospels regarding the expectation of
a prophet it is difficult to determine whether the
prophetic function was regarded as belonging to the
Messiah. We learn not only that one of the old
prophets was expected to reappear (Mt 14 2; 16
14 and ||), but also that a preéminent prophet was
looked for, distinct from the Messiah (Jn 1 21.25;
7 40f). But the two conceptions of prophet and
king seem to be identified in Jn 6 14f, where we
are told that the multitude, after recognizing in
Jesus the expected prophet, wished to take Him by
force and make Him a king. It would appear that
while the masses were looking forward to a temporal
king, the expectations of some were molded by
the image and promise of Moses. And to the
woman of Samaria, as to her people, the Messiah
was simply a prophet, who would bring the full light
of Divine knowledge into the world (Jn 4 25). On
the other hand, from Philip’s description of Jesus
we would naturally infer that he saw in Him whom
he had found the union of a prophet like unto
Moses and the Messianic king of the prophetical
books (Jn 1 45).

(3) The title “Son of God.’’—It cannot be doubted
that the ‘Son of God” was used as a Messianic title
by the Jews in the time of Our Lord. The high
priest in presence of the Sanhedrin recognized it
as such (Mt 26 63). It was applied also in its
official sense to Jesus by His disciples: John the
Baptist (Jn 1 34), Nathanael (1 49), Mary (11 27),
Peter (Mt 16 16, thoughmnot in ||). This Messianic
use was based on Ps 2 7; cf 2S 7 14. The title
as given to Jcsus by Peter in his confession, “‘the
Son of the living God,” is suggestive of something
higher than a mere official dignity, although its full
significance in the unique sense in which Jesus
claimed it could scarcely have been apprehended
by the disciples till after His resurrection.

(1) His claim—The claim of Jesus to be the
Messiah is written on the face of the evangelic his-
tory. But while He accepted the title, He stripped


2043


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Messiah


it of its political and national significance and filled | ceived His Messiahship and the nature and extent


it with an cue and uueral content. The
. ewish expectation of a great kin
2. Attitude who would restore the throne 66 David
of Jesus to and free the nation from a foreign
the Mes- yoke was interpreted by Jesus as of one
siahship who would deliver God’s people from
‘ spiritual foes and found a universal
kingdom of love and peace.
_ (2) His delay in making it.—To prepare the Jew-
ish mind for His transformation of the national
hope Jesus delayed putting forth His claim before
the multitude till His triumphal entry into Jerus,
which, be it noted, He made in such a way as to
justify His interpretation of the Messiah of the
prophets, while He delayed emphasizing it to His
disciples till the memorable scene at Caesarea
Philippi when He drew forth Peter’s confession.

(3) “The Son of Man.”—But he sought chiefly to
secure the acceptance of Himself in all His lowliness
as the true Messianic king by His later use of His
self-designation as the “Son of Man.” While
“Son of Man” in Aram., bar ndsha’, may mean
simply ‘‘man,” an examination of the chief passages
in which the title occurs shows that Jesus applied
it to Himself in a unique sense. That He had the
passage in Dnl in His mind is evident from the
phrases He employs in describing His future coming
(Mk 8 38; 13 26 and ||; 14 62 and ||). By this
apocalyptic use of the title He put forward much
more clearly His claim to be the Messiah of national
expectation who would come in heavenly glory.
But He used the title also to announce the tragic
destiny that awaited Him (Mk 8 31). This He
could do without any contradiction, as He regarded
His death as the beginning of His Messianic reign.
And those passages in which He refers to the Son
of Man giving His life a ransom “for many” (Mt
20 28 and ||) and going “as it is written of him”
(Mt 26 24 and ||), as well as Lk 22 37, indicate
that He interpreted Isa 53 of Himself in His Mes-
sianic character. By His death He would complete
His Messianic work and inaugurate the kingdom of
God. Thus by the help of the title ‘Son of Man”
Jesus songht, toward the close of His ministry, to
explain the seeming contradiction between His
earthly life and the glory of His Messianic kingship.

It may be added that Our Lord’s use of the phrase
implies what the Gospels suggest (Jn 12 34), that
the “Son of Man,”’ notwithstanding the references
in Dnl and the Similitudes of. Enoch (if the pre-
Christian date be accepted), was not regarded by
the Jews generally as a Messianic title. For He
could not then have applied it, as He does, to Him-
self before Peter’s confession, while maintaining
His reserve in regard to His claims to be the Mes-
siah. Many scholars, however, hold that the “Son
of Man” was already a Messianic title before Our
Lord employed it in His conversation with the
disciples at Caesarea Philippi, and regard the earlier
passages in which it occurs as inserted out of
chronological order, or the presence of the title in
them either as a late insertion, or as due to the
ambiguity of the Aramaic. See Son or Man.

The thought of a suffering Messiah who would
atone for sin was alien to the Jewish mind. This

is evident from the conduct, not only


3. The ‘of the opponents, but of the followers
Christian of Jesus (Mt 16 22; 17 23). While
Trans- His disciples believed Him to be the
formation Messiah, they could not understand


His allusions to His sufferings, and
regarded His death as the extinction of all their
hopes (Lk 18 34; 24 21). But after His resur-
rection and ascension they were led, by the im-
pression His personality and teaching had made
upon them, to see how entirely they had miscon-


of His Messianic kingdom (Lk 24 31; Acts 2 36.
38f). They were confirmed, too, in their spiritual
conceptions when they searched into the ancient
prophecies in the light of the cross. In the mys-
terious form of the Suffering Servant they beheld
the Messianic king on His way to His heavenly
throne, conquering by the power of His atoning
sacrifice and bestowing all spiritual blessings (Acts

3 13.18-21.26; 4 27.30; 8 35; 10 36-43).
(1) Future manifestation—New features were
now added to the Messiah in accordance with Jesus’
own teaching. He had ascended to


4. New His Father and become the heavenly
Elements king. But all things were not yet
Added put under Him. It was therefore seen


that the full manifestation of His
Messiahship was reserved for the future, that He
would. return in glory to fulfil His Messianic office
and complete His Messianic reign.

(2) Divine personality—Higher views of His
personality were now entertained. He is declared
to be the Son of God, not in any official, but in a
unique sense, as coequal with the Father (Jn 1 1;
Rom 1 4.7; 1 Cor 1 3, etc). His preéxistence
is affirmed (Jn 1 1; 2 Cor 8 9); and when He
comes again in his Messianic glory, He will exercise
the Divine function of Universal Judge (Acts 10
42: 17 30f, etc).

(3) Heavenly priesthood. —The Christian con-
ception of the Messianic king who had entered into
His glory through suffering and death carried with
it the doctrine of the Messianic priesthood. But it
took some time for early Christian thought to ad-
vance from the new discovery of the combination
of humiliation and glory in the Messiah to concen-
trate upon His heavenly life. While the preaching
of the first Christians was directed to show from the
Scriptures that “Jesus is the Christ”’ and necessarily
involved the ascription to Him of many functions
characteristic of the true priest, it was reserved for
the author of the Ep. to the He to set forth this
aspect of His work with separate distinctness and
to apply to Him the title of our “great high priest’’
(He 4 14). As the high priest on the Day of
Atonement not only sprinkled the blood upon the
altar, but offered the sacrifice, so it was now seen
that by passing into the heavens and presenting to
God the offering He had made of Himself on earth,
Jesus had fulfilled the high-priestly office.

Thus the ideal of the Heb prophets and poets is
amply fulfilled in the person, teaching and work of

Jesus of Nazareth. Apologists may


5. Fulfil- often err in supporting the argument
ment in from prophecy by an extravagant
Jesus symbolism and a false exegesis; but


they are right in the contention that

the essential elements in the OT conception—the
Messianic king who stands in a unique relation to
Jeh as His ‘‘Son,” and who will exercise universal
dominion; the supreme prophet who will never be
superseded; the priest forever—are gathered up
and transformed by Jesus in a way the ancient seers
never dreamed of. Asthelast and greatest prophet,
the suffering Son of Man, and the sinless Saviour
of the world, He meets humanity’s deepest longings
for Divine knowledge, human sympathy, and
spiritual deliverance; and as the unique Son of
od, who came to reveal the Father, He rules over
the hearts of men by the might of eternal love.
No wonder that the NT writers, like Jesus Himself,
saw references to the Messiah in OT passages which
would not be conceded by a historical interpretation.
While recognizing the place of the old covenant in
the history of salvation, they sought to discover
in the light of the fulfilment in Jesus the meaning
of the OT which the Spirit of God intended to con-


Metal
Micah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2044


vey, the Divine, saving thoughts which constitute
its essence. d to us, as to the early Christians,
“the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy”
(Rev 19 10). To Him, hidden in the bosom of the
ages, all the scattered rays of prophecy pointed;
and from Him, in His revealed and risen splendor,
shine forth upon the world the light and power of
God’s love and truth. And through the history
and experience of His people He is bringing to
larger realization the glory and passion of Israel’s
Messianic hope.


Lirerature.—Drummond, The Jewish Messiah;
Stanton, The Jewish and the Christian Messiah; Riebm,
Messianic Prophecy; Delitzsch, Messianic Prophecies;
von Orelli, OT Prophecy; A. B. Davidson, OT Prophecy;
Schultz, OT Theology; Schtirer, H/JP, div 11, vol II, sec.
29, ‘'The Messianic Hope’’; Westcott, Intro to the Study
of the Gospels, Ch ii, ‘‘ The Jewish Doctrine of Messiah”’;
Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah,
book II, ch v, “What Messiah Did the Jews Expect ?”;
E. F. Scott, The Kingdom and the Messiah; Fairweather,
The Background of the Gospels; arts. in DB, ADB, EB,
DCG. For further list see Riehm and Schiirer; see also
APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE.

“ JAMES CRICHTON

METAL, met’al aun, hashmal; Aexrpov,
élektron; AV amber; Ezk 8 2, RVm “amber”):
The substance here intended is a matter of great
uncertainty. In Egypt bronze was called hesmen,
which may be connected with the Heb hashmal;
the Gr élekiron too has generally been accepted as an
alloy of gold or silver or other metals, but this is
far from certain. Professor Ridgeway (EB, I, cols.
134-36) has conclusively shown, however, that
amber was well known in early times and that there
is nothing archaeologically improbable in the read-
ing of AY.

Amber is a substance analogous to the vegetable
resins, and is in all probability derived from extinct
coniferous trees. The best or yellow variety was obtained
by the ancients from the coasts of the Baltic where it is
still found more plentifully than elsewhere. A red
amber bas been found in South Europe and in Phoenicia.
From earliest times amber has been prized as an orna-
ment; Homer apparently refers to it twice. Amber
bracelets and necklaces are highly prized by the Orientals
—esp. Jewesses—today, and they are credited with
medicinal properties. See ELectrum; Stonss, Prs-


cIOUS.
E. W. G. MastTerMan

METALLURGY, met’al-tr-ji: There are numer-
ous Bib. references which describe or allude to the
various metallurgical operations. In Job 28 I
occurs PPT, zakak, trd ‘‘refine,” lit. “strain.” This
undoubtedly refers to the process of separating the
gold from the earthy material as pictured in the
Egyp sculptures (Thebes and Beni Hassan) and
described by Diodorus. The ore was first crushed
to the size of lentils and then ground to powder in a
handmill made of granite slabs. This powder was
spread upon a slightly inclined stone table and
water was poured over it to wash away the earthy
materials. The comparatively heavy gold particles
were then gathered from the table, dried, and
melted in a closed crucible with lead, salt and bran,
and kept in a molten condition for 5 days, at the
end of which time the gold came out pure.

The alloying of gold and silver with copper, lead
or tin, and then removing the base metals by
cupellation is used figuratively in Ezk 22 18.22
to denote the coming judgment of Jeh. Again in
Isa 1 25 it indicates chastening. The fact that the
prophets used this figure shows that the people
were familiar with the common metallurgical] oper-
ations. See REFINER. James A. Patcu


METALS, met’alz (Lat metallum, “metal,”
; Gr péraddov, métalion, “mine”’): The
metals known by the ancients were copper, gold,
iron, lead, silver and tin. Of these copper, gold and
silver were probably first used, because, occurring
in a metallic state, they could be separated easily


from earthy materials by mechanical processes.
Evidence is abundant of the use of these three
metals by the people of remotest antiquity. Lead
and tin were later separated from their ores. Tin
was probably used in making bronze before it was
known as a separate metal, because the native
oxide, cassiterite, was smelted together with the
copper ore to get bronze. Because of the difficul-
ties in getting it separated from its compounds, iron
was the last in the list to be employed. In regard
to the sources of these metals in Bible times we have
few Bib. references to guide us. Some writers point
to Dt 8 9, ‘‘a land whose stones are iron,” etc, as
referring to Pal. Pal can be disregarded, however,
as a source of metals, for it possesses no mineral
deposits of any importance. If it was expected
that Israel would possess Lebanon also, then the
description would be more true. There is some
iron ore which was anciently worked, although
present-day engineers have declared it not to be
extensive enough to pay for working. There is a
little copper ore (chalcopyrite, malachite, azurite).
In the Anti-Lebanon and Northern Syria, esp. in
the country E. of Aleppo now opened up by the
Bagdad Railroad and its branches, there are abun-
dant deposits of copper. This must have been the
land of Nuha&dée referred to in the Am Tab. If
Zec 6 1 is really a reference to copper, which is
doubtful, then the last-mentioned source was prob-
ably the one referred to. No doubt Cyprus (Alasia
in Am Tab [?]) furnished the ancients with much
copper, as did also the Sinaitic peninsula.

Tarshish is mentioned (Ezk 27 12) as a source
of silver, iron, tin, and lead. Thisname may belong
to Southern Spain. If so it corresponds to the gen-
eral belief that the Phoenicians brought a consider-
able proportion of the metals used in Pal from that
country. Havilah (Gen 2 11), Ophir (I K 10 11),
Sheba (Ps 72 15) are mentioned as sources of gold.
These names probably refer to districts of Arabia.
Whether Arabia produced all the gold or simply
passed it on from more remote sources is a question
(see GoLp).

From the monuments in Egypt we learn that that
country was a producer of gold and silver. In fact,
the ancient mines and the ruins of the miners’ huts
are still to be seen in the desert regions of upper
Egypt. In the Sinaitic peninsula are deposits of
copper, lead, gold, and silver. The most remark-
able of the ancient Egyp mines are situated here
(J. Sarabit el Khadim, U. Sidreh, W. Magharah).
The early Egyp kings (Snefern, Amenemhat II,
and others) not only mined the metals, but cut on
the walls of the mines inscriptions describing their
methods of mining. Here, as in upper Egypt, are
remains of the buildings where miners lived or
carried out their metallurgical operations. It is
hardly to be conceived that the large deposits of
lead (galena) in Asia Minor were unworked by the
ancients. No nearer deposits of tin than those in
Southeastern Europe have yet been found. (For
further information on metals see separate articles.)

James A. Parc

METAL WORKING. See Crarts, 10; Mrntna.


METE, mét (1, madhadh): ‘To measure,”
either with a utensil of dry measure, as in Ex 16
18, or to measure with a line or measure of length,
as in Ps 60 6; 108 7; Isa 40 12. In Isa 18 2.7
it is the rendering of kaw, kaw, lit. ‘fine-line,”’ i.e.
measuring line, referring to the Ethiopians as a
nation that measured off other peoples for destruc-
tion and trod them down, asin RV. It is regarded
by some as signifying strength, being cognate with


the Arab. ee kawi, “strong.” For mete of


2045


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Metal
Micah


Mt 7 2 and || passages in Mk 4 24; Lk 6 38, see
Measure. H. Porter
METERUS, mé-té’rus. See Barrerus.
METEYARD, mét’yard (WT, middah, “‘a meas-
ure,’ Lev 19 35): Has this meaning in AV and
RV, but in ARV, “measures of length.”


METHEG-AMMAH, mé-theg-am’a, meth-eg-
am’a (TART INDE methegh ha-ammah, “bridle of
the metropolis’; LXX thy adopiopévyy, tén apho-
risménen): It is probable that the place-name M.
in 2 8 8 1 AV should be rendered as in RV, “the
bridle of the mother city,” i.c. Gath, since we find
in the | passage in 1 Ch 18 1 TRIB MA, gath
ubhnatheha, ‘Gath and her daughters,” i.e. daughter
towns. The LXX has an entirely different read-
ing: “and David took the tribute out of the hand
of the Philis,” showing that they had a different
text from what we now have in the Heb. The
text is evidently corrupt. If a place is intended its
site is unknown, but it must have been in the Phili
plain and in the vicinity of Gath. H. Porter

METHUSAEL, mé-thi’sd-el. See MeruusHaz..

METHUSELAH, wmé-thi’séla, me-thi’se-la
(mean, mthishelah, ‘‘man of the javelin”): A
descendant of Seth, the son of Enoch, and father of
Lamech (Gen 6 21ff; 1@Ch13; Lk 3 37).
Methuselah is said to have lived 969 years; he is
therefore the oldest of the patriarchs and the oldest
man. It is doubtful whether these long years do
not include the duration of a family or clan.


METHUSHAEL, mé-thi’shi-el ONWIN'?, m*-
thisha@’él): A descendant of Cain, and father of
Lamech in the Cainite genealogy (Gen 4 18). The
meaning of the name is doubtful. Dillmann sug-
gested ‘“suppliant or man of God.”


MEUNIM, mé-i’nim (AV Mehunim). See Maon.


MEUZAL, mé-i’zal OTN, m’azdl, or >TINA,
m@tzal): A word which occurs only in AVm of
Ezk 27 19. The rendering in AV text is “going
to and fro,” in RV text “with yarn,” but in RVm, in
agreement with BDB and most modern authorities,
Meuzal is regarded as a proper noun with a prefixed
preposition, and is rendered “from Uzal.”’ See Uzau.


ME-ZAHAB, mez’a-hab, me-za’hab (INT "A,
mé 2éhabh, ‘waters of gold’; B, MafooB, Maizodb,
A, MefesB, Mezodb): Grandfather of Mehetabel,
the wife of Hadar, the last-mentioned ‘‘duke” of
Edom descended from Esau (Gen 36 39). The
Jewish commentators made much play with this
name. Abarbanel, e.g., says he was “rich and
great, so that on this account he was called Meza-
hab, for the gold was in his house as water.” The
name, however, may denote a place, in which case
it may be identical with Dizahab.


MEZARIM, mez’a-rim (NORTH).
tronomy, II, 13, (1).


MEZOBAITE, mé-26'ba-it (TMZYAT, ha-m*-
cabhayah): The designation of Jaasiel, one of Da-
vid’s heroes (1 Ch 11 47).

MIAMIN, mi’a-min.


MIBHAR, mib’har ("022 , mibhhar, “‘choice’’[?]):
According to 1 Ch 11 38, the name of one of David’s


See As-


See Misamin; Miniamin.


heroes. No such name, however, occurs in the ||
passage (2 S 23 36). A comparison of the two
records makes it probable that mibhhar is a cor-
ruption of miccabhah=“‘from Zobah,” which com-
pletes the designation of the former name, Nathan
of Zobah. The concluding words of the verse,
Ben- Hagri=“‘the son of Hagri,” will then appear
as a misreading of Bani ha-gadhi=“Bani, the Gad-
ite,” thus bringing the two records into accord.


MIBSAM, mib’sam (OWA, mibhsam, ‘“‘per-
fume’’[?]):

(1) A son of Ishmael (Gen 26 13; 1 Ch 1 29).

(2) ASimeonite (1 Ch 4 25).


MIBZAR, mib’zar (1¥3A, mibhear, “a fortress”):
An Edomite chief, AV ‘‘duke” (Gen 36 42; 1 Ch
1 58). According to Eusebius, Mibzar is connected
with Mibsara, a considerable village subject to
Petra and still existing in his time. Cf Holzinger
and Skinner in respective comms. on Gen.


MICA, mi’ka (SD, mikha’): A variant of the
name Micah, and probably like it a contracted
form of Micatau (qg.v.). In AV it is sometimes
spelled “Micha.”

(1) A.son of Merib-baal or Mephibosheth (2 8
9 12, AV “Micha’). In 1 Ch 8 34, he is called
“Micah.”

(2) The son of Zichri (1 Ch 9 15). In Neh 11
17 (AV “Micha”), he is designated “the son of
Zabdi,” and in Neh 12 35, his name appears as
‘Micaiah [AV ‘“‘Michaiah”], the son of Zaccur.”’

(3) One of the signatories of the Covenant (Neh
10 11, AV “Micha”). Joun A. Les


MICAH, mi’ka (33°, mikhah, contracted from
WWI" , mikhayaha, “who is like Jeh?”’; B, Meaxatas,
Meichaias, A, Mux4, Michéd; sometimes in AV
spelled Michah):

(1) The chief character of an episode given as an
appendix to the Book of Jgs (Jgs 17,18). Micah,
a dweller in Mt. Ephraim, was the founder and
owner of a small private sanctuary with accessories
for worship (17 1-5), for which he hired as priest
a Judaean Levite (17 7-13). Five men sent in
quest of new territory by the Danites, who had
failed to secure a settlement upon their own tribal
allotment, visited Micah’s shrine, and obtained
from his priest an oracle favoring their quest (18
1-6). They then went on until they reached the
town of Laish in the extreme N., and deeming it
suitable for their purpose, they returned to report
to their fellow-tribesmen. These at once dis-
patched thither 600 armed men, accompanied by
their families (18 7-12). Passing Micah’s abode,
they appropriated his idols and his priest, and when
their owner pursued, he was insulted and threat-
ened (18 13-26). They took Laish, destroyed it
with its inhabitants and rebuilt it under the name
of Dan. There they established the stolen images,
and appointed Micah’s Levite, Jonathan, a grand-
son of Moses (AV “Manasseh”), priest of the new
sanctuary, which was long famous in Israel (18 27—
31).

The purpose of the narrative is evidently to set
forth the origin of the Danite shrine and priesthood.
A few peculiarities in the story have led some critics
—e.g., Moore, “Judges,” in [CC and “Judges” in

‘BOT; Budde, Richter—to regard it as composite.
Wellhausen, however, considers that the peculiarities
are editorial and have been introduced for the pur-
pose of smoothing or explaining the ancient record.
Most authorities are agreed that the story is nearly
contemporary with the events which it narrates, and
that itis of the highest value for the study of the


Micah
Michael


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2046


history of Israclitish worship. See also Junaas;
Dan; PrRiestHOop.
(2) A Reubenite, whose descendant Beerah was
carried into exile by Tiglath-pileser (1 Ch 6 5).
(8) A son of Merib-baal (1 Ch 8 34f; 9 40f).
See Mica, (1).
(4) A Kohathite Levite (1 Ch 23 20, 24 24f).
(5) The father of Abdon, one of Josiah’s messen-
gers to the prophetess Huldah (2 Ch 34 20). In
the || passage (2 K 22 12), the reading is ‘‘Achbor
the son of Micaiah,” AV “Michaiah.”
(6) A Simeonite mentioned in the Book of Jth
(Jth 6 15).
(7) The prophet, called, in Jer 26 18 (Heb),
“Micaiah the Morashtite.”’ See special article.
(8) The son of Imlah. See Micaiay, (7).
Joun A. Less
MICAH (M273, mikhdn; Mexatas, Meichaias;
an abbreviation for Micaiah [Jer 26 18], and this
again of the longer form of the word
1. Name in 2 Ch177; cf 1 K 22 8): The
and Person name signifies “who is like Jeh?”; cf
Michael, equal to “who is like El?”
(i.e. God). As this name occurs not infrequently,
he is called the ‘‘Morashtite,” i.e. born in More-
sheth. He calls his native city, in 1 14, More-
sheth-gath, because it was situated near the Phili
city of Gath. According to Jerome and Eusebius,
this place was situated not far eastward from Eleu-
theropolis. The prophet is not to be confounded
with Micah ben Imla, in1 K 22 8, an older prophet
of the Northern Kingdom.
According to Jer 26 18, Micah lived and prophe-
sied in the reign of Hezekiah; according to Mic 1 1,
he labored also under Jotham and
2. Time Ahaz. This superscription has, it
of Micah must be said, great similarity to Isa
1 1 and is probably of a later date.
Yet the contents of his first discourse confirm the
fact that he prophesied, not only before the de-
struction of Samaria, but also before the reforma-
tion of Hezekiah (cf Mic 1 5). Accordingly, ch
1 is probably a discourse spoken already under
Abaz, and chs 2 to 6 under Hezekiah. No mention
is any longer made of Samaria in chs 2to0 6. This
city has already been destroyed; at any rate, is
being besieged. Accordingly, these discourses were
pronounced after the year 722 BC, but earlier than
701 BC, as the reformation of Hezekiah had not yet
been entirely completed. It is impossible to date
exactly these discourses, for this reason, that all
the separate sentences and addresses were after-
ward united into one well-edited collection, prob-
ably by Micah himself. The attacks that have
been made by different critics on the authenticity
of chs 4 and 6 have but a poor foundation. Itisa
more difficult task to explain the dismal picture of
the conditions of affairs as described in chs 6 and 7
as originating in the reign of Hezekiah. For this
reason, scholars have thought of ascribing them to
the reigns of Jotham and Ahaz. But better reasons
speak for placing them in the degenerate reign of
Manasseh. There is no reason for claiming that
Micah no longer prophesied in the times of this
king. It is true that a number of critics declare
that Micah did not write these chapters, esp. the
so-called psalm in 7 7-20, which, it is -claimed,
clearly presupposes the destruction of Jerus (7 11)!
But it is a fact that Micah did really and distinctly
predict this destruction and the exile that followed
this event in 3 12; and accordingly he could in this
concluding hymn very easily have looked even
beyond this period. :
Micah is, then, a younger contemporary of Isaiah,
and, like the latter, he prophesied in Judah, per-
haps also in Jerus. To the writings of this great
prophet his book bears a close resemblance both in


form and in contents, although he did not, as was
the case with Isaiah, come into personal contact
with the kings and make his influence
3. Relation felt in political affairs. The statement
toIsaiah in Mic 4 1ff is found almost literally
in Isa 2 2ff. Opinions differ as to
who is to be credited with the original, Isaiah or
Micah. In the latter, the passage seems to suit
better into the connection, while in Isa 2 it begins
the discourse abruptly, as though the prophet
had taken it from some other source. However,
Mic 4 4f is certainly a sentence added by Micah,
who, accordingly, was not the first to formulate the
prophecy itself. It is possible that both prophets
took it from some older prophet. But it is also
conceivable that Isaiah is the author. In this
case, he placed this sentence at the head of his
briefer utterances when he composed his larger
group of addresses in chs 2-4, for the purpose of
expressing the high purposes which God has in
mind in His judgments.
Micah combats in his discourses, as does Isaiah,
the heathenish abuses which had found their way
into the cult, not only in Samaria, but
4. Contents also in Judah and Jerus, and which
of the the reformation of Hezekiah could
Prophecies counteract only in part and not at
all permanently (cf 1 5-7; 6 11-13;
6 7.16). Further, he rebukes them for the social
injustice, of which particularly the powerful and
the great in the land were guilty (2 1 ff; 3 2f.10f);
and the dishonesty and unfaithfulness in business
and in conduct in general (cf 6 10ff; 7 2 ff). At
all times Micah, in doing this, was compelled to
defend himself against false prophets, who slighted
these charges as of little importance, and threat-
ened and antagonized the prophet in his announce-
ments of impending evil (cf 2 5ff.11 ff). In pro-
nounced opposition to these babblers and their pre-
dictions of good things, Micah announces the
judgment through the enemies that are approach-
ing, and he even goes beyond Isaiah in the open
declaration that Jerus and the temple are to be
destroyed (3 12; 4 10; 61). The first-mentioned
passage is also confirmed by the event reported in
Jer 26 17 ff. The passage 4 10, where in a sur-
prising way Babylon is mentioned as the place of
the exile, is for this reason regarded as unauthentic
by the critics, but not justly. Micah predicts also
the deliverance from Babylon and the reéstablish-
ment of Israel in Jerus, and declares that this is to
take place through a King who shall come forth
from the deepest humiliation of the house of David
and shall be born in Bethlehem, and who, like
David, originally a simple shepherd boy, shall
later become the shepherd of the people, and shall
make his people happy in peace and prosperity.
Against this King the last great onslaught of the
Gentiles will avail nothing (4 11-18; 5 4 ff). As
a matter of course, he will purify the country of all
heathen abuses (5 9 ff). In the description of this
ruler, Micah again agrees with Isaiah, but without
taking the details from that prophet.
The form of the prophecies of Micah, notwith-
standing their close connection with those of his
great contemporary, has nevertheless
6. Form its unique features. There is a pro-
ofthe | nounced formal similarity between
Prophecies Mic 1 10ff and Isa 10 28 ff. Still
more than is the case in Isaiah, Micah
makes use of the names of certain places. Witty
references, which we can understand only in part, are
not lacking in this connection; e.g. Lachish, the “city
of horses,” is made the object of a play on words.
(Recently in the ruins of this city a large wall has
been unearthed.) The style of Micah is vigorous
and vivid. He loved antitheses. It is a peculiarity


2047


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Micah
Michael


of his style that he indulges in dramatic interrup-
tions and answers; eg. 2 5.12; 31; 6 6-8; 7
14f. He also loves historical references; as e.g.
113.15; 5 5; 6416.16; 7 20. He makes fre-
quent use of the image of the shepherd, 2 12; 3 2f;
46; 6 3ff; 7 14. Thefact that these peculiarities
appear in all parts of his little book is an argument
in favor of its being from one author. He is superior


to Isaiah in his tendency to idyllic details, and esp. |


in a deeper personal sympathy, which generally finds
expression in an elegiac strain. His lyrical style
ey takes the form of a prayer or of a psalm (cf
ch 7).


Literatury.—c. P. Casparl, Ueber Micha den Moras-
thiten, 1851; T. K. Cheyne, Micah with Notes and Intro-
duction, 1882; V. Ryssel, Untersuchungen uber Textgestalt
und Echthett des Buches Micha, 1887. See the eomms. on
the 12 minor prophets by Hitzig, Ewald, C. F. Keil, P.
Kleinert, W. Nowack, C. v. Orelli, K. Marti; Panl Haupt,
PS of Micah, 1910; Pusey, The Minor Prophets,


C. von ORELLI

MICAIAH, mi-ka’ya, mi-ki’a (739, mi-
khayahi, “who is like Jeh?”; Meixatas, Meichatas):
A frequently occurring OT name occasionally con-
tracted to Mica or Micau (q.v.). In AV it is
usually spelled “Michaiah.”

(1) The mother of Abijah (2 Ch 13 2, AV
“Michaiah”). The || passage (1 K 15 2; cf 2
Ch 11 20) indicates that Michaiah here is a cor-
ruption of MaacauH (q.v.) (so LXX).

(2) The father of Achbor (2 K 22 12, AV
“Michaiah”). See Mrcan, (5).

(3) A prince of Judah sent by Jehoshaphat to
teach in the cities of Judah (2 Ch 177, AV
“Michaiah’’).

(4) The son of Zaccur, a priestly processionist
at the dedication of the wall (Neh 12 35, AV
“Michaiah”’).

(5) A priestly processionist at the dedication of
the wall (Neh 12 41; wanting in LXX).

(6) The canonical prophet. See Muican, (7),
and special article.

(7) The son of Imlah, the chief character of an
important episode near the end of the reign of Ahab
(1 K 22 4-28 || 2 Ch 18 3-27). In the Heb, his
name appears once in the contracted form “Micah”
(2 Ch 18 14). Ahab had suggested to his visitor,
Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, that they should under-
take a joint campaign against Ramoth-gilead.
Jehoshaphat politely acquiesced, but asked that
the mind of Jeh should first be ascertained. Ahab
forthwith summoned the official prophets, to the
number of 400, into the royal presence. Obse-
quious to their master, they, both by oracular
utterance and by the symbolic action of their
leader, Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah, gave the
king a favorable answer. Their ready chorus of
assent seems to have made Jehoshaphat suspicious,
for he pleaded that further guidance be sought.
Micaiah, for whom Ahab, then, with evident
reluctance, sent, at first simply repeated the favor-
able response of the 400; but adjured by the king
to speak the whole truth, he dropped his ironical
tone, and in sad earnest described a vision of
disaster. Ahab endeavored to lessen the effect, of
this oracle by pettishly complaining that Micaiah
was always to him a prophet of evil, The latter
thereupon related an impressive vision of the
heavenly court, whence he had seen a lying spirit
dispatched by Jeh to the prophets in order to
bring about Ahab’s delusion and downfall. In
answer to a rude challenge from Zedekiah, who
acted as spokesman for the 400, Micaiah confident-
ly appealed to the issue for proof of the truth of
his prediction, and was promptly committed to
prison by the king.


The narrative is exceedingly vivid and of the utmost
interest to students of Israclitish propheey. Several of its
detalis have given rise to discussion, and the questions:
How far were the prophet's visions objective? How
far did he admit the inspiration of his opponents? Is
the Divine action deseribed eonsistent with the holy
character of Jeh? have oeeasloned difficulty to many.
But their difficulty arises largely either beeause of their
Christian viewpoint, or because of their hard and me-
ehanieal theory of prophetic inspiration. Mieaiah's
position was a delicate one. Foreboding or foreseeing
disaster, he did his best to avert lt. This he could do
only by weanlng the king from the influenee of the 400
time-serving prophets. He sought to gain his end; first,
by an. ironical acquiescence in their favorable answer;
then, by a short oracle forecasting disaster esp. to Ahab;
and, these means having failed, by discrediting in the
most solemn manner the courtly prophets opposed to
him. Thus regarded, his vision contains no admission
of thelr equal inspiration; rather is it an emphatie
deelaratlon that these men were uttering falsehood in
Jch's name, therehy endangering their country's safety
and their king's life. Their obsequlous time-serviee
made them fit forerunners of the false prophets denouneed
by Jeremiah (Jer 23 9-40) and by Ezekiel (Ezk 13
1-15). The frank anthropomorphism of the vision
need be no stumbling-block if allowed to drop into its
proper place as the literary device of a prophet intensely
eonseious of his own inspiration and as whole-heartedly
patriotie as those opposed to him. :


The record ends very abruptly, giving no account
of Micaiah’s vindication when at length the course
of events brought about the fulfilment of his pre-
diction. The closing words, “Hear, ye peoples, all
of you” (1 K 22 28 || 2 Ch 18 27), a quotation of
Mic 1 2, are an evident interpolation by some late
scribe who confused the son of Imlah with the
contemporary of Isaiah.


For fuller treatment see EB, HDB, and comms. on
K and Ch.


MICE, mis. See Mouse.


MICHA, mi’ka, MICHAH, mi’ka. See Mica;
Mica.


Joun A. Lezs


MICHAEL, mi‘kd-el, mi’kel Oxon, mikha@ al,
“who is like God?” Mxaa, Michaél):
see father of Sethur the Asherite spy (Nu


(2) (8) Two Gadites (1 Ch 5 13.14).

(4) A name in the genealogy of Asaph (1 Ch 6
40 [Heb 25]).

(5) A son of Izrahiah of Issachar (1 Ch 7 3).

(6) A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 16).

(7) A Manassite who ceded to David at Ziklag
(1 Ch 12 20).

(8) The father of Omri of Issachar (1 Ch 27 18).

(9) A son of King Jehoshaphat (2 Ch 21 2).

(10) The father of Zebediah, an exile who re-
turned with Ezra (zr 8 8 || 1 Esd 8 34).

(11) “The archangel” (Jude ver 9). Probably
also the unnamed archangel of 1 Thess 4 16 is
Michael. In the OT he is mentioned by name only
inDnl. Heis ‘‘one of the chief princes” (Dnl 10 13),
the “prince” of Israel (10 21), “the great prince”
(12 1); perhaps also “the prince of the host”
(8 11). In all these passages Michael appears
as the heavenly patron and champion of Israel; as
the watchful guardian of the people of God against
all foes earthly or devilish. In the uncanonical
apocalyptic writings, however, Jewish angelology
is further developed. In them Michael frequently
appears and exercises functions similar to those
which are ascribed to him in Dnl. He is the first
of the “four presences that stand before God’'—
Michael, Gabriel, Raphael and Uriel or Phanuel
(En 9 1; 40 9). In other apocryphal books and
even elsewhere in En, the number of archangels is
given as 7 (En 20 1-7; Tob 12 15; ef also Rev
8 2). Among the many characterizations of
Michael the following may be noted: He is “the
merciful and long-suffering’ (En 40 9; 68 2.3),


1


Michah
Midianitish


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2048


“the mediator and intercessor” (Asc Isa, Lat VS
9 23; Test. XITP, Levi 5; Dan 6). It is he who
opposed the devil in a dispute concerning Moses’
body (Jude ver 9). This passage, according to
most modern authorities, is derived from the
apocryphal Asm M (see Charles’s ed, 105-10). It
is Michael also who leads the angelic armies in the
war in heaven against “the old serpent, he that is
called the Devil and Satan” (Rev 12 7 ff). Accord-
ing to Charles, the supplanting of the ‘‘child” by
the archangel is an indication of the Jewish origin
of this part of the book.

The earlier Protestant scholars usually identified
Michael with the preincarnate Christ, finding sup-
port for their view, not only in the juxtaposition of
the “child” and the archangel in Rev 12, but also
in the attributes ascribed to him in Dnl (for a full
discussion see Hengstenberg, Offenbarung, I, 611-
22, and an interesting survey in English by Dr.
Douglas in Fairbairn’s BD). Joun A. Lezs


MICHAH, mi’ka.
MICHAIAH, mi-ka’ya, mi-ki’a.


MICHAL, mi’kal (o2"9, mikhal, contracted from
S22, mikha’él, “Michael” [q.v.]; MedxsA, Mel-
chél): Saul’s younger daughter (1 S 14 49), who,
falling in love with David after his victory over
Goliath (1 S 18 20), was at last,on the payment of
double the dowry asked, married to him (1 8 18
27). Her love was soon put to the test. When Saul
in his jealonsy sent for David, she was quick to dis-
cern her husband’s danger, connived at his escape,
and not only outwitted and delayed the messengers,
but afterward also soothed her father’s jealous
wrath (1 8 19 11-17). When David was out-
lawed and exiled, she was married to Palti or Paltiel,
the son of Laish of Gallim (1 8 25 44), but was,
despite Palti’s sorrowful protest, forcibly restored
to David on his return as king (2 8 3 14-16).
The next scene in which she figures indicates that
her love had cooled and had even turned to disdain,
for after David’s enthusiastic joy and ecstatic
dancing before the newly restored Ark of the
Covenant, she received him with bitter and scorn-
ful mockery (2 S 6 20), and the record closes with
the fact that she remained all her life childless (2 S
6 23; cf 2 S 21 8 where Michal is an obvious mis-
take for Merab). Michal was evidently a woman
of unusual strength of mind and decision of char-
acter. She manifested her love in an age when it
was almost an unheard-of thing for a woman to
take the initiative in such a matter. For the sake
of the man whom she loved too she braved her
father’s wrath and risked her own life. Even her
later mockery of David affords proof of her courage,
and almost suggests the inference that she had
resented being treated as a chattel and thrown from
one husband to another. The modern reader can
scarce withhold from her, if not admiration, at least
a slight tribute of sympathy. Joun A. LEES


MICHEAS, mi-ké’as (MICHAEAS): In 2 Esd 1
39=the prophet Micah.


MICHMAS, mik’mas (073%, mikhmas; B,
Maypds, Machmds, A, Xappds, Chammds): The form
of the name ‘‘Michmash” found in Ezr 2 27; Neh
731. In1 Esd 5 21 it appears asMacaton (q.v.).


See Micaz,


See Micalau.


MICHMASH, mik’mash (WD, mikhmash;
Maxpds, Machmds): A town in the territory of
Benjamin, apparently not of sufficient importance
to secure mention in the list of cities given in Josh
18 21 ff. It first appears as occupied by Saul with


2,000 men, when Jonathan, advancing from Gibeah,
smote the Phili garrison in Geba (1 S 13 2). To
avenge this injury, the Philis came up in force and
pitched in Michmash (ver 5). Saul and Jonathan
with 600 men held Geba, which had been taken
from the Phili garrison (ver 16). It will assist in
making clear the narrative if, at this point, the
natural features of the place are described.


Michmash is represented by the mod. Mukhmas,
about 7 miles N. of Jerus. From the main road
which runs close to the watershed, a valley sloping
eastward sinks swiftly into the great gorge of Wddy
es-Suweinit. The village of Mukhmas stands to the
N. of the gorge, about 4 miles E. of the carriage
road. The ancient path from Ai southward passes
to the W. of the village, goes down into the valley
by a steep and difficult track, and crosses the gorge
by the pass, a narrow defile, with lofty, precipitous
crags on either side—the only place where a crossing
is practicable. TotheS. of the gorge is Geba, which
had been occupied by the Philis, doubtless to com-
mand the pass. Their camp was probably pitched
in a position E. of Mukhmas, where the ground
slopes gradually northward from the edge of the
gorge. The place is described by Jos as “upon a
precipice with three peaks, ending in a small, but
sharp and long extremity, while there was a rock
that surrounded them like bulwarks to prevent the
attack of the enemy” (Ant, VI, vi, 2). Conder
confirms this description, speaking of it as “a high
hill bounded by the precipices of Wady es-Suweinit
on the S., rising in three flat but narrow mounds,
and communicating with the hill of Mukhmas,
which is much lower, by a long and narrow ridge.”
The Philis purposed to guard the pass against
approach from the 8. On the other hand they were
not eager to risk an encounter with the badly armed
Israclites in a position where superior numbers
would be of little advantage. It was while the
armies lay thus facing each other across the gorge
that Jonathan and his armor-bearer performed their
intrepid feat (14 1 ff). See Bozzz; Smnza.

It_will be noted that the Philis brought their -
chariots to Michmash (1S 13 5). In his ideal
picture of the Assyr advance on Jerus, Isaiah makes
the invader lay up his baggage at Michmash so
that he might go lightly through the pass (10 28).
A company of the men of Michmash (see Micx-
Mas) returned with Zerubbabel from exile (Ezr
2 27; Neh 7 31). Michmash produced excellent
barley. According to the Mish, “to bring barley
to Michmash” was equivalent to our Eng. “to
carry coal to Newcastle.’ Michmash was the seat
of government under Jonathan Maccabaeus (1
Macc 9 73).


The modern village is stone-built. There are


2049


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Michah
Midianitish


rock-cut tombs to the N. Cisterns supply the
water. There are foundations of old buildings,
arge stones, and a vaulted cistern. W. Ewing


MICHMETHAH, mik’mé-tha (WNA20N, ha-
mikhmthah; B, ‘Inacpav, Hikasmén, A, Max0d0,
Machthéth): A place named in defining the terri-
tory of Ephraim and Manassch (Josh 16 6; 17 7).
It 1s said to lie “before,” i.e. to the E. of Shechem.
In the name itself, the meaning of which is obscure,
there is nothing to guide us. The presence of the
art., however (“the Michmethah”), suggests that
it may not be a proper name, but an appellative,
applying to some feature of the landscape. Conder
suggests the plain of Makhneh, which lies to the E.
of Nablus (Shechem), in which there may possibly
be an echo of the ancient name.


MICHRI, mik’ri ("13'0 ; mikhri): A Benjamite
dweller in Jerus (1 Ch 9 8).


MICHTAM, mik’tam. See Psatos.


MIDDAY, mid’da (DO MENA, mahacith
ha-yom, DYIIZ, gohdrayim; jpepa péon, héméra
mésé): The Heb mahdcith ha-yom (Neh 8 3) and
the Gr hémeras mesés (Acts 26 18) are strictly the
middle of the day, but the Heb gohérayim is a dual
form from Wi, ¢dhar, meaning “light,” hence light
or brightness, i.e. the brightest part of the day (1 K
18 29). See Noon.


MIDDIN, mid’in (j"0, middin; in GB, Atvév,
Ainén, “springs”): One of the six cities in the
wilderness of Judah (Josh 15 61). There are not
many possible sites. The Heb name may possibly
survive in Kh. Mird, a very conspicuous site with
many ancient cisterns overlooking the plateau el
Bukea'‘, above which it towers to a height of 1,000
ft.; it is the Mons Mardes of early Christian pil-
grims; the existing remains are Byzantine. Itisa
site of great natural strength and was clearly once
a place of some importance. The Gr reading
Ainon, “place of springs,” suggests the neighbor-
hood of the extensive oasis of ‘Ain Feshkhah at the
northwest corner of the Dead Sea where there are
at Kh. Kumrdn remains of buildings and a rock-cut
aqueduct. See PEF, III, 210, 212, Sh XVIII.

. E. W. G. Mastrerman

MIDDLE WALL. See Partirion.


MIDIAN, mid‘i-an, MIDIANITES, mid’i-an-its
(P12, midhyén, OYITA, midhyanim; Mabidp,
Madidm, Mafiyvain, Madiénatoi):

1. The Seed Midian was a son of Abraham by his
of Abraham concubine Keturah. To him were
to the Time born 5 sons, Ephah, Epher, Hanoch,
of the Abida and Eldaah (Gen 25 2.4; 1
Judges Ch 1 82f). Bearing gifts from Abra-
ham, he and his brothers, each with

his own household, moved off from Isaac into “the
east country” (Gen 25 6). The first recorded in-
cident in the history of the tribe is a defeat suffered
‘an the field of Moab” at the hands of Hadad, king
of Edom. Of thisnothing beyond the fact is known
(86 35; 1 Ch 146). The Midianites next ap-
pear as merchantmen traveling from Gilead to
Egypt, with “spicery and balm and myrrh,” with
no prejudice against a turn of slave-dealing (Gen
37 25 ff). Moses, on fleeing from Egypt, found
refuge in the land of Midian, and became son-in-
law of Jethro, the priest of Midian (Ex 2 15.21).
In Midian Moses received his commission to Israel
in Egypt (4 19). A Midianite, familiar with the
desert, acted as guide (‘instead of eyes”) to the
children of Israel in their wilderness wanderings


(Nu 10 29 ff). The friendly relations between
Israel and Midian, which seem to have prevailed
at first, had been ruptured, and we find the elders of
Midian acting with those of Moab in calling
Balaam to curse Israel (22 4-7). Because of the
grievous sin into which they had scduced Israel on
the shrewd advice of Balaam, a war of vengeance was
made against the Midianites in which five of their
chiefs perished; the males were ruthlessly slain,
and Balaam also was put to death (25 15.17; 31
2 ff). We next hear of Midian as oppressing Israel
for 7 years. Along with the Amalekites and the
children of the East they swarmed across the Jor-
dan, and their multitudinous beasts swept up the
produce of the earth. Overwhelming disaster be-
fell this horde at the onset of Gideon’s chosen
men. In the battle and pursuit ‘‘there fell a
hundred and twenty thousand men that drew
sword”; their kings, Zebah and Zalmunna, and
their princes, Oreb and Zceb, sharing the common
fate (ies 6-8). Echoes of this glorious victory—
“the day of Midian”—are heard in later lit. (Ps

83 9; Isa 9 4; 10 26; Hab 3 7).
The Kenites appear to have been a branch of the
Midianites. Jethro could hardly have attained the
dignity of the priesthood in Midian


2. The had he been of alien blood (Jgs 1 16).
Kenite See Kenites. Again, the tribesmen
Branch are named indifferently Ishmaelites and

Midianites (Gen 37 25.28.36; Jgs 8
22.24). They must therefore have stood in close


relations with the descendants of Hagar’s son.

The representations of Midian in Scripture are

consistent with what we know of the immemorial

ways of Arabian tribes, now engaged
3. Modern in pastoral pursuits, again as carriers
Arabs of merchandise, and yet again as
freebooters. Such tribes often roam
through wide circles. They appear not to have
practised circumcision (Ex 4 25), which is now
practically universal among the Arabs. The men
wore golden ornaments, as do the modern nomads
(Jas 8 24 ff).

The name of “Midian” is not found in Egyp or

Assyr documents. Delitzsch (Wo lag das Para-

dies? 304) suggests that Ephah (Gen
4, Histori- 25 4) may be identical with Hayapa
cal Refer- of the cuneiform inscriptions. If this
ences is correct the references point to the

existence of this Midianite tribe in the
N. of el-Hijaz in the times of 'Tiglath-pileser and
Sargon (745-705 BC). Isaiah speaks of Midian
and Ephah apparently as separate tribes, whose
dromedaries bear gold and frankincense to Zion
(60 6); but he gives no hint of the districts they
occupied. The tribe of Ghifar, found in the neigh-
borhood of Medina in Mohammed’s day, Knobel
would identify with Epher, another of Midian’s sons.

No boundaries can now be assigned to “‘the land
of Midian.” It included territory on the W. as

well as on the E. of the Gulf of ‘Akaba
5. Territory (Ex 4.19). It lay between Edom

and Paran (1 K 11 18). In the time
of the Judges their district seems to have extended
northward to the E. of Gilead (8 10).

A trace of the ancient name is found in that of
Madyan, a place mentioned by the Arab. geog-
raphers, with a plentiful supply of water, now
called Maghair Sho‘aib. It lies E. of the Gulf of
‘Akaba, some miles from the coast, almost opposite
the point of the Sinaitic peninsula. The name
Sho'aib, given by Mohammed to Jethro, may here
be due to ancient Midianite tradition.

W. Ewine

MIDIANITISH, mid‘i-an-it-ish, WOMAN
(M37 TO4, ha-midhyanith, “the Midianitess”): The


Midnight
Milk


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2050


designation given to the daughter of Zur, Cozbi,
whom Zimri the son of Salu brought into the camp
of Israel (Nu 25 6-18). Both were of noble
parentage (26 14.15). The majority of the people
strongly resented this act of profanation (26 6).
A pestilence was raging in the camp, and Phinehas,
the son of Eleazar, in an outburst of zeal pursued
the two delinquents and slew them by a spear-
thrust through their bodies (25 8). He obtained
as a reward the immediate staying of the plague and
the promise of perpetual priesthood to his family
(26 8.138). Joun A. Lees


MIDNIGHT, mid’nit (22 MED, hacath
laylah, ‘middle of the night” [Ex 11 4; Job 34 20;
Ps 119 62], M2750 (LN, hace ha-laylah, “the half
of the night’? [Ex 12 29; Jgs 16 3; Ruth 3 8],
mba Jr, takk ha-laylah, ‘the division of the
night” and hence the middle point [1 K 3 20];
péons vuKrés, mésés nuktés [Mt 26 6], or pérov tis
vuxtés, méson tés nuktés, ‘the middle of the night”
{Acts 27 27], perovixrios, mesoniktios, “midnight”;
WH, mesoniktion [Acts 16 25, etc]): In the period
before the exile midnight does not seem to have
been very accurately determined. The division of
the night was into three watches, the middle one of
which included midnight. In NT times the four-
watch division was used where midnight must have
been more or less accurately determined. See
True; WatTcH. H. Porter


MIDRASH, mid’rash (W712, midhrash): The
Heb word corresponding to AV “story” and RV
“commentary” in 2 Ch 18 22; 24 27. A mid-
rash is properly a story developed for purposes of
edification. See Commentary.


MIDWIFE, mid’wif (MIP, meyalledheth):
Those who in patriarchal times attended mothers
at childbirth are so named in Gen 35 17; 38 28;
Ex 1 15-22. Such attendants were probably then
(1 S 4 20), as they usually are now, the older
female relatives and friends of the mother. The
duties which they had to perform are enumerated
_in Ezk 16 4: division of the cord, washing the
infant in water, salting with salt and swathing in
swaddling clothes. During the Egyp bondage
there were two midwives who attended the Heb
women; from their names, they were probably He-
brews, certainly they were not Egyptians. From
this passage it appears that they used a certain
double-round form of birthstool called ’obhnayim,
concerning which there are several rabbinical com-
ments. Jt probably was like the kurt elwilddeh,
or “birth-seat,” still used by the Egyp fellahin.
I have not found any record of its use among the
Palestinian fellahin. There is a curious passage in
the Talm (Saiah 2b) in which it is said that the two
midwives had different duties, Shiphrah being the
one who dressed the infant, Puah, the one who whis-
pered to it. One Jewish commentator on this sup-
poses that Puah used artificial respiration by blow-
ing into the child’s mouth. The midwives must have
had considerable skill, as a case like that of Tamar
required some amount of operative manipulation.

The Eng. word means originally the woman who
is ‘with the mother” (cf “the women that stood by,”
in 18 4 20), but very early became applied to
those who gave skilled assistance, as in Raynold’s
Birth of Mankind, 1565. ALEX. MACALISTER


MIGDAL-EDER, mig-dal-é’dér. See Epzr.


MIGDAL-EL, mig’dal-el ON7>3I9, mighdal-’al;
B, Meyadaapelp, Megalaareim, A, MaySadunopap,


Magdaligérém): The name, which means ‘tower
of God,” occurs between Iron and Horem in the list
of the fenced cities of Naphtali (Josh 19 38).
Onom places it 9 miles from Dora (fantérah), on
the way to Ptolemais, which points to Athlit. But
this is far from the territory of Naphtali. It is
probably to be identified with either Khirbet
Mejdel, 3 miles N. of Kedes, or Mejdel Islim, 5 miles
farther to the N.W.


MIGDAL-GAD, mig’dal-gad (73-932, mighdal-
gadh, ‘tower of Gad’’): One of a group of 16 cities
of Judah situated in the “lowland” (Josh 15 37).
Of these, only Lachish, Eglon, Beth-dagon and
Naamah have been identified with any certainty.
This would indicate a site in the Phili plain, and
the modern flourishing town of Mejdel, 2} miles
N.E. of Ashkelon, appears to be a possible identi-
fication. It is the most important town in the dis-
trict which is named after it Nahiet el-Mejdel. It
must, however, be admitted that it is difficult to
see how Judah could have held a, site so close to the
great Phili strongholds. It is very probable that
Mejdel (“tower’’) is the tower mentioned in Jos,
BJ, IU, ii, 3, as close to Ashkelon, and it or Migdal-
gad (or both if they are the same sites) may be
identical with the Magtal of the Am Tab (Petrie,
Hist. Egypt, II, 329). For Mejdel_see PHF, II,
410, Sh XVI. E. W. G. MasTerMan


MIGDOL, mig’dol, mig’ddl (5°73, mighdol;
MaySaAov, Magdélon): This name (“the tower’’) is
applied to two places on the east frontier of Egypt.

(1) In Ex 14 2; Nu 88 7, the Heb camp, on the
march from Etham after they had “turned” (appar-

ently to the §.), is defined as ‘facing
1. Ex 14:2; Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the
Nu 38:7 sea, over against Baal-zephon.” It

is thus to be sought (see Exopnus) W.
of the Bitter Lakes, and may have been a watch-
tower on the spur of Jebel ’Atakah. Israel was
supposed to be “entangled in the land,” and shut
in in the “wilderness,” between this range and the
Bitter Lakes, then forming the head of the Red Sea.
The exact site is unknown. In about 385 AD, St.
Silvia, traveling from Clysma (Suez), was shown the
sites above mentioned on her way to Herodépolis,
but none of these names now survive.

(2) In Jer 44 1; 46 14, a Migdol is noticed with
Memphis, and with Tahpanhes (LXX ‘“‘Taphnas”),

this latter being supposed to be the
2. Jer 44:1; Daphnai of Gr writers, now Teil
46:14 Defeneh, W. of Kantarah. The same

place is probably intended in Ezk 29
10; 30 6 (cf vs 15-18), the borders of Egypt being
defined as reaching “from Migdol to Syene” (see
RVm), as understood by the LXX translators.
The Antonine Itinerary places Migdol 12 miles S.
of Pelusium, and the site appears to have beeu at
or near Tell es Samit, the Egyp name, according to
Brugsch (Hist, II, 351), being Samut. This Mig-
dol was thus apparently a “watchtower” on the
main road along the coast from Pal, which is called
(Ex 13 17) “the way of theland of the Philis,” enter-
ing Egypt near Daphnai.

These sites not identical——We are specially told
that this was not the route taken at the exodus,
and this Migdol cannot therefore be the same
as (1), though Brugsch, in consequence of a theory
as to the exodus which has not been accepted by
other scholars, has confused the two sites, as ap-
parently does the Antonine Itinerary when placing
Pithom on thesame route leading to Zoan. Brugsch
(Geography, III, 19) supposes the Egyp town name
Pa-Ma' kal (with the determinative for “wall” added)
to stand for Migdol, but the prefix Pa (“city”)


2051


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Midnight
Milk


seems to show that this word is purely native, and
not Sem, to say nothing of philological objections.
This town may, however, have lain in the required
direction, according to a scribe’s report of the time
of Seti II (or about 1230 BC).

As much confusion has been created by quoting this
report as illustrative of the exodus, the actual words
according to Brugsch’s tr may be given (Hist, II, 132):
“I set out from the hail of the royai palace on the 9thda;
of Epiphi, in the evening, after the two servants.
arrived at the fortress Thuku (T-k-u) on the 10th of
Evipnl _i was informed that the men had resoived to
take their way toward the 8. On the 12th I reached
Khetam. There I was informed that grooms who had
come from the neighborhood [of the ‘‘sedge city ’'] re-
ported that the fugitives had already passed the ram-

art (Anbu or ‘‘wall’'), to the N. of the Ma’ktai of King


Roti Minepthah."’ As to the position of this “wall,”
see Sour,


; C. R. Connrr

MIGRON, mig’ron (JA, mighron; Maydv,
Magén):

(1) A place in the uttermost part of Geba—which
read here instead of Gibeah—marked by a pome-
granate tree, where Saul and his 600 men encamped
over against the Philis, who were in Michmash (1 8
14 2). Jos describes the distress of Saul and his
company as they sat on a high hill (bounds hupséldés)
viewing the widespread desolation wrought by the
enemy. There is, however, nothing to guide us as
to the exact spot. Many suppose that the text is
corrupt; but no emendation suggested yields any
satisfactory result. The place was certainly S. of
Michmash.

(2) (B, Mayedé, Magedd, A, Mayedéé, Mageddé):
The Migron of Isa 10 28 is mentioned between
Aiath (Ai) and Michmash. If the places are there
named in consecutive order, this Migron must be
sought to the N. of Michmash. It may with some
confidence be located at Makrian, a ruined site to the
N. of the road leading from Michmash to Ai.

There is nothing extraordinary in two places
having the same name pretty close to each other.
The two Beth-horons, although distinguished as
upper and lower, are a case in point. So also are
the two Bethsaidas. There is therefore no need to
try to identify the two with one another, as some
(e.g. Robertson Smith in Journal of Philol., XIII,
62 ff) have attempted to do with no success.

W. Ewine

MIJAMIN, mij’a-min ([YA%2, miyamin; AV
Miamin): : .

(1) One of those who had married foreign wives
(Ezr 10 25). Heis also called Maelus (1 Esd 9 26).

(2) The one to whom fell the lot for the 6th
priestly course (1 Ch 24 9). His family returned
with Zerubbabel and Joshua (Neh 12 5).

(3) A signatory of the Covenant (Neh 10 7).


MIKLOTH, mik’loth, mik’l6th (M>p"A, mikloth):

(1) A Benjamite, son of Jeiel (1 Ch 8 32; 9
37.38). A comparison of the two passages shows
that the name Mikloth has been dropped at the
end of 1 Ch 8 31. .

(2) An officer designated ‘‘the ruler,” appointed
in the priestly course for the 2d month (1 Ch 27 4).


MIKNEIAH, mik-né’ya, mik-ni’a (TPA,
miknéyahi): A Levite doorkeeper (1 Ch 15 18).


MILALAI, mil-a-la'i, mil’a-It 02%, mildlay): A
Levite musician (Neh 12 36).


MILCAH, mil’ka (1D9%, milkah; Medxd, Melchd):

(1) Daughter of Haran, wife of Nahor, and grand-
mother of Rebekah (Gen 11 29; 22 20-23; 24
15.24.47).

(2) Daughter of Zelophehad (Nu 26 33; 27 1; 36
11; Josh 17 3). Many recent authorities are of


opinion that Milcah is an abbreviation of Bethmilcah,
and is a geographical rather than a personal name.


MILCOM, mil’kom, mil’k6m. See Moteca.


MILDEW, mil’da (ip), yérakon; LXX usually
Yxrepos, tkteros, lit. jaundice’): In the 5 passages
where it occurs it is associated with shiddaphon,
“blasting” (Dt 28 22; 1 K 8 37; 2 Ch 6 28; Am
49; Hag 217). In Jer 30 6, the same word is
tr? “paleness,” the yellow color of one with ab-
dominal disease. The root-meaning is ‘greenish


yellow”; ef the Arab. yea, yarkdn, meaning


both “jaundice” and “blight.” Mildew or “rust” in
corn is due to a special fungus, Puccima graminis,
whose life is divided between the barberry and
cereals. Many other varieties of fungi which
flourish upon other plants are also designated “‘mil-
dew.” See Buastina. E. W. G. Masterman


MILE, mil (pldvov, milion, Lat mille passus,
milia passuum): A thousand paces, equal to 1,618
Eng. yds. (Mt 6 41). See WeicuTs anp Mzas-
URES,


MILETUS, mi-lé’tus (M(Anros, Milétos): A famous
early Ionian Gr city on the coast of Caria, near the
mouth of the Meander River, which, according to
Acts 20 15—21 1, and 2 Tim 4 20 (AV ‘Mile-
tum”), Paul twice visited: In the earliest times it
was a prominent trading post, and it is said that
75 colonies were founded by its merchants. Among
them were Abydos, Cyzicus and Sinope. In 494
BC, the city was taken by the Persians; it was
recovered by Alexander the Great, but after his
time it rapidly declined, yet it continued to exist
until long after the Christian era. In the history .
of early Christianity it plays but a little part.
The Meander brings down a considerable amount
of sediment which it has deposited at its mouth,
naturally altering the coast line. The gulf into
which the river flows has thus been nearly filled
with the deposit. In the ancient gulf stood a litile
island called Lade; the island now appears as a
mound in the marshy malarial plain, and Palatia,
the modern village which stands on the site of
Miletus, is 6 miles from the coast. Without taking
into account the great changes in the coast line it
would be difficult to understand Acts 20 15-21,
for in the days of Paul, Ephesus could be reached
from Miletus by land only by making a long détour
about the head of the malt, To go directl. fran one
of these cities to the other, one would have been.
obliged to cross the gulf by boat and then continue
by land. This is what Paul’s messenger probably
did. The direct journey may now be made by
land. Miletus has been so ruined that its plan
can no longer be made out. Practically the only
remaining object of unusual interest is the theater,
the largest in Asia Minor, which was not built in a
hollow of the hillside, as most ancient theaters were,
but in the open field. E. J. Banxs


MILK, milk (2971, halabh; yéda, gdla; Lat lac
(2 Esd 219; 8 10]): The fluid secreted by the
mammary glands of female mammals for the nourish-
ment of their youn The word is used in the Bible
of that of human beings (Isa 28 9) as well as of
that of the lower animals (ix 23 19). Asa food it
ranked next in importance to bread (Ecclus 39 26).
Pal is frequently described as a land ‘flowing with
milk and honey” (Ex 3 8.17; Nu 13 27; Dt 6 3;
Josh 5 6; Jer 115; Ezk 20 6.15). Milkwasamong
the first things set before the weary traveler (Gen
18 8). In fact, it was considered a luxury (Jgs 5
25; Cant 6 1). The people used the milk of kine


Mill, Millstone
Millennium


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2052


and also that of sheep (Dt 32 14), and esp. that of
goats (Prov 27 27). It was received in pails
Catinim, Job 21 24), and kept in leather bottles
(no’dh, Jgs 4 19), where it turned sour quickly in
the warm climate of Pal before being poured out
thickly like a melting substance (ndthakh; ci Job
10 10). Cheese of various kinds was made from it
(g*bhinah and hdri¢é he-halabh, lit. “cuts of milk’’);
or the curds (hem’Gh) were eaten with bread, and
possibly also made into butter by churning (Prov
30 33). See Foon, II. It is possible that milk was
used for seething other substances; at least the
Israelites were strictly forbidden to seethe a kid in
its mother’s milk (Hx 23 19; 34 26; Dt 14 21),
and by a very general interpretation of these pas-
sages Jews have come to abstain from the use of
mixtures of meat and milk of all kinds.

Figuratively the word is used (1) of abundance
(Gen 49 12); (2) of a loved one’s charms (Cant 4
11); (8) of blessings (Isa 55 1; Joel 3 18); (4) of
the (spiritual) food of immature people (1 Cor 3 2;
He 5 12.13); (5) of purity (1 Pet 2 2).

Natuan Isaacs

MILL, mil, MILLSTONE, mil’stén (STM,
réheh; ptdos, miilos, pvddv, mulén): The two most
primitive methods of grinding grain were (1) by
pounding it in a mortar, and (2) by rubbing it be-
tween two stones. In Nu 11 8 both methods are
mentioned as used for rendering the manna more
fit for cooking. Numerous examples of both mill


Women at a Modern Mill.


and mortar have been found in ancient excavations.
Bliss and Macalister in their excavations at. Gezer
and other places have found specimens of what is
called the saddle-quern or mill, which consists of
two stones. The “nether” stone, always made of
hard lava or basalt from the district of the Hauran,
was a large heavy slab varying in length from 14
ft. to 23 ft., and in width from 10 in. to 14 ft. Its
upper surface was hollowed out slightly, which
made it look a little like a saddle and may have
suggested the name of “riding millstone” applied
by the Hebrews to the upper stone which rested on
it (Jgs 9 53). The ‘upper stone” or “rider” was
much smaller, 4 in. to 8 in. long and 22 in. to 6 in.
wide, and of varying shapes. This could be seized
with the two hands and rubbed back and forth over
the nether stone much the same as clothes are
scrubbed ou a wash-board. Such a stone could be
used as a weapon (Jgs 9 53; 2 8 11 21), or given
as a pledge (Dt 24 6).

Macalister goes so far as to say that ‘the rotary hand-
quern in the form used In modern Pal and in remote
European regions, such as the Hebrides, is quite un-
known throughont the whole history,even down to the
tlme of Christ’? (Ezcavations at Gezer). The same writer,
however, descrihes some mills belonging to the 3d and
4th Sem periods which are much like the present rotary
quern, except smaller (4 in. to 6 in. in diameter), and
with no provision for a turning handle. Schumacher
describes these as paint grinders. The only perforated


upper millstones found in the excavations at Gezer
helong to the carly Arab. period.


If the above assertions are substantiated then we
must alter somewhat the familiar picture of the two
women at the mill (Mt 24 41), commonly illus-
trated by photographs of the mills still used in
modern Pal. These latter consist of two stone
dises each 18 in. to 20 in. in diameter, usually made
of Hauran basalt. The upper one is perforated in
the center to allow it to rotate on a wooden peg
fixed in the nether stone, and near the circumference
of the upper stone is fixed a wooden handle for
turning it. The grain to be ground is fed into the
central hole on the upper stone and gradually works
down between the stones. As the grain is reduced
to flour, it flies out from between the stones on to a
cloth or skin placed underneath the mill. To make
the flour fine it is reground and sifted. Larger
stones 4 ft. to 5 ft. in diameter, working on the
principle of the handmill, are still used for grind-
ing sesame seed. These are turned by asses or
mules. Another form of mill, which is possibly
referred to in Mt 18 6; Mk 9 42; Rev 18 21.22,
consisted of a conical nether stone on which ‘‘rode”’
a second stone like a hollowed-out capstan. The
upper stone was probably turned with handspikes
in much the same way as an old-fashioned ship’s
capstan was turned. The material to be ground
was fed into the upper cone which formed the
hopper and from which it was delivered to the grind-
ing surfaces between the “rider” and the nether
stone. This form of mill must have been known in
late Bib. times, because many examples of the upper
stone dating from the Gr-Rom period have been
found. One may be seen in the museum of the
Syrian Protestant College at Beirit. Another
large one lies among the ruins at Petra, etc. In Mt
18 6; Mk 9 42, the mill is described as a uddos
duxés, miilos onikés, lit. a mill turned by an ass,
hence a great millstone. It is not at all unlikely
that the writers have confused the meaning of évos,
6nos (VM, hdémér), a term commonly applied to the
upper millstone of a handmill, thinking it referred
instead to the animal which turned the mill. This
explanation would make Christ’s words of con-
demnation more applicable. The upper millstone
of a handmill would be more than sufficient to sink
the condemned, and the punishment would be more
easily carried out. A few years from now hand-
mills will have disappeared from the Syrian house-
holds, for the more modern gristmills turned by
water or other motor power are rapidly replacing
them. See Crarts, II, 8.

Figuratively: (1) Of firmness and undaunted
courage (Job 41 24). ‘“‘The heart of hot-blooded
animals is liable to sudden contractions and expan-
sions, producing rapid alternations of sensations;
not so the heart of the great saurians” (Canon
Cook ad loc.). (2) To “grind the face of the poor”
(Isa 3 15) is cruelly to oppress and afflict them.
(3) The ceasing of the sound of the millstone was
a sign of desolation (Jer 25 10; Rev 18 22).

James A. Patcu


MILLENNIUM (POSTMILLENNIAL VIEW).
See EscHaro.ocy or tHE NT.


Vv.


Divergent Views—Scope of Article
I. Tue Tracuine or Jesus
The Millennium Not before the Advent
(1) Parable of the Wheat and Tares
(2) Parable of the Pounds
II. Teacuino or tHe Apostiues
die Expectation of the Advent
2. Possibility of Survival—Its Implications
3. Prophecy of ‘'Man of Sin"
No Room for Millennium
5. Harmony of Christ and Apostles


LITERATURE


Perales mi-len’i-um (PREMILLENNIAL


2053


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Mil; Millstone


ilennium


The great majority of evangelical Christians
believe that the kingdom of God shall have uni-
versal sway over the earth, and that


Divergent righteousness and peace and the
Views— knowledge of the Lord shall every-
Boe of where prevail. This happy time ‘is
rticle


commonly called the Millennium, or
; the thousand years’ reign. Divergent
views are entertained as to how it is to be brought
about. Many honest and faithful men hold that
it will be introduced by the agencies now at work,
mainly by the preaching of the gospel of Christ and
the extension of the church over the world. An
increasing number of men equally honest teach
that the Millennium will be established by the
visible advent of the Lord Jesus Christ. The aim
of this brief article is to set forth some of the
Scriptural grounds on which this latter view rests.
No reference will be made to objections, to counter-
objections and interpretations; the single point,
namely, that the Millennium succeeds the second
coming of Jesus Christ, that it does not pre-
cede it, will be rigidly adhered to. Those who
hold this view believe that neither Christ nor
His apostles taught, on fair principles of interpreta-
tion, that the Millennium must come before His
advent.

I. The Teaching of Jesus.—The Lord Jesus said
nothing about world-wide conversion in His in-

structions to His disciples touching
The Mil- their mission (Mt 28 19.20; Mk 16
lennium 15; Lk 24 46-48; Acts 18). They
Not before were to be His witnesses and carry
the Advent His message to the race, but He does

not promise the race will receive their
testimony, or that men will generally accept His
salvation. On the contrary, He explicitly fore-
warns them that they shall be hated of all men, that
sufferings and persecutions shall be their lot, but
if they are faithful to the end their reward will
be glorious. But world-wide evangelism does not
mean world-wide conversion. The universal offer
of salvation does not pledge its universal acceptance.
In His instructions and predictions the Lord does
not let fall a hint that their world-wide mission will
result in world-wide conversion, or that thereby
the longed-for Millennium will be ushered in. But
there is a time to come when the knowledge of
the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters the
sea, when teaching shall no longer be needed,
for all shall know Him from the least to the
greatest. Our dispensation, accordingly, cannot
be the last, for the effects stated in that are not
contemplated in the instructions and the results of
this. To the direct revelation of Christ on the
subject we now turn. In two parables He explicitly
announces the general character and the consumma~
tion of the gospel age, and these we are briefly to
examine.

(1) Parable of the Wheat and Tares (ME 13 24-
30.36-43).—Happily we are not left to discover
the meaning and scope of this parable. We enjoy
the immense advantage of having Our Lord’s own
interpretation of it. Out of His Divine explana-
tion certain most important facts emerge: (a) The
parable covers the whole period between the first
and second advents of the Saviour. The Sower is
Christ Himself. He began the good work; He
opened the new era. (6) The field is the world.
Christ’s work is no longer confined to a single
nation or people as once; it contemplates the
entire race. (c) His people, the redeemed, begotten
by His word and Spirit, are the good seed. Through
them the gospel of His grace is to be proppented
throughout the whole world. (d) The devil is also
asower. Heis the foul counterfeiter of God’s work.


He sowed the tares, the sons of the evil one. (e) !


The tares are not wicked men in general, but a par-
ticular class of wicked brought into close and con-
taminating association with the children of God.
“Within the territory of the visible church the
tares are deposited” (Dr. David Brown). It is the
corruption of Christendom that is meant, a gi-
gantic fact to which we cannot shut our eyes.
(f) The mischief, once done, cannot be corrected.
“Let both grow together until the harvest.”” Chris-
tendom once corrupted remains so to the end.
(g) The harvest is the consummation of the age.
This is the culmination of our age; it terminates
with the advent and judgment of the Son of God.
He will send forth His angels who will “gather out
of his kingdom all things that cause stumbling, and
them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into the
furnace of fire..... Then shall the righteous
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
Father.”

Here, then, we have the beginning, progress and
consummation of our age. Christ Himself intro-
duced it, and it was distinguished for its purity and
its excellence. But the glorious system of truth
was soon marred by the cunning craitiness of Satan.
No after-vigilance or earnestness on the part of the
servants could repair the fatal damage. They were
forbidden to attempt the removal of the tares, for
by so doing they would endanger the good grain, so
intermixed had the two become! The expulsion of
the tares is left for angels’ hands in the day of the
harvest. This is Our Lord’s picture of our age:
a Zizanian field wherein good and bad, children of
God and children of the evil one, live side by side
down to the harvest which is the end. In spite of
all efforts to correct and reform, the corruption of
Christendom remains, nay, grows apace. To
expel the vast crop of false doctrine, false professors,
false teachers, is now as it has been for centuries
an impossibility. Christ’s solemn words hold down
to the final consummation, ‘‘Let both grow together
until the harvest.’’ In such conditions a millen-
nium of universal righteousness and knowledge of
the Lord seems impossible until the separation
takes place at the harvest.

(2) Parable of the Pounds (Lk 19 11-27).—
Jesus was on His last journey to Jerus, and near
the city. The multitude was eager, expectant.
They supposed the Kingdom of God was imme-
diately to appear. The parable was spoken to
correct this mistake and to reveal certain vital
features of it. “A certain nobleman went into a
far country, to receive for himself a kingdom, and
to return.” There is little difficulty in grasping
the main teaching of this suggestive narrative.
The nobleman is the Lord Jesus Christ Himself;
the far country is heaven; the kingdom He goes to
receive is the Messianic kingdom, for the victorious
establishment of which all God’s people long and
pray. The servants are those who sustain respon-
sible relation to the Lord because of the trust com-
mitted to them. The rebellious citizens are those
who refuse subjection to His will and defy His
authority. His return is His second coming. The
parable spans the whole period between His ascen-
sion and His advent. Jt measures across our entire
age. It tells of Christ’s going away, it describes
the conduct of His servants and of the citizens
during His absence; it foretells His return and the
reckoning that is to follow. Mark the words, “And
it came to pass, when he was come back again,
having received the kingdom.” It is in heaven He
receives the investiture of the kingdom (Rev 6 6).
It is on earth that He administers it. The phrase,
“having received the kingdom,” cannot by any
dexterity of exegesis be made to denote the end of
time or the end of the Millennium, or of His re-
ceiving it at the end of the world; it is then He


Millennium
Mincing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2054


delivers it up to God, even the Father (1 Cor 15
24-28).

The order and sequeuce of events as traced by
the Lord disclose the same fact made prominent
in the parable of the Wheat and Tares, namely,
that during the whole period between His ascension
and His return there is no place for a Millennium
of world-wide righteousness and prosperity. But
Scripture warrants the belief that such blessedness
is surely to fill the earth, and if so, it must be real-
ized after Christ’s second coming.

Hl. Teaching of the Apostles.—There is no
unmistakable evidence that the apostles expected

a thousand years of prosperity and
1. Expecta- peace during Christ’s absence in
tion of the heaven. In Acts 1 11 we read that
Advent the heavenly visitants said to the

apostles, ‘“‘Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye looking into heaven?” This attitude of the
men of Galilee became the permanent attitude of
the primitive church. It was that of the uplifted
gaze. Paul’s exultant words respecting the Thessa-
lonians might well be applied to all believers of that
ancient time, that they “turned unto God from idols,
to serve a living and true God, and to wait for
his Son from heaven” (1 Thess 1 9.10). It is the
prominent theme of the NT epp. In the NT it
is mentioned 318 t. One verse in every thirty, we
are told, is occupied with it. It is found shining
with a glad hope in the first letters Paul wrote, those
to the Thessalonians. It is found in the last he
wrote, the second to Timothy, gleaming with the
bright anticipation of the crown he was to receive
at the Redeemer’s appearing. James quickens the
flagging courage, and reanimates the drooping spirits
of believers with this trumpet peal: ‘Be ye also
patient; establish your hearts: for the coming of
the Lord is at hand’ (6 8). Peter exhorts to all
holy conversation and godliness by the like motive:
“Looking for and hastening the coming of the day
of God” (2 Pct 312m). Amid the deepening
gloom and the gathering storms of the last days,
Jude (ver 14) cheers us with the words of Enoch,
the seventh from Adam, ‘Behold, the Lord cometh
with ten thousand of his saints, to execute judgment
upon .... the ungodly.’ John closes the Canon
with the majestic words, ‘‘Behold, he cometh with
the clouds,” ‘Behold, I come quickly.”” These men,
speaking by the Spirit of the living God, know there
can be no reign of universal righteousness, no de-
liverance of groaning creation, no redemption of the
body, no binding of Satan, and no Millennium while
the tares grow side by side with the wheat; while
the ungodly world flings its defiant shout after the
retiring nobleman, “We will not have this man to
reign over us’; and while Satan, that strong,
fierce spirit, loose in this age, deceives, leads cap-
tive, devours and ruins as he lists. Therefore the
passionate longing and the assurance of nearing
deliverance at the coming of Christ fill so large
a place in the faith and the life of the primitive
disciples.

In 1 Thess 417 Paul speaks of himself and
others who may survive till the Lord’s coming:

“Then we that are alive, that are left,


2. Possi- shall together with them be caught
bility of up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in
Survival— the air” (cf 1 Cor 15 51.52).

Its Impli- his implies fairly that the apostle did
cations


not know that long ages would elapse be-
tween his own day and Christ’s advent.
There was to his mind the possibllity of His coming in
his lifetime; in fact, he seems to have an expectation
that he would not pass through the gates of death ai all,
that he would live to sce the Lord in His glorious return,
for the day and the hour of the advent is absolutely
concealed even from inspired men. The inference is
perfecily legitimate that Paul and his fellow-disciples did


not anticipate that a thousand years should intervene
between them and the coming. F

Furthermore, the Thessalonians had fallen into a

serious mistake (2 Thess 2 1-12). By_a false spirit,

fod to believe tab tthe day of the Lord te

ed to believe that ‘‘the day of the Lord is

3. Prophecy Theapostle


“ now present’’ (ERV), ver 2.
of Man sets them right about this solemn matter.
of Sin” He assures them that some things must


precede that day, namely, ‘‘the falling
away,”’ or apostasy, and the appearing of a powerful
adversary whom he calls ‘‘the Man of Sin,’’ and de-
scribes as ‘‘the Son of Perdition.”” Neither the one nor the
other of these two, the apostasy and the Man of Sin, was
then present. But the road was fast getting ready for
them. There was the ‘‘mystery of lawlessness” already
at work at the time, and although a Certain restraint
held it in check, nevertheless when the check was re-
moved it would at once precipitate the apostasy, and it
would issue in the advent of the Man of Sin, and he
should be brought to nought by the personal coming of
Jesus Christ. This appears to be the import of the -
passage.

Here was the appropriate place to settle forever for
these saints and for all others the question of a long
period to intervene before the Saviour’s advent. How
easy and natural it would have bcen for Paul to write,
“ Brethren, there is to be first a time of universal blessed-
ness for the world, the Millennium, and after that there
will be an apostasy and the revelation of the Man of Sin
whom Christ will destroy by the brightness of His com-
ing.”’ But Paul intimated nothing of the sort. Instead,
he distinctly says that the mystery of lawlessness is already
working, that it will issue in “the falling away,’’ and
then shall appear the great adversary, the Lawless One,
who shail meet his doom by the advent of Christ. The
mystery of lawlessness, however, is held in restraint,
we are told. May it not be possible that the check
shall be taken off, then the Millennium succeed, and
after that the apostasy and the Son of Perdition? No,
for its removal is immediately followed by the coming
of the great foe, the Antichrist. For this foe has both
an apocalypse and a parousia like Christ Himself. Hence,
the lifting of the restraint is sudden, by no means a
prolonged process.


The apostle speaks of the commencement, prog-
ress, and close of a certain period. It had com-
menced when he wrote. Its close is
4. No Room at the coming of Christ. What inter-
for Millen- venes? The continuance of the evil
nium secretly at work in the body of pro-
fessing Christians, and its progress
from the incipient state to the maturity of daring
wickedness which will be exhibited in the Man of
Sin. This condition of things fills up the whole
period, if we accept Paul’s teaching as that of in-
spired truth. There appears to be no place for a
Millennium within the limits which the apostle
here sets. The only escape from this conclusion,
as it seems to us, is, to deny that the coming of
Christ is His actual, personal second coming. But
the two words, epiphdneia and parousia, which
elsewhere are used separately to denote His advent,
are here employed to give ‘“‘graphic vividness” and
certainty to the event, and hence they peremptorily
forbid a figurative interpretation. The conclusion
seems unavoidable that there can be no Millen-
nium on this side of the advent of Christ.
Our Lord’s Olivet prophecy (Mt 24, 26; Mk 13;
Lk 21) accords fully with the teaching of the
apostles on the subject. In that dis-
5. Harmony course He foretells wars, commotions


of Christ among the nations, Jerusalem’s cap-
and ture and the destruction of the temple,
Apostles Israel’s exile, Christians persecuted


while bearing their testimony through-
out the world, cosmic convulsions, unparalleled
tribulation and sufferings which terminate only
with His advent. From the day this great prophecy
was spoken down to the hour of His actual coming
He offers no hope of a Millennium. He opens no
place for a thousand years of blessedness for the
earth.

These are some of the grounds on which Bib.
students known as Premillennialists rest their
belief touching the coming of the Lord and the
Millennial reign.


2055


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Millennium
Mincing


Literaturse.—Premillenarlan: H. Bonar, The Coming
of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus; Wood, The Last
Things; Guinness, The Approaching End of the Age;
Seiss, The Last Times; Gordon, Ecce Venit; Premillen-
nial Essays; Peters, The Theocratic Kingdom; West,
The Thousand Years in Both Testaments; Trotter, Plain
Papers on Prophetic Subjects; Brookes, Maranatha;
Andrews, Christianity and Antichristianity; Kellogg,
Prediction and Fulfilment.


Wiuuiam G. MoorrHEap
MILLET, mil’et, mil’it (7, ddkan; kéyxpos,
kégchros): One of the ingredients of the prophet’s
bread (Ezk 4 9). The Arab. equivalent is dukhn,
the common millet, Panicum miliaceum, an annual


Millet (Sorghum vulgare).


grass 8 or 4 ft. high with a much-branched nodding
panicle. Its seeds are as small as mustard seeds
and are used largely for feeding small birds, but
are sometimes ground to flour and mixed with other
cereals for making bread. The Italian millet,
setaria Italica, known as Bengal grass, is also called
in Arab. dukhn, and has a similar seed. A somewhat
similar grain, much more widely cultivated as a
summer crop, is the Indian millet—also_called
‘Heyp maize’—the Sorghum annuum. This is
known as dhurah in Arab., and the seed as dhurah
beidé, “white dourra.” It is a very important crop,
as it, like the common millet, grows and matures
without any rain. It is an important breadstuff
ng the poor.
ar Both Mevecmnon millet and the dourra were
cultivated in Egypt in very ancient times; the Heb
dohan was certainly the first, but. may include all
three varieties. E. W. G. MasterMan
MILLO, mil’s (853"2, mille’, generally inter-
preted to mean a “filling,” e.g. a solid tower or


an earth embankment; in Jgs 9 6.20; 2 IX 12 20,
we get Nibia M72, beth milla’, tra in EV “House

of Millo,” which Winckler thinks may
1. OT have been the original Jebusite temple-
References shrine of Jerus [see Brru-miLLo];

LXX reads BrOpaadtdv, Bethmaalin,
also Maalén and otkos Maallén): It is gen-
erally supposed that ‘‘The Millo” was some kind
of fortress or other defence, but many speculations
have been made regarding its position. In 28 5
9, we read that David built round about from the
Millo and inward, or (in LXX) “he fortified it, the
city, round about from the Millo and his house”
(ef 1 Ch 11 8). In connection with Solomon’s
strengthening of the fortifications, there are several
references to Millo. In 1 K 9 15, Solomon raised
a levy “‘to build the house of Jeh, and his own house,
and Millo, and the wall of Jerus,” etc; in ver 24,
“Pharaoh’s daughter came up out of the city of
David unto her house which Solomon had built for
her: then did he build Millo”; in 1 K 11 27,
Solomon ‘built Millo, and repaired the breach of
the city of David his father.” Ata later time Heze-
kiah “took courage, and built up all the wall that
was broken down, and raised it up to the towers,
and the other wall without, and strengthened Millo
in the city of David’ (2 Ch 82 5; 2 K 12 20);
Joash was slain by his servants ‘“‘at the house of
Millo, on the way that goeth down to Silla,” but
possibly this may have been in Shechem (cf Jgs9 6).

The mention of the site in the days of David and

the reference to it in connection with the city of

David (1 K 11 27) point to some
2. Identical part of the southeastern hill 8S. of the
with the temple. It is suggestive that Millo
Akra Site is in LXX always tr? by ‘“Akra.”

It seems to the present writer very
probable that it was a fortress crowning the hill on
which at a later time stood the Syrian Akra, which
hill, if we are to believe Jos (BJ, V, iv, 1, etc), was
cut down because its commanding situation dom-
inated the temple. This hill cannot have been the
site of Zion afterward known as ‘‘David’s Burg”
(City of David), because the tombs of the Judaean
kings were within its walls, and that alone would
have made the complete leveling of the site impos-
sible, but whereas the Jebusite fortress was probably
not far from Gihon, this fortified summit may have
been, as Watson suggests for the Akra, as far north
as where the present Al Aksa mosque is situated.
In David’s time it may have been an isolated and
detached fort guarding the north approach, but if
it was originally a Jebusite high place (Winckler)
partly of sun-dried brick like similar constructions
in Babylonia, the account of its being leveled would
be much more credible. The importance of this
site in the days of Solomon is fully explicable if this
was the citadel guarding the newly built temple and
royal palaces.

Dr. G. A. Smith is inclined to think that Millo
may have been a fortress “off the south end of
Ophel, to retain and protect the old pool,” and
Vincent suggests that the site of Millo is that now
occupied by the great causeway connecting the
Western and Eastern hills along which runs the
tarik bab es silsileh. E. W. G. Masrerman


MILLSTONE, mil’stén. See Mri.


MINA, mi’na. Sce MANrEn. ;

MINCING, min’sing (DY, faphaph): “Taking
short steps,” “walking trippingly.” Only in Isa
3 16, “walking and mincing as they go, and making
a tinkling [a jingling of the metal anklets| with their
feet.” CfOHL.


Mind
Ministry


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE EN CYCLOPAEDIA


2056


MIND, mind (vots, nous, Sidvora, didnoia, cbveris,
sumests): We look in vain in the OT and NT for
anything like scientific precision in the
1. No Pre- employment of terms which are meant
cision in the to indicate mental operations.
Terms Used In the OT /ébh is made to stand for
the various manifestations of our in-
tellectual and emotional nature. We are often
misled by the different renderings in the different
versions, both early and late.

Sometimes nephesh or ‘‘soul" is rendered by ‘‘mind"’
(Dt 18 6 AV, “ desire of hissoul"’ or‘‘mind"’); sometimes
rat, or “spirit” (Gen 26 35, “grief of mind,” rath).
Here Luther renders theterm Herzeleid (‘‘ grief of heart”),
and the Vulg animum. Sometimes lébh is used, as in
Isa 46 8, ‘bring it to mind"’ (lit. ‘‘heart’’), or iu Ps 31
12, ‘‘I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind”’ (lit.
‘‘heart’’), as_in LXX, kardia, and in Vulg, a corde,
Luther, im Herzen, new Dutch tr, wit de gedachtenis
(i.e. ‘‘memory”’).


In the Apoc this precision is equally lacking.
Thus we read in Wisd 9 15, “For the corruptible
body [séma] presseth down the soul [psuché] and
the earthly tabernacle weigheth down the mind
[nous] that museth upon many things.” But these
distinctions are alien to the letter and spirit of
revelation, a product of the Gr and not of the Heb
mind.

In the NT the words nous and dianota are used,
but not with any precision of meaning.

Here too several terms are rendered by the same word.
Thus the Heb ru is rendered hy nous in 1 Cor 2 16
( mind of the Lord,"’ with referencetoIsa 40 13, where
“rith YHWH [Jeh]"’ occurs). Nous evidently means
here the organ of apiriiual perception—a word bor-
rowed from the LXX, where it is sometimes made to
stand for lébh (Job 7 17; Isa 41 22); sometimes for
ra%, (Isa 40 13). In Lk 24 45—the solitary text,
where nous occurs in the Gospels—it is rendered ‘* under-
standing" in AV, mind" in RV.


For a true solution we must turn to the Epp. of
Paul, where the word frequently occurs in an ethical
sense—sometimes in connection with
(sinful) flesh as in Col 2 18, “puffed
up by his fleshly mind,’’ sometimes in
direct contrast to it, as in Rom 7 25,
‘with my mind I serve the law of God; with the
flesh the law of sin.’ In Tit 1 15 it is brought into
parallelism with conscience (“Their mind and their
conscience are defiled”’). Phrases like ‘‘a reprobate
mind,” ‘corrupted in mind” occur elsewhere (Rom 1
28; 1 Tim 6 5). From this state of ‘‘reprobation”
and “corruption” man must be saved. Hence the
necessity of complete transformation and renewal
of the inner man (Rom 12 2), “transformed by the
renewing of your mind [nous].”

Another word, with possibly a deeper meaning, is
sometimes employed, viz. dianoia, which lit. means

“meditation,” “reflection.” Itis found
8. Dianoia as synonymous with nous in a good
and Nous _ sense, as e.g. in 1 Jn 6 20 (He “hath

given us an understanding, that we
know him that is true’). Evidently the sense here
is the same as in Rom 12 2, a renovated mind ca-
pable of knowing Christ. It may also bear a bad
sense, asin Eph 4 18, where the Gentiles are repre-
sented as having “a darkened understanding,” or in
parallelism with sérz: “the desires of the flesh and
of the mind” (Eph 2 3), and with nous: ‘walking
in vanity of mind [nous] and a darkened understand-
ing [dianoia]’ in Eph 4 18. At times also “heart”
and “mind” are joined to indicate human depravity
(Lk 1 51: ‘‘He hath scattered the proud in the
imagination [dianoia] of their heart’’). It is inter-
esting also to know that the Great Commandment
is rendered in Mt 22 37—“Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul [psuch2], and with all thy understanding
[dianoia] [EV ‘‘mind”’)’—though Mk has two render-


2, Ethical
Sense


ings in one of which dianoia occurs, and in the other
sunesis (Mk 12 30.33), though possibly without any
psychological refinement of meaning, for the term
sunesis occurs elsewhere in conjunction with pneu-
matikés (“spiritual understanding,” Col 1 9). It
also stands alone in the sense of an ‘‘understanding
enlightened from above” (2 Tim 27 AV: “The Lord
give thee understanding [sunesis] in all things’).
The history of these terms is interesting, but not of
great theological significance.
It seems to us that Godet's interpretation of the Great
Commandment in Lk 10 27 is somewhat far-fetched.
He considers the heart as ‘'the central
4. The focus from which all rays of the moral life
Great Co go forth, and that iu their three priucipal
M™M- directions: the powers of feeling, or the
mandment affections,
of feeling;


nephesh (‘soul’) in the sense
a the active powers, the impul-
sive aspirations, the might (‘with all thy might’), the
will; and in the intellectual powers, analytical or con-
templative, dianoia (‘with all thy mind’). The differ-
ence between the heart, which resembles the trunk and the
three branches, feeling, will, understanding, is emphati-
cally marked in the Alexandrian variation, by the substi-
tution of the preposition en (‘in') for ek (‘ with,’ ‘from’)
in the three last members. Moral life proceeds from the
heart and manifests itself without, in the three forms of
activity. Theimpulse God-ward proceeds from the heart,
and is realized in the life through the will, which conse-
crates itself actively to the accomplishment of His will;
and through the mind, which pursues the track of His
thought in all His works"’ (Godet, Comm. on the Gospel


of Lk, II, 38, 39).
J. I. Marats

MINE, min, MINING, min‘ing: In Job 28 1-11
we have the only Bib. reference to mines. The
writer very likely derived his information either from
personal observation or from a description by an
eyewitness, of the mining operations of Sinai (see
Merats). No traces of ancient mines have yet
been found in Pal and Syria. What metals were
taken out came from the superficial strata. ‘The
mines of Upper Egypt have already been mentioned.
Burton and other travelers in Northern Arabia and
the Red Sea country have found there evidences of
ancient mining operations.

The usual Egyp method of mining was to follow
the vein from the surface as far as it was practicable
with tools corresponding to our pick and hoe, ham-
mer and chisel. The shafts frequently extended
into the ground a distance of 180 to 200 ft. The
rock when too hard to be dug out was first cracked
by having fires built on it. The metal-bearing
stone was carried in baskets to the surface, where
the crushing and separating took place. The
mining operations were performed by an army of
slaves who were kept at their work day and night,
driven with the lash until they died, when their
places were taken by others. See Mpraus; Crarts,


II, 10. James A. Patcu
MINERALS, min‘ér-alz. See Mrtats; STonzEs,
Precious.


MINGLED PEOPLE, min’g’ld pé’p’l (MIXED
MULTITUDE):

(1) “Mixed multitude” occurs in Nu 11 4 as
atr of SODON, ’dsaphsuph, “collection,” “rabble.”
The same phrase in Ex 12 38; Neh 13 3 is the
rendition of V2, ‘érebh. ‘“Mingled people” is
used also to translate ‘érebh, and is found in Jer
25 20.24; 60 37; Ezk 305, and in 1 K 10 15
RV (AV “Arabia”; cf ARVm). In the last case
both revised VSS have followed the pointing of the
MT, and this pointing alone distinguishes “mingled
people” (‘érebh) from “Arabia” (‘drabh); in the
unpointed text both words are equally 279. Now
“the traffic of the merchants, and of all the kings of
the mingled people, and of the governors of the
country” is very awkward, and the correction into
“Arabia,” as in the MT (and EV) of the || 2 Ch 9
14, is indicated. Probably the same change should


2057


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mind
Ministry


be made in Ezk 30 5, reading “Ethiopia, and Put,
and Lud, and Arabia, and Cub.” A similar textual
confusion seems to be responsible for either “and
all the kings of Arabia’ or ‘‘and all the kings of the
mingled people” in Jer 25 24. On all these verses
see the comms.

(2) In Jer 25 20; 50 87, ‘mingled people” is a
term of contempt for the hybrid blood of certain
of Israel’s enemies. Something of this same con-
tempt may be contained in Ex 12 38, where a
multitude of non-Israelitish camp-followers are
mentioned as accompanying the children of Israel
in the exodus, and in Nu 11 4 it is this motley
body that seduced Israel to sin. But who they were,
why they wished or were permitted to join in the
exodus, and what eventually became of them or of
their descendants is a very perplexing puzzle. In
Neh 13 3, the ‘mixed multitude” consists of the
inhabitants of Pal whom the Jews found there after
the return from the exile (see Samarra). In accord
with the command of Dt 23 3-5, the Jews with-
drew from all religious intercourse whatever had
been established with these.

Notz.—The Heb noun for ‘‘mingled people’? may or


may not be connected with the vh. trd ‘“‘mingle” in Ezr
9 2; Ps 106 35; Dnl 2 48. On this see the lexicons.


Burton Scott Haston

MINIAMIN, min’ya-min, mi-ni’a-min (["A77A,
minyamin):

(1) A Levite who assisted Kore, the son of
Imnah, in the distribution of the freewill offerings
(2 Ch 31 15).

(2) A priestly family of the time of the high
priest Joiakim (Neh 12 17), probably = Mrysamin (2).

(3) A priestly participant in the ceremony of the
dedication of the wall (Neh 12 41).


MINISH, min’ish (AV and ERV Ex 5 19; Ps
107 39; ERV_ Isa 19 6; Hos 8 10): The vb.
“minish,” “make small,’ is now obsolete, being
replaced by its derivative “diminish” (ef ARV in
all vs above).


MINISTRY, sain’is-tri:
I. Tae Worp ‘Ministry
Use of the Word in This Article

II. Two Kinps or Ministry
1. The Prophetic Ministry

{1} Apostles

(2) Prophets

(3) Teachers
2. The Local Ministry

Origin
THREEFOLD CONGREGATIONAL MINISTEY
1. Insistence on Organization

(1) Selecting a Bishop

(2) Bishops and Presbyters ;
2. Multiplication of Orders: Growth of a Hier-

archy
IV. Sxwops
LivERATURE

I. The Word “Ministry.’’—The common NT
term for the ministry is diakonia (é:axovla), and
along with it we find didkonos (S:éxovos), “minister,”
ho diakonén (6 daxovdv), “he who ministers,” and
diakonein (Staxovety), “to minister.” All these words
have a very extensive application within the NT
and are by no means restricted to denote service
within the Christian church; even when 80 re-
stricted the words are used in a great variety of
meanings: e.g. (1) discipleship in general (Jn 12
26); (2) service rendered to the church because of
the “gifts” bestowed (Rom 127; 1 Cor 12 5),
and hence all kinds of service (Acts 6 2; Mt 20 26);
(3) specifically the “ministry of the Word” (Eph 4
12), and most frequently the “apostleship’” (Acts
117; 20 24; 21 19; Rom 11 18, ete); (4) such
services as feeding the poor (Acts 6 1; 11 29; 12
25), or organizing and providing the great collec-
tion for the poor saints at Jerus (Rom 16 25;
2 Cor 8 4.19, etc); (5) such services as those


Iii.


rendered by Stephanas (1 Cor 16 15), by Archip-
pus (Col-4 17), by Tychicus (Eph 6 21; Col 4 7),

ete.
In this art. the word has to do with the guidance
and government of a united community, fellowship,
or brotherhood of men and women


Use of the whose inward bond of union was the
Word in sense of fellowship with Jesus their
This Article Risen Lord. In all ages of Christian-


ity the call to become the follower of

Jesus, while it is the deepest of all personal things
and comes to each one singly, never comes solita-
rily. The devout soul must share his experiences
with those like-minded, and the fellowship thus
formed must be able to take outward shape, which
cannot fail to render necessary some sort of rule
and guidance. The very thought of the church
with articulate expression of a common faith, ad-
ministration of the sacraments, meetings and their
right conduct, aid given to the spiritual and bodily
needs of their fellow-members, implies a ministry
or executive of some kind. To endeavor to explain
what was the character of the ministry of the Chris-
tian church in the earliest centuries of its existence
and how it came into being is the aim of this article.
I Two Different Kinds of Ministry.—The
earliest fact we have about the organization of the
Christian church is given in Acts 6, whcre we are
told that “seven” men were appointed to what is
called a “ministry of tables” (diakonein trapézais),
which is distinguished from the “ministry of the
word” (diakonia tov légou). This distinction be-
tween two different kinds of ‘ministry’ which
appears at the very beginning is seen to exist all
through the apostolic church and beyond it into the
sub-apostolic. It can be traced in the Epp. of St.
Paul and in other parts of the NT. It is seen in the
Didache, in the Pastor of Hermas, in the Epp. of
Barnabas, in the Apology of Justin Martyr, in the
writings of Irenaeus and elsewhere. (¥or a full
list of authorities, ef Harnack, Texte u. Unter-
suchungen, II, ii, 111 ff.) The one ministry differs
from the other in function, and the distinction
depends on a conception to be afterward examined
—that of ‘gifts.’ The common name, in apostolic
and sub-apostolic literature, for the members of
the one kind of ministry is ‘those who speak the
Word of God” (lalotintes tén Idgon toi Theot).
Modern writers have called it the charismatic,
but perhaps the better term is the prophetic min-
istry; while to the other class belong all the names
which are given to denote office-bearers in the
local churches. The two existed side by side.
The great practical distinction between them was
that the members of the former were in no sense
office-bearers in any one Christian community;
they were not elected or appointed to any office;
they were not set apart for duties by any ecclesi-
astical ceremony. The ‘‘Word” came to them and
they were compelled by inward impulsion to speak
the message given them to deliver. Some were
wanderers; others confined themselves to their own
community. They were responsible to no ecclesi-
astical authority. Churches were encouraged to
test them and their message; for the “gift”’ of dis-
cerning whether a so-called prophet spoke a truly
Divine message was always presupposed to be
within the local church. But once accepted they
took a higher place than the office-bearers, they
presided at the Lord’s Supper, and their judgment
in cases of discipline could overbear ordinary
ecclesiastical rules. The contest of Cyprian with
the ‘“confessors’”’ at Carthage was the last stage of
the long struggle which arose in the 2d cent. be-
tween the two ministries. Out of the other kind of
ministry came, by ordinary development, all the
various kinds of ecclesiastical organization which


Ministry


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2058


now exist. Its members were office-bearers in the
strictest sense of the word; they were selected to
do ecclesiastical work in a given community, they
were set apart for it in a special way, and they were
responsible to the church for its due performance.
But it is important to remember that while the
two kinds of ministries are thoroughly distinct from
each other, the same individuals might belong to
both kinds. The “prophetic gift’? might fall on
anyone, private member or office-bearer alike.
Office-holding did not prevent the “gift.” Poly-
carp, office-bearer at Smyrna, was a prophet; so
was Ignatius of Antioch, and many others. The
“sift” of speaking the Word of God was a personal

and not an official source of enlightenment.
In the prophetic ministry we find a threefold
division—aposiles, prophets and teachers. Some
would add a fourth, evangelists, i.e.


1. The men like the apostles in all respects
Prophetic save in having seen the Lord in the
Ministry flesh. The distinction may hold good


for the apostolic period, though that

appears to be very doubtful; it disappears utterly
in the sub-apostolic; evangelist and apostle seem
to be one class. This triple division may be traced
through early Christian literature from 1 Cor
down to the Clementine Homilies, which can scarcely
be earlier than 200 AD. It is hardly possible to
define each class in any mechanical fashion; speak-
ing generally, the first were the missionary pioneers
whose message was chiefly to the unconverted, while
to the second and third classes belonged exhortation
and instruction within the Christian communities.
(1) Apostles—In the NT and in the other lit.
of the early church the word ‘‘apostle” is used in a
narrower and in a wider sense, and it is the more
extensive use of the word which denotes the first
division of the prophetic ministry. The Lord
selected the Twelve, ‘‘whom also he named apostles”
(Mk 3 14, RVm), to be trained by personal fellow-
ship with Him and by apprentice mission work
among the villages of Galilee for that proclamation
of His gospel which was to be their future life-work.
Two things strictly personal and excluding every
thought of successors separated the ‘‘Eleven” from
all other men: long personal fellowship with Jesus
in the inner circle of His followers, and their selec-
tion by Himself while still in the flesh. They were
the “Apostles’’ in the narrow sense of the word.
But the name was given to many others. Matthias,
who had enjoyed personal intercourse with Jesus
both before and after the resurrection, was called
by the disciple company, confirmed by decision of
the lot, to the same ‘service and sending forth’
(diakonia kat apostolé) (Acts 1 25). Paul was
called by the Lord Himself, but in vision and in-
ward experience, and took rank with those before
mentioned (Rom 11ff; Gal 2 7-9). Others,
called apostles, are mentioned by name in the NT.
Barnabas is not only an apostle but is recognized
to have rank equal to the “Eleven” (Acts 14 14;
Gal 2 7-9). The correct rendering of the text
(Rom 16 7) declares that Andronicus and Junias
were apostles who had known Christ before Paul
became a believer. Chrysostom, who thinks that
Junias or Junia was a woman, does not believe that
her sex hindered her from being an apostle. Silas
or Silvanus and Timothy, on the most natural in-
terpretation of the passage, are called apostles by
St. Paul in 1 Thess 1 1.6. The title can hardly
be denied to Apollos (1 Cor 4 6.9). St. Paul
praises men, whom he calls ‘the apostles of the
churches,” and declares them to be “the glory of
Christ” (2 Cor 8 23m). One of them, Epaphrodi-
tus, is mentioned by name—“your apostle,” says
Paul writing to the Christians of Philippi (Phil 2
25m); and there must have been many others.


“Apostles” are distinguished from the ‘“Twelve”
by St. Paul in the rapid summary he gives of the
appearances of Jesus after the resurrection (1 Cor
15 5.7). Besides those true apostles the NT men-
tions others who are called ‘false apostles” (2 Cor
11 13), and the church of Ephesus is praised for
using its “gift”? of discrimination to reject men who
“call themselves apostles, and they are not” (Rev
2 2). This wider use of the word has descended to
the present day; “‘apostles’’ or “holy apostles” is still
the name for missionaries and missioners in some
parts of the Greek church. The double use of the
word to denote the ‘Twelve’ or the “Eleven” is
seen in the sub-apostolic age in the Didache, which
recognizes the narrower use of the word in its title
(“The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles”), and in
the text portrays the itinerant missionaries to
whom the name in its widest use belonged.

Those “apostles,” to whatever class they be-
longed, had one distinguishing characteristic: they
had chosen as their life-work to be the missionary
pioneers of the gospel of the Kingdom of Christ.
They were all engaged in aggressive work, and were
distinguished from others not so much by what
they were as by what they did. They were wander-
ers with no fixed place of residence. The require-
ments of their work might make them abide for
long periods in some center (as did Paul at Corinth
and at Ephesus, or some of the “Eleven’”’ at Jerus),
but they had no permanent home life. As the
earlier decades passed, their numbers increased
rather than diminished. They are brought vividly
before us in such writings as the Didache. They
were to be highly honored, but as severely tested.
They were not expected to remain longer than three
days within a Christian community, nor to fare
softly when there (Did., ii.4-6). The vindication
of their call was what they were able to accom-
plish, and to this St. Paul, the greatest of them,
appeals over and over again.

(2) Prophets.—Prophets had been the religious
guides of Israel of old, and the spirit of prophecy
had never entirely died out. John the Baptist
(Mt 11 9), Simeon (Lk 2 25.26), and Anna (Lk
2 36) had the gift in the days of Christ. It was
natural for the Sam woman to believe that the
stranger who spoke to her by the well was a prophet
(Jn 4 19). The reappearance of prophecy in its
old strength was looked on as a sign of the nearness
of the coming of the Messiah. Jesus Himself had
promised to send prophets among His followers
(Mt 10 41; 23 34; Lk 11 49). The promise was
fulfilled. Christian prophets appeared within the
church from its beginning. Nor were they con-
fined to communities of Jewish Christians; prophecy
appeared spontaneously wherever Christianity
spread. We are told of prophets in the churches of
Jerus and Caesarea where the membership was
almost purely Jewish; at Antioch where Jews and
Gentiles united to make one congregation; and
everywhere throughout the gentile churches—in
Rome, Corinth, Thessalonica and in the Galatian
churches (Acts 11 27; 15 32; 219.10; Rom 12
6.7; 1 Cor 14 32.36.37; 1 Thess 6 20; Gal 3
3-5). Prophets are mentioned by name—Agabus
(Acts 11 28; 21 10), Symeon and others at An-
tioch (Acts 13 1), Judas and Silas in Jerus (Acts
15 32). Nor was the “gift” confined to men;
women prophesied—the four daughters of Philip
among others (Acts 219). From the earliest
times down to the close of the 2d cent. and later,
an uninterrupted stream of prophets and prophet-
esses appeared in the Christian churches. The
statements of NT writers, and esp. of St. Paul, im-
Rly that prophets abounded in the earliest churches.

t. Paul, for example, expected the prophetic gift
to appear in every Christian community. He


2059


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ministry


recognized that they had a regular place in the meet~
ing for public worship (1_Cor 14); he desired that
every member in the Corinthian .church should
possess the “gift” and cultivate it (1 Cor 14 1.5.
39); he exhorted the brethren at Thessalonica to
‘cherish prophesyings’ (1 Thess 5 20), and those in
Rome to make full use of prophecy (Rom 12 6).
If he criticized somewhat severely the conduct of
the “prophets” in the Corinthian church, it was to
teach them how to make full use of their “gift”
for the right edifying of the brethren.

Prophecy was founded on revelation; the prophets
were men esp. “gifted” with spiritual intuition and
magnetic speech. Sometimes their “gift” took the
form of ecstasy, but by no means always; St. Paul
implies that prophets have a real command of and
can control their utterances. Sometimes their mes-
sage came to them in visions, such as we find in the
Apocalypse and in Hermas; but this was not a
necessary means. The prophets spoke as they
were moved, and the Spirit worked on them in
various ways.

The influence of those prophets seems to have in-
creased rather than diminished during the earlier dec-
ades of the 2d cent. While the duty of the apostle
was to the unbelievers, Jewish or heathen, the sphere of
the activity of the prophet was within the Christian
congregation. It was his business to edify the hrethren.
Prophets had a recognized place in the meeting for the
public worship of the congregation; if one happened to
be present at the dispensation of the Lord’s Supper, he
presided to the exclusion of the office-hearers, and his

rayers were expected to he extempore (Did., x.7);
Re had special powers when matters of discipline were
discussed, as is
from Hermas


lain from a great variety of evidence
own to Tertullian. From St. Paul's


(3) Teachers—While the third class of the pro-
phetic ministry, the teachers, is found joined to the
other two both in the NT and in sub-apostolic lit.,
and while St. Paul assigns a definite place for their
services in the meeting for edification (1 Cor 14
26), we hear less about them and their work. They
seem, however, to have lingered much longer in
active service in the. early church than did the
apostles and the prophets. : ;

As has been said, the first notice we have of organi-
zation within a local church is in Acts 6, where at

the suggestion of the apostles seven


2. The men were selected to administer the
Local charity of the congregation.
Ministry The conception that ‘the Seven” were


ive of the heginnings of local organization as a whole.
When we EUV the expansion of Christian communities
outside Jerus, we have no such distinct picture of he-


us that Paul and Barnahas left hehind them at Derbe,
Lystra and Iconium societies of brethren with ‘‘elders’’
at their head. The word used suggests an election hy
popular vote and was probably the same as had been
used In the selection of the ‘‘Seven’’ men. .


When we examine the records of the distinctively
Pauline churches, there is not much direct evidence
for the origins of the ministry there, but a great deal
about the existence of some kind of rule and rulers.
For one thing, we can see that these churches had
and were encouraged to have feelings of independ-
ence and of self-government; a great deal is said
about the possession of “gifts” which imply the
presence and power of the Spirit of Jesus within
the community itself. We find names applied to
men who, if not actually office-bearers, are at least
leaders and perform the functions of office-bearers
—protstdémenoi, potménes, episkopoi, didkonoi—and
where special designations are lacking a distinction
is always drawn between those who obey and those
who are to be obeyed. In all cases those Jeaders or
ministers are mentioned in the plural.

It may be said generally that about the close of
the 1st cent. every Christian community was ruled
by a body of men who are sometimes called pres~
byters (elders), sometimes but more rarely bishops
(overseers), and whom modern church historians
are inclined to call presbyter-bishops. Associated
with them, but whether members of the same court
or forming a court of their own it is impossible to
say, were a number of assistant rulers called
deacons. See BisHop; CuurcH GovERNMENT;
Deacon; Exper. The court of elders had no
president or permanent chairman. There was atwo-
fold not a threefold ministry. During the 3d cent.,
rising into notice by way of geographical distribu-
tion rather than in definite chronological order, this
twofold congregational ministry became threefold
in the sense that one man was placed at the head
of each community with the title of pastor or
bishop (the titles are interchangeable as late as the
4th cent. at least). In the early centuries those
local churches, thus organized, while they never
lacked the sense that they all belonged to one body,
were independent self-governing communities pre-
serving relations to each other, not by any political
organization embracing them all, but by eter
fellowship through visits of deputies, ‘interchange
of letters, and in some indefinite way giving and
receiving assistance in the selection and setting
apart of pastors.

Origins of local ministry—The question arises,
How did this organization come into being? We
may dismiss, to begin with, the idea once generally
accepted among the Reformed churches, that the
Christian society simply took over and made use of
the synagogue system of organization (Vitringa,
De synagoga vetere). The points common to both
reveal a superficial resemblance, but no more.
The distinctive differences are great. When we
add to them the decisive statement of Epiphanius
(Haeresis, xxx.18), that the Jewish Christians
(Judaizing) organized their communities with
archons and an archisynagogos like the Jewish syna-
gogues of the Dispersion and unlike the Christian
churches, all the evidence makes it impossible to
believe that the earliest Christian organization was
simply taken over from the Jewish. On the other
hand, there is little evidence that the apostles (the
Twelve and St. Paul) received a special commission
from Our Lord, to appoint and ordain the office-
bearers of the earliest Christian communities, so
exclusive that there could be no legitimate or-
ganization without this apostolic authority and
background. We find, on the contrary, the church
in Rome exercising all the disciplinary functions of
a congregation without this apostolic ecclesiastical


Ministry


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2060


rule supposed to be essential. Even in the mother-
church in Jerus, the congregational meeting exer-
cised rule over the apostles themselves, for we find
apostles summoned before it and examined on their
conduct (Acts 11 1-4). The whole question de-
mands the recognition of several facts:

(1) Evidence abounds to show that the local
churches during the apostolic and sub-apostolic
age were self-governing communities and that the
real background of the ministry was not apostolic
authority but the congregational meeting. Its
representative character and its authority are seen
in the apostolic and sub-apostolic lit. from St. Paul
to Cyprian.

(2) The uniquely Christian correlation of the
three conceptions of leadership, service and “gifts”;
leadership depended on service, and service was
possible by the possession and recognition of special
“gifts” which were the evidence of the presence and
power of the Spirit of Jesus within the community.
These “gifts” gave the church a Divine authority
to exercise rule and oversight apart from any special
apostolic direction.

(8) The general evidence existing to show that
there was a gradual growth of the principle of asso-
ciation from looser to more compact forms of or-
ganization (Gayford, art. “Church” in HDB; also
Harnack, Expos, 1887, January to June, 322-24),
must not be forgotten; only one must remember
that in young communities the growth is rapid.

(4) We must also bear in mind that the first
Christians were well acquainted with various kinds
of social organization which entered into their daily
life and which could not fail fo suggest how they
might organize their new societies.


Examples occur readily: (a) Every Jewish village
community was ruled by its ‘‘seven wise men,"' and it
is probable that the appointment of the "Seven" in the
primitive Jewish chnrch was suaeested by familiarity
with this example of social polity. (b) It was and is an
almost universal oriental usage that the ‘‘next of kin"
to the founder was recognized, after the founder's death,
to be the head of the new religious community founded,
and this usage accounts for the selection of James, the
eldest male surviving relative of Our Lord, to be the
recognized and honored head of the church in Jerus.
James has been called the first bishop; but when _we
read in Eusehins (HE, III, 11, 1.2; 32.4; IV, 22, 4; ILI,
20, 1-8) how his snccessors were chosen, the term seems
inappropriate. A succession in the male line of the
kindred of Jesus, where the selection to office is mainly
in the hands of a family council, and where two (James
and Zoker) can rule together, has small analogy to
episcopalrule. (c) The relation of ‘‘ patron" to “client,”
which in one form or other had spread throughout the
civilized world, is suggested hy a series of kindred words
used to denote rulers in local churches. We find pro-
istdmenot (mpotorduevor), prostdtis (mpoordris), prostdtés
(mpootarns), proestés (mpoectos), in varions writers, and
the last was used as late as the middle of the 2d cent.
to denote ministry in the Rom chnrch (Rom 12 8;
16 2; 1 Thess § 12; Hermas, Pastor. Vis. 2, 4; Justin,
Apol, 1.65). (d) The Rom empire was honeycomhed
with ‘'gilds,’’ some recognized by law, most of them
withont legal recognition and liable to suppression.
These confraternities were of very varied character—
trades unions, burial clubs, etc, but a large proportion
were for the purpose of practising special religious rites.
The Jewish synagogues of the Dispersion seemed to
have heen enrolled among those confraternities, and
certainly appeared to their heathen neighbors to be one
kind of such private associations for the practice of a
religion which had heen legalized. Many scholars have
insisted that the gentile Christian churches simply
copied the organization of such confraternities (Renan,
Les Apétres; Heinrici, Zeitschrift f. wissensch. Theol.,


1876-77); Hatch, Organization of the Early Christian
Churches). There must have been some external
resemblances. Pliny believed that the Christian


churches of Bithynia were illicit confraternities (Ep. 96;
cf Lucian, Peregrinus Proteus). They had, in common
with the churches, a democratic constitution; they
shared a ‘‘common meal” at stated times; they made a
monthly collection; they were ruled by a committee of
office-hearers; and they exercised 2 certain amount of
discipline over their members. Multitndes of Chris-
tians must have been members of such confraternities,
and many continued to be so after accepting Chris-
tianity (Cyprian, Ep., Ixvii. 6).


But while the Christian churches may have
learned much about the general principles of asso-
ciated life from all those varied forms of social
organization, it cannot be said that they copied
any one of them. The primitive Christian societies
organized themselves independently in virtue of
the new moral and social life implanted within
them; and though they may have come to it by
various paths, they all in the end arrived at onc
common form—a society ruled by a body of office-
bearers who possessed the “gifts” of government
and of subordinate service embodied in the offices
of presbyter and deacon.

Hl, The Threefold Congregational Ministry.—
During the 2d cent. the ministry was subject to a
change. The ruling body of office-bearers in every
congregation received a permanent president, who
was called the pastor or bishop, the latter term being
the commoner. The change came gradually. It
provoked no strong opposition. By the beginning
of the 3d cent. it was everywhere accepted.

When we seek to trace the causes why the college of
elders received a president, who hecame the center of
all the ecclesiastical life in the local church and the one
potent office-hearer, we are rednced to conjecture. This
only can be said with confidence, that the change began
in the East and gradually spread to the West, and that
there are hints of a gradual evolution (Lindsay, The
Church and the Ministry in the Early Centuries, 180,
183-85). Scholars have bronght forward many reasons
for the change; the need for an undivided leadership in
times of danger from external persecution or from the
introduction of gnostic speculations which disturbed the
faith of the members; the convenience of being repre-
sented to other local churches by one man who could
charge himself with the administration of the external
affairs of the congregation; the need of one man to
preside at the solemn and crowning act_of worship, the
administration of the Lord's Supper; the sense of con-
gregational unity implied in the possession of one leader
—each or all are prohable ways in which the churches
were influenced in making this change in their ministry.

This threefold congregational ministry is best
seen in the Epp. of Ignatius of Antioch. ‘They por-
tray a Christian community having at its head a
bishop, a presbyterium or session of elders, and a
body of deacons. These form the ministry or
office-bearers of the congregation to whom obe-
dience is due. Nothing is to be done without the
consent of the bishop, neither love-feast, nor sacra-
ment, nor anything congregational. The ruling
body is a court where the bishop sits as chairman
surrounded by his council or session of elders; and
the one is helpless without the other, for if the
bishop be the lyre, the elders are the chords, and
both are needed to produce melody. Ignatius
compares the bishop to Jesus, and the elders to the
apostles who surrounded Him. There is no trace
of sacerdotalism, apostolic succession, one-man
government, diocesan rule in those letters of Ig-
natius; and what they portray is unlike any form
of diocesan episcopacy.

It is interesting to remark how all throughout
the 3d cent. and later every body of Christians,

even if consisting of fewer than twelve


1. Insist- —_ families, is instructed to organize itself
ence on into a church under aministry of officc-
Organiza- bearers, consisting of a bishop or
tion under pastor, at least two elders and at least
a Ministry three deacons. Should the bishop


: be illiterate—for character more than
erudition determined his choice—the congregation
was told to elect 2 reader, and provision was made
for a ministry of women. It was possible to obey
such instructions, because the ministry of the
early church received no stipends. The ministry
were office-bearers, to whom ecclesiastical obedience
Mis due in paige of their ed election and their

elug set apart by prayer, and perhaps by laying on
of hands, for sacred office; Bat ne ee at the
same time merchants, artisans, or engaged in other


2061


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ministry


secular callings, and supported themselves. Build-
ings, set apart for public worship, did not exist
until the very close of the 2d cent., and then only
in a few populous centers in towns which had felt
persecution but slightly. The only property which a
church possessed, besides its copies of the Scriptures,
its congregational records and perhaps a place of
burial, were the offerings which were presented by
members of the congregation, mostly in kind, after
the Eucharist; and these offerings were distributed
to the poor of the congregation. If office-bearers
received a share, it was only on account of their
poverty and because they were on the roll of widows,
orphans and helpless poor.

This threefold congregational ministry has been
called by some scholars ‘“monarchical episcopacy,”
a title as high-sounding as it is misleading. The
kingdom over which ‘those so-called monarchs pre-
sided might and often did consist of less than
twelve families, and their rule was fenced in with
many restrictions. We can collect from the Epp.
of Ignatius what were the powers and what the
limitations (Ep. to Polycarp) of the bishop. He
administered the finances of the church; he was
president of the court of Elders; he had the right
to call and presumably to preside over the court of
discipline; and he had the regulation of the sacra-
ments in his hands. On the other hand, it is very
doubtful whether he, or even he in conjunction with
the elders, could excommunicate; that appears to
have remained in the hands of the congregational
meeting. The bishop might convoke the congre-
gational meeting for the purpose, but it belonged to
the meeting and not to the bishop to appoint dele-
gates and messengers to other churches; and the
meeting had the power to order the bishop to go
on such 4 mission.

(1) Aid given in selecting a bishop.—From what
has been said it is plain that the selection of a bishop
became one of the most important acts a congre-
gation was called upon to perform. Accordingly,
provision was made for its assistance. Itis declared
in the Apostolic Canons that if a congregation con-
tains fewer than twelve men competent to vote
at the election of a bishop, neighboring, “well-
established” churches are to be written to in order
that three men may be sent to assist the congrega-
tion in selecting their pastor (Sources of the Apos-
tolic Canons, 7, 8). This is evidently the origin of
what afterward became the custom and later a law,
that the consecration of a bishop required the
presence of three neighboring bishops—a rule
which has given occasion to the saying that “all
Christendom becomes Presbyterian on a conse-
cration day.” This custom and rule, which in its
beginnings was simply practical assistance given
to a weak by stronger congregations, came to bear
the meaning that the bishop thus consecrated was
an office-bearer in the church universal as well as
the pastor of a particular congregation. It is also
more than probable that this practice of seeking
assistance in an emergency is the germ out of which
grew the Synod—the earliest recorded synods
being congregational meetings assisted in times of
difficulty by advice of experienced persons from
other churches.

(2) Bishops and presbyters—When a small
group of villagers had been won to Christianity
through the efforts of the Christian congregation
in a neighboring town, they commonly were dis-
inclined to separate from it, and came from their
villages into town to join in the public worship.
“On the day called Sunday,” says Justin Martyr,
“‘al) who live in the city and in the country gather
together into one place” (Ap., 1.67). The earliest
collections of canons show that the bishop was able


in time of absence or sickness to delegate his duties
to elders or even to deacons; and this enabled him,
when occasion for it arose, to be, through his office-
bearers, the pastor of several congregations. We
can see the same process at work more clearly in
large towns where the number of Christians had
become very large. The bishop was always held
to be the head of the Christian community, however
large, in one place. He was the pastor; he baptized;
he presided at the Holy Supper; he admitted
catechumens to the full communion of the brother-
hood. By the middle of the 3d cent. the work in
most large towns was more than one man could do.
No record exists of the number of members belong-
ing to the Rom church at this time, but some idea
of 1ts size may be obtained from the fact that it had
more than 1,500 persons on its poor-roll; and before
the close of the century the Rom Christians wor-
shipped in over 40 separate places of meeting. It
is obvious that one man could not perform the
whole pastoral duties for such a multitude, and that
most of the pastoral work must have been delegated
to the elders or presbyters. The unity of the pas-
torate was for long strictly preserved by the custom
that the bishop consecrated the communion ele-
ments in one church, and these were carried round
to the other congregations. The bishop was thus
the pastor in every congregation; the elders and
deacons belonged to the whole Christian community;
they served all the congregations and were not
attached to one distinctively. In Alexandria, on
the other hand, something hike a parochial system
gathered round the bishop, for mdividual pres-
byters were set over the separate congregations
within the city. But always and without excep-
tion the original pastoral status of the bishop was
preserved by the fact that one portion of the pas-
toral duties was invariably left in his hands—the
rite of confirmation whereby catechumens were
admitted to full communion.


The middle of the 3d cent. witnessed two changes in
the ministry of the church. One was a multiplication of
tip oe Se an other, the growth of a hier-

a ultipli- archy; and while many causes went to pro-
Zany ce duce these changes it can hardly be doubted
that they were at least partly due to the

Orders and imitation of pagan religious organization.
the Growth Although we find the distinction between
of a those who are to be obeyed and those who
- are to ohey clearly laid down in the Epp.
Hierarchy of St. Paul, we do not find a common
é term in general use to denote the former
class until the beginning of the 3d cent. In the west
the word was ordo, and in the east clerus, from which
come our ‘‘orders’’ and ‘‘clergy.’’ Ordo was the desig-
nation for the municipality in towns or for the committee
which presided over a confraternity; and clerus denoted
rank or class. The introduction of ministerial stipends
and the implication that a paid ministry was expected
to give its whole time to the service of the church made
the distinction hetween clergy and laity more emphatic.
When we investigate the matter, it is evident that the
fact that the clergy are paid complicates the question;
for the earliest lists are evidently those who are entitled
to share in the funds of the church, and widows and
orphans figure as memhers of the ordo or clerus. Setting
this disturhing element aside we find that the earliest
division of the ministry in the 3d cent. is into hishops,
preshyters and deacons (all congregational); but bishops
and preshyters are sometimes said to form the special
ordo ecclestasticus. The earliest addition to those three
orders is the reader, and there follows soon the sub-
deacon. Then come such persons as exorcists, acolyths,
singers, door-keepers and even grave-diggers; and to
such the name ‘‘minororders"’ is given. All are included
within the clergy, all receive a proportionate share of
the revenues of the congregational funds. The presence
of hishops, preshyters and deacons needs no explanation.
Readers, aS we have seen, were needed at first to assist
illiterate hishops or pastors; their retention and_ the
insertion of exorcists have heen plausihly accounted for
hy the idea that they represented the absorption of the
old prophetic ministry. But in instituting the other
minor orders the Christlan church evidently copied the
pagan temple usages where persons who performed corre-
sponding services were included among the temple min-
istry and had due share of the temple revenues. In the
institution of a graded hierarchy including metropolitans


Minni
Miracle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2062


and patriarchs, the churches probably followed_ the
example of the great pagan organization called forth by
the imperial cult of the Divot and Divae (Lindsay, The
Church and the Ministry, 335 ff). As Mommsenremarks,
“he conquering Christian church took its hierarchic
weapons from the arsenal of the enemy.”

IV. Synods.—Synods to begin with were essen-
tially democratic assemblies. They were, in their
primitive form, congregational meetings assisted in
times of emergency by delegates (not necessarily
bishops) from ‘well-established churches,” and they
grew to be the instrument by which churches grouped
round one center became united into one compact
organization. The times were not democratic,
and gradually the presence of the laity and even of
presbyters and deacons and their combined assent
to the decisions of the assembly became more and
more a matter of form and gradually ceased alto-
gether. Thesynods consisted exclusively of bishops
and became councils for registering their decisions;
and this implied that each local church was fully
and completely represented by its pastor or bishop,
who had become very much of an autocrat, respon-
sible, not to his congregation nor even to a synod,
but to God alone. Before the end of the 3d cent.
and onward, synods or councils had become a


regular part of the organization of the whole church,


and the membership was confined to the bishops of
the several churches included within the group. It
was natural that such assemblies should meet in
the provincial capitals, for the roads converged to
the cities which were the seats of the Rom pro-
vincial administration. A synod required a chair-
man, and various usages obtained about the natural
chairman. At first the oldest bishop present was
placed in the chair, and this continued long to be
the practice in several parts of the empire. Grad-
ually it became the habit to put into the chair the
bishop of the town in which the council met, and
this grew to a prescriptive right. It was then that
the bishops of the towns which were the meeting-
places of synods came to be called metropolitans.
The title was for long one of courtesy only and did
not carry with it any ecclesiastical rank and author-
ity. But by the middle of the 4th cent. the metro-
politans had acquired the right to summon the
synods and even to exercise some authority over the
bishops of the bounds, esp. in the matter of election
and consecration. When Christianity was thor-
oughly established as the religion of the empire, the
more important bishops secured for themselves the
civil precedence and privileges which had belonged
to the higher priests of the abandoned Imperial
Cult, and the higher ranks of the Christian ministry
came into the possession of a lordship strangely at
variance with their earlier position of service.

LireraturE.—C. Vitringa, De synagoge vetere libri
tres, Leucopetrae  (Weissenfels), 1726; Bingham,
Antiquities of the Christian Church, 1708-32; _Banner-
mann, The Scripture Doctrine of the Church; Hort, The
Christian Ecclesia; Lightfoot, Comm. on the Ep. to
the Phil (dissertation on the minlstry); Hatch, The
Organization of the Early Christian Church, and arts. on
“Orders’’ in Smith’s Dict. of Christian Antigutties;
Harnack, Erpos for January to June, 1887, and Ent-
stehung u. Entwicklung der Kirchenverfassung ... .ind.
zwet ersten Jahrhunderten (1910) (ET The Constitution
and Law of the Church); Lindsay, The Church and the
Ministry in the Early Centuries; Schmiedel, art. ‘‘Min-
istry’ in HB; Gayford, art. ‘‘Church"’ in HDB.

; T. M. Linpsay

MINNI, min’ (3%, minnz): A kingdom men-
tioned in Jer 61 27, along with Ararat and Ash-
kenaz, as assailants of Babylon. It is identified
with the Minnai of the Assyr inscriptions, in close
relation with, or part of, Armenia.


MINNITH, min‘ith (13%, minnith; B, axpis
’Apvdév, dchris Arnén, A, ets Depwel@, ets Se-
méeith): After Jephthah defeated the Ammonites,
he is said to have smitten them from Aroer “until


thou come to Minnith” (Jgs 11 33). Onom men-
tions a place called Maanith, 4 Rom miles from
Heshbon, on the road to Philadelphia (‘Amman),
and locates Abel-cheramim, which is mentioned
with Minnith, 7 miles from Philadelphia, without
indicating the direction. Some travelers have
spoken of a Menjah, 7 miles E. of Heshbon, but of
this place Tristram (Land of Moab, 140) could. find
no trace. The same place appears to be mentioned
in Ezk 27 17 as supplying wheat, which figures in
the trade between Judah and Tyre. There are
really no reliable data on which to suggest an identi-
fication, while there are grave reasons to suspect the
integrity of the text. W. Ewine

MINSTREL, min’strel. See Music.

MINT, mint (4Storpov, hédiiosmon): Mentioned
(Mt 23 23; Lk 11 42) as one of the small things
which were tithed. The cultivated variety (Mentha
piperita), ‘peppermint,’ was doubtless primarily
intended, but the wild M. silvestris or horsemint,
which flourishes all over the mountains of Pal, is
probably included.


MIPHKAD, mif’kad, GATE OF ("Ppb@q 170,
sha‘ar ha-miphkadh; RV ‘Hammiphkad’’ [Neh
3 31]): A gate in, or near, the north end of the east
wall of Jerus, rebuilt under Nehemiah. Its exact
position is uncertain. See JERUSALEM.


MIRACLE, mir’a-k’]:
I. Nature or Miracte
1. General Idea
2. Biblical Terms Employed
II. Mriracuiz in tHE NT
1. Miracles in Gospel History
2. Special Testimony of St. Luke
3. ar ustycreh ines’ of Evidence in Gospels and
cts
III. Muracie anp Laws or Natures
1. Prejudgment of Negative Critlcism
. Sir George Stokes Quoted
. Effects on Nature of New Agencies
. Agreement with Biblical Idea and Terms
. J. 8. Mill on Miracle
. Miracle as Connected with Command
VIDENTIAL VALUE OF MIRACLE
. Miracles as Proofs of Revelatlon
. Miracles of Christ in This Relatlon
. Miracles Part of Revelation
IRACLES IN THE OT
Analogy with NT Miracles
. The Mosaic Miracles
. Subsequent Miracles
. Prophecy as Miracle
VI. EccursiasticaL MiRacLes
1. Probability of Such Miracles
2. Pascal Quoted
VII. Miracte tn Works oF GRACE
LifBRATURE.


I. Nature of Miracle.—‘Miracle”’ is the general
term for the wonderful phenomena which accom-
panied the Jewish and Christian revela-~
1. General tion, esp. at critical moments, and
Idea, which are alleged to have been con-
tinued, under certain conditions, in
the history of the Christian church. The miracle
proper is a work of God (Ex 7 3 ff; Dt 4 34.35,
etc; Jn 3 2; 9 32.33; 10 38; Acts 10 38, ete);
but as supernatural acts miracles are recognized
as possible to evil agencies (Mt 24 24; 2 Thess 2
9; Rev 13 14; 16 14, etc).
The Bib. idea of miracle as an extraordinary work
of God, generally though not invariably (“provi-
dential’? miracles—see below, II, 6),


4 4
ig 09 Nm bef Gy 69S


Poot


2. Biblical transcending the ordinary powers of
Terms Nature, wrought in connection with the
Employed ends of revelation, is illustrated by


; the terms used to describe miracles
in the OT and NT. One class of terms brings out
the unusual, exceptional, and striking character of


the works, as NDB, pele’, minopy, niphla’oth (Ex


2063


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Minni
Miracle


3 20; 16 11, etc), répas, téras, lit. “a portent” (in
pl. Mt 24 24; Acts 2 22.43, etc); another lays
— on the power displayed in them, as T1723,
@bhirah, Stvauis, duinamis (in pl. “mighty works,”
RVm “powers! Mt 11 20.2193; 13 b4; 14 3;
2 Cor 12 12, etc); a third gives prominence to
their teleological significance—their character as
“signs,” as MIN, ’dth (pl. RV “signs,” Nu 14 22:
Dt 11 3, etc), onuetov, sémeion (pl. RV “signs,
Jn 2 11.23, and frequently; Acts 4 16.22; 6 8:
Rev 13 14, etc). Another OT word for “wonder”
or “miracle” is MDW, maphéth (Ex 7 9; Dt 29 3).
See, further, below, III, 4.
Hf, Miracle in the NT.—The subject of miracles
has given rise to much abstract discussion; but it
‘ is best approached by considering the
1. Miracles actual facts involved, and it is best
in Gospel to begin with the facts nearest to us:
History those which are recorded in the NT.
Our Lord’s ministry was attended
from first to last by events entirely beyond the
ordinary course of Nature. He was born of a Virgin,
and His birth was announced by angels, both to
His mother, and to the man to whom she was be-
trothed (Mt and Lk). He suffered death on the
cross ag an ordinary man, but on the third day after
His crucifixion He rose from the tomb in which He
was buried, and lived with His disciples for 40 days
(Acts 1 3), eating and drinking with them, but
with a body superior to ordinary physical condi-
tions. At length He ascended to the heavens, and
a cloud received Him out of their sight. But
besides these two great miracles of His birth and His
resurrection, Jesus was continually performing
miracles during His ministry. His own words
furnish the best description of the facts. In reply
to the question of John the Baptist, His predecessor,
He said, ‘‘Go and tell John the things which ye hear
and see: the blind receive their sight, and the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and
the dead are raised up, and the poor have good
tidings preached to them’’ (Mt 11 4.5). Speci-
mens of these miracles are given in detail in the
Gospel narratives; but it is a mistake to consider
the matter, as is too often done, as though these par-
ticular miracles were the only ones in question.
Even if they could be explained away, as has often
been attempted, there would remain reiterated
statements of the evangelists, such as St. Matthew's
that He “went about in all Galilee, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the king-
dom, and healing all manner of disease and all
manner of sickness among the people” (4 23), or
St. Luke’s “And a great number of the people from
all Judaea and Jerus, and the seacoast of Tyre and
Sidon, who came to hear him, and to be healed of
their diseases; and they that were troubled with
unclean spirits were healed. And all the multitude
sought to touch him; for power came forth from
him, and healed them all’’ (6 17-19).
It must be borne in mind that if there is any
assured result of modern criticism, it is that these
accounts proceed from contemporaries
2. Special and eyewitnesses, and with respect
Testimony to the third evangelist there is one
of St. Luke unique consideration of great import.
The researches of Dr. Hobart have
proved to the satisfaction of a scholar like Harnack,
that St. Luke was a trained physician. His testi-
mony to the miracles is therefore the nearest thing
possible to the evidence which has often been
desired—that of a man of science. When St. Luke,
e.g., tells us of the healing of a fever (4 38.39), he
uses the technical term for a violent fever recog-
nized in his time (cf Meyer, in loc.); his testimony
is therefore that of one who knew what fevers and


the healing of them meant. This consideration is
esp. valuable in reference to the miracles recorded
of St. Paul in the latter part of Acts. It should
always be borne in mind that they are recorded by
a physician, who was an eyewitness of them.
It seems to follow from these considerations that
the working of miracles by Our Lord, and by St.
Paul in innumerable cases, cannot
3. Trust- be questioned without attributing to
worthiness the evangelists a wholesale untrust-
of Evidence worthiness, due either to wilful, or to
in Gospels superstitious misrepresentation, and
and Acts this is a supposition which will cer-
tainly never commend itself to a fair
and competent judgment. It would involve, in
fact, such a sweeping condemnation of the evangel-
ists, that it could never be entertained at all except
under one PICeUpDoRsOU, viz. that such miraculous
occurrences, as being incompatible with the estab-
lished laws of Nature, could not possibly have hap-
pened, and that consequently any allegations of
toe must of necessity be attributed to illusion or
raud. .
_ HL Miracle and Laws of Nature.—This, in fact,
is the prejudgment or prejudice which has prompted,
either avowedly or tacitly, the great
1. Pre- mass of negative criticism on this sub-
judgment of ject, and if it could be substantiated,
Negative we should be confronted, in the Gos-
Criticism pels, with a problem of portentous
difficulty.
On this question of the abstract possibility of
miracles, it seems sufficient to quote the following
passage from the Gifford Lectures for


2. Sir 1891 of the late eminent man of
George science, Professor Sir George Stokes.
Stokes On p. 23 Professor Stokes says: ‘“‘We
Quoted know very well that a man may in general


act uniformly according to a certain rule,
5 _ and yet for a special reason may on a par-
ticular occasion act quite differently. We cannot refuse
to admit the possibility of something analogous taking
place as regards the action of the Supreme Being. If
we think of the laws of Nature as self-existent and un-
caused, then we cannot admit any deviation from them.
But if we think of them as designed by a Supreme Will,
then we must allow the posslhility of their being onsome —
pie occasion suspended. Nor is it even necessary,
n order that some result out of the ordinary course of
Nature should be brought about, that they should even
be suspended; it may be that some different law Is
brought into action, whereby the rcsult in question is
brought about, without any suspension whatever of the
laws by which the ordinary course of Nature is regu-
lated. .... It may be that the event which we call a
miracle was brought about, not by any suspension of the
laws in ordinary operation, but by the superaddltlon
of something not ordinarily in operation, or, If in oper-
atlon, of such a nature that its operation Is not percelved.””


Only one consideration need be added to this
decisive scientific statement, viz. that if there be
agencies and forces in existence out-


3. Effects side the ordinary world of Nature,
on Nature and if they can under certain circum-
of New stances interpose in it, they must
Agencies necessarily produce effects inconsistent


with the processes of that world when
left to itself. Life under the surface of the water
has a certain course of its own when undisturbed;
but if a man standing on the bank of a river throws
a stone into it, effects are produced which must be
as unexpected and as unaccountable as a miracle
to the creatures who live in the stream. The near-
ness of two worlds which are absolutely distinct
from one another receives, indeed, a striking illus-
tration from the juxtaposition of the world above
the water and the world below its surface. There
js no barrier between them; they are actually in
contact; yet the life in them is perfectly distinct.
The spiritual world may be as close to_us as the air
is to the water, and the angels, or other ministers


Miracle


of God’s will, may as easily, at His word, interpose
im it as a man can throw a stone into the water.
When a stone is thus thrown, there is no suspension
or modification of any law; it is simply that, as
Sir George Stokes supposes in the case of a miracle,

a new agency has interposed.
This, indeed, is the main fact of which miracles
are irresistible evidence. They show that some
power outside Nature, some super-


4. Agree- natural power, has intervened. They
ment with are exactly described by the three
- Biblical words in the NT already mentioned.
Idea and They are teraia, “prodigies” or ‘‘won-
Terms ders’; they are also dunameis, vir-
tutes, “powers,” or “manifestation of

powers’; and finally they arc sémeia, “signs.”


The three conceptions are combined, and the source
of such manifestations stated with them, in a
pregnant verse of He: “God also bearing witness
with them, both by signs and wonders, and by mani-
fold powers, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit, accord-
ing to his own will” (2 4).
The words of J. 8S. Mill on the question of the possi-
bility of miracles may also be quoted. Dealing with the
4, Objection of Hume in his Essay on Mira-
5. J. S. Mill ces, Mill observes: ‘In order that any
on Miracle alleged fact should be contradictory to a
law of causation, the allegation must be,
not simply that the cause existed withont heing followed
by the effect, for that would be no uncommon occurrence;
but that this happened in the absence of any adequate
counteracting cause. Now in the case of an alleged
miracle, the assertion is the exact opposite of this. It
is that the effect was defeated, not in the absence, but
in consequence, of a counteracting cause, namely, a
direct interposition of an act of the will of some being
who has power over Nature; and in particular of a Being,
whose will being assumed to have endowed all the causes
with the powers by which they produce their effects,
may well be supposed able to counteract them. A
miracle (as was justly remarked by Brown) is no con-
tradiction to the law of cause and effect; it is a new effect,
supposed _ to be produced by the introduction of a new
cause. Of the adequacy of that cause, if present, there
can be no donbt; and the only antecedent improbability
which can be ascribed to the miracle is the improbability
that any such cause existed "’ (System of Logic, II, 161-62).


There is, however, one other important char-
acteristic of miracles—of those at least with which
we are concerned—viz. that they occur
6. Miracle at the command, or at the prayer, of
as Con- the person to whom they are attrib-
nected with uted. This is really their most sig-
Command nificant feature, and the one upon
which their whole evidential value
depends. One critic has compared the fall of the
fortifications of Jellalabad, on a critical occasion,
with the fall of the walls of Jericho, as though the
one was no more a miracle than the other. But the
fall of the walls of Jericho, though it may well have
becn produced by some natural force, such as an
earthquake, bears the character of a miracle because
it was predicted, and was thus commanded by God
to occur in pursuance of the acts prescribed to
Joshua. Similarly the whole significance of Our
Lord’s miracles is that they occur at His word and
in obedience to Him. ‘What manner of man is
this,” exclaimed the disciples, “that even the winds
and the sea obey him?” (Mt 8 27).
IV. Evidential Value of Miracle.—This leads
us to the true view of the value of miracles as proofs
of a revelation. This is one of the
1. Miracles points which has been discussed in


as Proofs far too abstract a manner. Argu-
of Reve- ments have becn, and still arc, con-
lation structed to show that there can be no


real revelation without miracles, that
miracles are the proper proof of a revelation, and
soon. Itis always a perilous method of argument,
perhaps a presumptuous one, to attempt to de-
termine whcther God could produce.a given result
in any other way than the one which He has actually


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2064


adopted. The only safe, and the sufficient, method
of proceeding is to consider whether as a matter
of fact, and in what way, the miracles which are
actually recorded do guarantee the particular reve-
lation in question.
Consider Our Lord’s miracles in this light.
Assuming, on the grounds already indicated, that
they actually occurred, they prove
2. Miracles beyond doubt that He had supreme


of Christ command over Nature; that not only
in This the winds and the sea, but the human
Relation soul and body obeyed him, and in the


striking words of the Eng. service for
the Visitation of the Sick, that He was “Lord of
life and death, and of all things thereto pertaining,
as youth, strength, health, age, weakness and sick-
ness.” This is the grand fact which the miracles
establish. They are not like external evidence,
performed in attestation of a doctrine. They are
direct and eloquent evidence of the cardinal truth
of our faith, that Our Lord possessed powers which
belong to God Himself. But they are not less


-direct evidence of the special office He claimed


toward the human race—that of a Saviour. He did
not merely work wonders in order that men might
believe His assertions about Himself, but His
wonderful works, His powers—virtutes—were direct
evidence of their truth. He proved that He was
a Saviour by doing the works of a Saviour, by
healing men and women from their diseases of both
body and soul. It is well known that salvation in
the true sense, viz. saving men out of evils and cor-
ruptions into which they have fallen, is an idea
which was actually introduced into the world by the
gospel. There was no word for it in the Rom lan-
guage. The ancients know of a servator, but not
of a salvator. The essential message of the miracles
is that they exhibit Our Lord in this character—
that of one who has alike the will and the power to
save. Such is Our Lord’s own application of them
in His answer, already quoted, to the disciples of
John the Baptist (Mt 11 4.5).
It is therefore an extraordinary mistake to suppose
that the evidence for our faith would not be dam-
aged if the miracles were set aside.
3. Miracles We should lose the positive evidence
Part of we now possess of Our Lord’s saving
Revelation power. In this view, the miracles are
not the mere proofs of a revelation;
they are themselves the revelation. They reveal
a Saviour from all human ills, and there has been
no other revelation in the world of such a power.
The miracles recorded of the apostles have a like
effect. They are wrought, like St. Peter’s of the
impotent man, as evidence of the living power of the
Saviour (Acts 3,4). “Be it known unto you
all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified,
whom God raised from the dead, even in him doth


The nature of that force is
revealed by them, and can only be ascertained by
observation of them. A man is known by his words
and by his deeds, and to these two sources of reve-
lation, respecting His person and character, Our
Lord expressly appealed. “If I do not the works
of my Father, believe me not. But if I do them,
though ye believe not me, believe the works: that


2065


_ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Miracle


ye may know and understand that the Father is
in me, and I in the Father” (Jn 10 37.38).

It is therefore a mistake to try to put the evidence
of the miracles into a logically demonstrative argu-
ment. Paley stated the case too much in this almost
anathematized form.


“It is idle,” he said, ‘to say that a future state had
heen discovered already. It had been discovered as the
Copernican system was; it was one guess among many.
He alone discovers who proves; and no man can prove
this point but the teacher who testifies hy miracles that
his doctrine comes from God” (Moral and Polit. Phi-
losophy, hook V, ch ix, close).


Coleridge, in the Aids to Reflection, criticizes the
above and puts the argument in a juster and more
human form.


“Most fervently do I contend, that the miracles worked
by Christ, both as miracles and as fulfilments of prophecy,
both as signs and as wonders, made plain discovery, and
gave unquestionable proof, of His Divine character and
authority; that they were to the whole Jewish nation
true and appropriate evidences, that He was _ Indeed
come who had promised and declared to their fore-
fathers, Behold your God will come with vengeance, even
God, with a recompense! He will come and save you.
I receive them as proofs, therefore, of the truth of every
word which He taught who was Himself the Word: and
as sure evidences of tho final victory over death and of
the life to come, in that they were manifestations of
Him who said: I am the resurrection and the life!’’ (note
prefatory to Aphorism CX XIII).


This seems the fittest: manner in which to con-

template the evidence afforded by miracles.
V. Miracles in the OT.—If the miracles ascribed
to Our Lord and His apostles are established on the
grounds now stated, and are of the


1. Analogy value just explained, there can be
with NT little difficulty in principle in accepting
Miracles _as credible and applying the miracles


of the OT. They also are obviously

wrought as manifestations of a Divine Being, and
as evidences of His character and will.

This, e.g., was the great purpose of the miracles

wrought for the deliverance of the people of Israel


out of Egypt. The critical theories
2. The which treat the narrative of those
Mosaic events as “unhistorical’” are, I am
Miracles convinced, unsound. If they could


be established, they would deprive
us of some of the most precious evidences we possess
of the character of God. But, in any case, the
purpose to which the alleged miracles are ascribed
is of the same character as in the case of the NT
miracles. “For ask now,’ says Moses, “of the
days that are past . . . . whether there hath been
any such thing as this great thing is, or hath been
heard like it? Did ever a people hear the voice
of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou
hast heard, and live? Or hath God assayed to go
and take him a nation from the midst of another
nation, by trials, by signs, and by wonders, and
by war, and by a mighty hand, and by an out-
stretched arm, and by great terrors, according to.
all that Jek your God did for you in Egypt before
your eyes? Unto thee it was showed, that thou
mightest know that Jeh he is God; there is none
else besides him’? (Dt 4 32-35). The God of the
Jews was, and is, the God manifested in those
miraculous acts of deliverance. Accordingly, the
Ten Commandments are introduced with the
declaration: “I am Jeh thy God, who brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bond-
age,” and on this follows: “Thou shalt have no
other gods before me’ (Ex 20 2.3). Without
these miracles, the God of the Jews would be an
abstraction. As manifested in them, | He is the
living God, with a known character, “a just God
and a Saviour” (Isa 45 21), who can be loved
with all the heart, and soul, and mind, and


strength.


The subsequent miracles of Jewish history, like
those’wrought by Elijah, serve the same great end,
and reveal more and more both of the


3. Subse- will and the power of God. They are
quent not mere portents, wrought as an ex-
Miracles — ternal testimony to a doctrine. They


are the acts of a living Being wrought
through His ministers, or with their coéperation,
and He is revealed by them. If the miracles of the
NT were possible, those of the OT were possible,
and_as those of the NT reveal the nature and will
of Christ, by word and deed, so those of the OT
reveal the existence, the nature, and the will of God.
Nature, indeed, reveals God, but the miracles reveal
new and momentous acts of God; and the whole
religious life of the Jews, as the Pss show, is indis-
solubly bound up with them. The evidence for
them is, in fact, the historic consciousness of a great
and tenacious nation.
It should be added that the Jewish Scriptures
embody one of the greatest of miracles—that of
prophecy. It is obvious that the
4, Prophecy destiny of the Jewish people is pre-
as Miracle dicted from the commencement, in the
narrative of the life of Abraham and
onward. There can, moreover, be no question
that the office of the Christ had been so distinctly
foreshadowed in the Scriptures of the OT that the
people, as a whole, expected a Messiah before He
appeared, Our Lord did not, like Buddha or Mo-
hammed, create a new office; He came to fill an
office which had been described by the prophets,
and of which they had predicted the functions and
powers. Weare told of the Saviour, “And beginning
from Moses and from all the prophets, he inter-
preted to them in all the scriptures the things con-
cerning himself’? (Lk 24 27). That, again, is a
revelation of God’s nature, for it reveals Him as
“knowing the end from the beginning,” and as the
Ruler of human life and history.
VI. Ecclesiastical Miracles.—Some notice, finally,
must be taken of the question of what are called
ecclesiastical miracles. There seems


1. Proba- no sufficient reason for assuming that
bility of miracles ceased with the apostles, and
Such there is much evidence that in the early
Miracles church miraculous cures, both of body


and soul, were sometimes vouchsafed.
There were occasions and circumstances when the
manifestation of such miraculous power was as
appropriate as testimony of the living power of
Christ, as in the scenes in the Acts. But they were
not recorded under inspired guidance, like the
miracles of the Apostolic Age, and they have in
many cases been overlaid by legend.
The observation in Pascal's Thoughts eminently applies
to this class of miracles: ‘It has appeared to me that the


real cause [that there are so many false
2. Pascal miracles, false revelations, etc] is that
Quoted there are true ones, for it would not he

possihle that there should be so many
false miracles unless there were true, nor so many false
religions unless there were one that is true. For if all
this had never been, it is impossible that so many others
should have believed it... .. Thus instead of con-
cluding that there are no true miracles since there are
so many false, we must on the contrary say that there
are true miracles since there are so many false, and that
false miracles exist only for the reason that there are
true; so also that there are false religions only because
there is one that is true’’ (On Miracles).


VII. Miracle in Works of Grace.—lIt has lately
been argued with much earnestness and force in
Germany, particularly by J. Wendland, in his
Miracles and Christianity, that belief in miracles
ig indispensable to our apprehension of a real
living God, and to our trust in His saving work in
our own souls. The work of grace and salvation,
indeed, is all so far miraculous that it requires the
influence upon our nature of a living power above


Miracles, Gift of
Mitre


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2066


that nature. It is not strictly correct to call it
miraculous, as these operations of God’s Spirit are
now an established part of His kingdom of grace.
But they none the less involve the exercise of a like
supernatural power to that exhibited in Our Lord’s
miracles of healing and casting out of'devils; and
in proportion to the depths of man’s Christian life
will he be compelled to believe in the gracious
operation on his soul of this Divine interposition.

On the whole, it is perhaps increasingly realized
that miracles, so far from being an excrescence on
Christian faith, are indissolubly bound up with it,
and that there is a complete unity in the mani-
festation of the Divine nature, which is recorded in
the Scriptures.


Lirerature.—Trench, Notes on the Miracles; Moz-
ley, Bampton Lectures (Mozley’s argument is perhaps
somewhat marred by its too positive and controversial
tone, but, if the notes be read as well as the Lectures, the
reader will obtain a comprehensive view of the main
controversies on the subject); A. B. Bruce, The Miracu-
lous Element in the Gospels. For modern German views
see J. Wendland, Miracles and Christianity; Christlieb,
Modern Doubt and Christian Belief. Paley’s Evidences
and Butler’s Analogy may profitably be consulted. On
continuance of miracles, see Bushnell, Nature and the
Supernatural, ch xiv, and Christlieb, as above, Lecture V.


. Wace
MIRACLES, GIFT OF. See Sprriruau Girrs;


MIRACLE.


MIRAGE, mé-razh’ (290, sharabh, “heat-
mirage’; Arab. ile é , sarab, from vb. Siete “to


go forth,” “to flow”; hence ‘flowing of water’):
“The glowing sand shall become a pool, and the
thirsty ground springs of water” (Isa 35 7); AV has
“parched ground” and RVm “‘mirage.”” The same
Heb word is also used in Isa 49 10, ‘Neither shall
the heat [m ‘‘mirage’’] nor sun smite them.” These
are the only uses of the word in the Scriptures,
although mirages are very common in the drier
parts of the country. However, the context in
both cases seems to justify the tr usually given,
rather than “mirage.” Aurrep H. Joy


MIRE, mir. See Cuauxstonz; Cuay; Marsu.


MIRIAM, mir’i-am (OPA, miryam; LXX and
the NT Mapidp, Maridm; EV of the NT “Mary”):

(1) Daughter of Amram and Jochebed, and sister
of Aaron and Moses. It is probable that it was
she who watched the ark of bulrushes in which the
child Moses was laid (Ex 2 4). She associated
herself with her brothers in the exodus, is called
“the prophetess,”’ and led the choir of maidens who
sang the triumph-song after the crossing of the
Red Sea (Ex 15 20f). Along with Aaron, she op-
posed Moses at Hazeroth (Nu 12 1-5). She was
smitten with leprosy in punishment, but on Aaron’s
intercession was pardoned and healed (Nu 12
10-15). She died and was buried at Kadesh (Nu
20 1). In_ the Deuteronomic Law respecting
leprosy, Miriam is mentioned as a warning to the
Israelites (Dt 24 8f). In Mic 6 4, she is referred
to along with Moses and Aaron as a leader of God’s
people.

(2) Son (or daughter) of Jether (1 Ch 4 17).
The latter half of the verse is in its present situation
unintelligible; it should probably follow ver 18
(see Curtis, Chron., in loc.). Joon A. Lrzs


MIRMAH, mir’ma (T, mirmah, “deceit”):
A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 10).


MIRROR, mir’ér. See LooxinG-Guass.


MISAEL, mis’é-el, mi’sf-el (A, Micaf\, Misaél,
B, Macagd, Meisaél): °


(1) One of those who stood on Ezra’s left hand
as he expounded the Law (1 Esd 9 44=“Mishael,”
Neh 8 4). ‘

(2) In Three ver 66 (LXX Dnl 8 88), for ‘“‘Mis-
hael,” one of Daniel’s companions in captivity.


MISAIAS, mi-sa’yas, mi-si’as: RVm=‘‘Masias.”


MISCHIEF, mis’chif: The word, in the sense of
“hurt” or “evil” befalling, plotted against, or done
to, anyone, represents a variety of Heb terms (e.g.
’ason, AV Gen 42 4; 44 29; Ex 21 22; ra‘, 158
23 9; 28 16 8; 1 K 11 25, etc; ‘amal, Ps 7 14.
16; 10 7.14; Prov 24 2, etc). Sometimes RV
changes the word, as to “evil” (Ex 32 12.22); in
Acts 13 10, to ‘“villany” (sadtoupyla, rhadiourgia).

In RV Apoc the word is used for caxd, kakd, “evils,”
Ad Est 13 5 (cf Sir 19 28); xaxla, kakia, “evil,”
1 Mace 7 23; and Lat malum, ‘‘evil,” 2 Esd 15 56.
“Mischievous” is nsed, Ad Est 14 19, for rovnpevopat,
ponéretiiomai, ‘to be evil.” Theuse in AV Apoc is
considerably more extended (Sir 11 33; 19 27; 27
27, etc). James ORR


MISGAB, mis’gab (230%, ha-misgabh; B,
’And0, Amdih, A, 7d Kparalopa, 16 kratatoma):
Named with Nebo and Kiriathaim in the denuncia-
tion of doom against. Moab (Jer 48 1). No trace
of any name resembling this has been found. Pos-
sibly we should take it, not as a place-name, but as
an appellation of some strong fortress, perhaps of
Kir-moab itself. The term is elsewhere tr? “high
fortress” (Isa 25 12, etc).


MISHAEL, mish’4-el, mi‘sh4-el Oxia >» min
sha’el, perhaps= ‘‘who is equal to God?”’):

(1) A Kohathite, 4th in descent from Levi (Ex
6 22). He and his brother Elzaphan carried out
Moses’ order to remove from the sanctuary and the
camp the corpses of Nadab and Abihu (Lev 10 4f).

(2) A supporter of Ezra at the reading of the Law
(Neh 8 4).

(3) The Heb name of one of Daniel’s 3 compan-
ions (Dnl 1 6.7.11.19; 2 17). His Bab name was
MesHAcu (q.Vv.).


MISHAL, mi’shal (NWA, mish’al): A town in
the territory of Asher (Josh 19 26, AV “Misheal,”
Maacd, Maasd), assigned to the Gershonite Levites
(21 30; B, Basoedddv, Bassellén, A, Macadd, Ma-
sadl=‘‘Mashal” of 1 Ch 6 74). Onom (s.v. “Ma-
san’’) places it near Carmel by the sea. It is not
identified.


MISHAM, mi’sham (DYW"A, mish‘am): A Ben-
jamite, son of Elpaal (1 Ch 8 12).


MISHEAL, mish’é-al. See MisHat.


MISHMA, mish’ma (QW), mishma'):
(1) A son of Ishmael (Gen 25 14; 1 Ch 1 30).
(2) A Simeonite (1 Ch 4 25).


MISHMANNAH, mish-man’a (“2AWA, mish-
mannah): A Gadite warrior who joined David at
Ziklag (1 Ch 12 10).


MISHNA, mish’na. See Tatmup.


MISHNEH, mish’ne ((3WAN, ha-mishneh; 2 K
22 14; 2 Ch 34 22, AV “college,” RV “second
quarter,” m “Heb Mishneh”; Zeph 1 10, AV “the
second,’ RV “second quarter,’ m “Heb Mishneh”):
A part of Jerus, apparently not far from the Fisu
Gate (q.v.) and the Maxresa (q.v.). The tr
“college” is due to Tg Jon on 2 ie 22 14. The


2067


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Miracles, Gift of
Mitre


RV interpretation of Mishneh is connected with
the belief that Hezekiah, when he built “the other
wall without” (1 Ch 32 5), made the second wall
on the N. There seems little evidence of this (see
JERUSALEM, VI, 11), and the “second” may refer to
the district of the city on the west hill or perhaps to
the hill itself. See CoLiEan.


E. W. G. Masterman
_ MISHOR, mi'shor. See Puaw, and also note
in HDB, III, 309.


MISHRAITES, mish’r4-its conan, ha-mish-
nee One of the families of Kiriath-jearim (1 Ch


MISPAR, mis’par (180, mispdr): An exile
who returned with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 2). AV
spells the name “Mizpar.”’ In the || verse of Neh
it appears as “‘Mispereth” (Neh 7 7).


MISPERETH, mis’pé-reth (BD, migpereth).
See Mispar.


MISREPHOTH-MAIM, miz-ré-foth-ma’im
(O77 MP WA, misr-phath mayim; LXX Macepév,
Maserén, Macept? Mepdopaip, Maseréth Mempho-
maim): A place to which Joshua chased the various
tribes, which were confederated under Jabin, after
their defeat at the waters of Merom (Josh 11 8).
It follows the mention of great Sidon, as though it
was a place in the same region but farther from the
point of departure. In Josh 13 6, it is also men-
tioned in connection with the Sidonians, as though
it was included in their territory, so it must have
been in the coast district, or Phoenicia, which was
in that period dominated by Sidon. The Canaan-
ites who were among the tribes forming the hosts
of Jabin would naturally scck refuge among their
brethren in Sidon and its territory. They fled
across the hill country which lies between the waters
of Merom and the coast, but as Sidon is situated
considerably to the N. of Merom, some would seek
the coast by a more southerly route, and we may
look for Misrephoth-maim there. Dr. Thomson
(LB, JI, 266-67, ed 1882) locates it at Ras el-Mu-
sheirifeh, some 13 miles S. of Tyre, where there was
a stronghold, and where the fugitives might find
refuge (see Lapper or Tyre). Though the name
hardly suggests Misrephoth-maim, the identifica-
tion may be accepted until some better one is
found. H. Porter


MIST ("8 , adh; 4xAus, achlis, 6plxdn, homichlé):
Mist is caused by particles of water vapor filling
the air until it is only partially transparent. Mist
and haze produce much the same effect, the one
being due to moisture in the atmosphere and the
other to dust particles. Mist or fog 1s not common
on the plains of Pal and Syria at sea-level, but is
of almost daily occurrence in the mountain valleys,
coming up at night and disappearing with the morn-
ing sun (Wisd 2 4). It is nothing else than a cloud
touching theland. In the account of creation, there
went up a mist from the earth,” giving a descrip-
tion of the warm humid atmosphere of the carbon-
iferous ages which agrees remarkably with the
teaching of modern science (Gen 2 6). The word
is used fig. in Acts 18 11 to describe the shutting-
out of light. Those who bring confusion and un-
certainty are compared to ‘“‘mists driven by a storm
(2 Pet 2.17). See Vapor. Aurrep H. Joy


MISTRESS, mis’tres (M293, batalah, 1733,
gbhereth): Is the tr of ba‘dlah “lady,” “owner”
( K 17 17; Nah 8 4); in 1S 28 7, “a woman
that hath a familiar spirit’’ is lit. ‘the mistress of


a familiar spirit’; of g*bhereth (Gen 16 4.8.9; 2 K
5 3; Ps 123 2; Prov 30 23; Isa 24 2); in Isa 47
5.7, we have AV and ERV “lady,” ARV “mistress.”


MITE, mit (Aerrév, lepién): The smallest copper
or bronze coin current among the Jews. They were
first struck by the Maccabean princes with Heb
legends, and afterward by the Herods and the Rom
procurators with Gr legends. The ‘widow’s
mite” mentioned in Mk 12 42 and Lk 21 2 was
probably of the first kind, since those with Gr
legends were regarded as unlawful in the temple
service. According to Mk, the lepton was only
half a kodrdntés (Lat quadrans), which would indi-
cate a value of abont one-fourth of a cent or half
an Eng. farthing. See Money. H. Porter


MITHKAH, mith’ka (TPA, mithkah, “sweet-
ness’; AV Mithcah): Name given owing to sweet-
ness of pasture or water. A desert camp of the
Israelites. between Terah and Hashmonah (Nu 33
28f). See WANDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


MITHNITE, mith’nit (380, ha-mithni):
Designation of Jehoshaphat, one of David’s officers
(1 Ch 11 48).


MITHRADATES, mith-ra-da’téz (A, MiOpaSdrqs,
Mithradatés, B, MiOpi8arys, Mithriddies; AV Mith-
ridates) :

(1) The treasurer of Cyrus to whom the king
committed the vessels which had been taken
from the temple and who delivered them to the
governor, Sanabassar (1 Esd 2 11=‘“Mithredath”
of Ezr 1 8).

(2) Apparently another person of the same name
—one of the commissioners stationed in Samaria
who wrote a letter to Artaxerxes persuading him
to put a stop to the rebuilding of Jerus (1 Esd 2
16=“Mithredath” of Ezr 4 7). S. ANcus


MITHREDATH, mith’ré-dath (UTM), mith-
redhath; Pers=“gift of Mithra” or “consecrated
to Mithra’’):

(1) The Pers treasurer through whom Cyrus
restored the sacred vessels to the returning Jewish
exiles (Ezr 1 8).

(2) A Persian, Perhaps an official, who was asso-
ciated with Bishlam and Tabeel in corresponding
with Artaxerxes concerning the restoration of
Jerus (Ezr 4 7). In 1 Esd 2 11.16, the name is
written MrrHrapatss (q.v.).


MITRE, mi’tér: In AV this word renders two
Heb words, both of which, however, come from
the same stem, viz. 72%, ¢cdnaph, “‘to coil” or “to
wrap round.” In Ex 28, a mitre (RVm “‘turban’’)
ig enumerated among Aaron’s articles of dress,
which were to be made by tailors of recognized skill.
On the forefront of the mitre was a “plate of pure
gold” with the words “Holy to Jehovah” (i.e. con-
secrated to Jehovah) inscribed upon it. This gold
plate was fastened to the mitre by a blue ribbon.
The material of the mitre was fine linen or silk.
The word for the headtire (AV “bonnet’’) of the
ordinary priest was a different word. Ezekiel uses
the Bak in connection with Zedekiah (21 26);
the prophet associated regal and priesily functions
with the throne. It is possible, however, that the
two sentences—“remove the mitre,” and ‘‘take off
the crown’’— refer to the degradation of the priest-
hood and of the throne which the downfall of Jerus
will involve. The LXX varies between kidaris and
mitra, the former word being used in Sir 46 12.

T. Lewis


Mitylene
Moab, Moabites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2068


MITYLENE, mit-i-lé’né, mit-i-lyé’nyé (Mervdjvn,
Mituléné, or Mut-Aqvn, Mutiléné, as usually on coins):
In antiquity the most important city of


1. Impor- the Asiatic Aeolians and of the island
tance and of Lesbos. It had 2 harbors and
History strong fortresses. The city was noted


for its high culture and for its zeal for
art and science from the earliest times. The island,
under the leadership of Mitylene, revolted in 428
BC from the Athenian confederacy. The city was
besieged by the Athenians and finally taken. The
inhabitants of Mitylene were treated with great
severity; the walls were dismantled, and the city
was deprived of its power on the sea. In the time
of Alexander the Great, Mitylene suffered most
through the Persians, and later by the occupation
of the Macedonians, but afterward regained its
power and prosperity, and still later was favored
by the Rom emperors, being made a free city by
Pompey.

In the Middle Ages, the name Mitylene was applied
to the whole island. The present capital, often called
simply Castro, has a large castle built on the site of the
ancient acropolis (in 1373). The city was conquered by


the Turks in 1462. It contains 14 mosques, 7 churches,
and has a population of about 15,000.


On his third missionary Journey, Paul traveled
to the Hellespont from Philippi, thence through the
Troad by land to Assos on the southern
side—where extensive excavations
were carried on in 1881 by an American
archaeological expedition—thence by
ship to Mitylene (Acts 20 14), where he spent the
night. Leaving Lesbos, he sailed southward to a
point opposite the island of Chios (Acts 20 15).
There is no record that a Christian church had been
established in Mitylene at this time.

Literaturs.—Tozer, Islands of the Aegean, 121,
134 f, 136; Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, 291 ff.

J. E. Harry

MIXED, mikst, MULTITUDE, mul’ti-tiid. See


Minciep PEOPLE.


2. Paul’s
Visit


MIZAR, mi’zir, THE HILL (W202 70, har
mic¢’dr; dpos pixpdés, dros mikrés): The name of a
mountain found only in Ps 42 6; ‘I remember thee
from the land of Jordan, and the Hermons, from
the hill Mizar.”” The term may be taken as an
appellative meaning “‘littleness,” and the phrase
mehar mic‘dr would then mean “from the little
mountain,” i.e. the little mountain of Zion. Some
scholars think that the m in méhar may have arisen
from dittography, and that we should read, “from
the land of Jordan, and the Hermons, O thou little
mountain [of Zion].” G. A. Smith discusses the
question in a note (HGHL, 477). He suggests that
certain names found in the district (za‘uraé, wady
za‘arah, and Khirbet Mazaré) may be a reminis-
cence of the name of a hill in the district called
Mic¢‘ar; and surely none other would have been put
by the Psalmist in apposition to the Hermons.
Cheyne says: ‘“To me this appendage to Hermonim
seems a poetic loss. Unless the little mountain has
a symbolic meaning I could wish it away.” I can-
not see this: the symbolic meanings suggested for
Hermonim and Mic‘ar are all forced, and even if we
got a natural one, it would be out of place after the
literal land of Jordan. To employ all as proper
names is suitable to a lyric. No identification is at
present possible. W. Ewine


MIZPAH, miz’pé, MIZPEH, miz’pe: This name
is pointed both ways in the Heb, and is found usually
with the article. The meaning seems to be “outlook”
or “watchtower.” It is natural, therefore, to look
for the places so named in high positions, command-
ing wide prospects.


(1) (IBS, ha-micgpah [Gen 31 49; Jgs 11
11.34], MEY, migpéh [Hos 6 1), WPA TPL,
micpeh ghil‘adh [Jgs 11 29]; Maconé, Massépha,
tiv oxomdv, tén skopidn, and other forms): It
seems probable that the same place is intended in
all these passages, and that it is identical with
Ramath-mizpeh of Josh 13 26. It is the place.
where Jacob and Laban parted in Mt. Gilead; con-
sequently it lay to the N. of Mahanaim. Here was
the home of Jephthah, to which he returned after
the defeat of the Ammonites, only to realize how his
rash vow had brought desolation to his house. It
was taken by Judas Maccabaeus, who destroyed
the inhabitants and burned the city (1 Mace 6 35).
Identifications have been suggested with Suf,
Jerash, and Kal‘at er-Rabad; but these seem all to
lie S. of any possible site for Mahanaim. A ruined
site was discovered by Dr. Schumacher (M und
NPDY, 1897, 86), with the name Masfa, which
is just the Arab. equivalent of the Heb Micpah.
It lies some distance to the N.W. of Jerash and
claims consideration in any attempt to fix the site
of Mizpah.

(2) (MPPAT PIS, ’eree ha-migpah [Josh 11 3],
‘a NYp3, bik‘ath micpch [ver 8]; Maccevpdv, Mas-
seumdn, Macondd0, Masséphdth, and other forms):
The “land of Mizpah” and the “valley of Mizpah”
may be taken as applying to the same district. It
lay on the southwest slopes of Hermon N.E. of
the Waters of Merom. The site must be looked
for on one of the heights in the region indicated,
from which a wide view is obtained. Mutallah,
a Druze village standing on a hill to the N. of ‘Abdi,
and E. of Nahr el-Hasbany, was suggested by Rob-
inson. The present writer agrees with Buhl (GAP,
240) that the ancient castle above Banias, Kal'at
es-Subeibeh, occupics a more likely position.

(3) (BLA, miepeh; Maorhd, Masphd): A town
in the Shephelah of Judah named with Dilan, Jok-
theel and Lachish (Tell el-Hesy). Onom mentions
a Masfa in the neighborhood of Eleutheropolis, to
the N. The identification proposed by Van de
Velde and Guérin would suit this description.
They would locate Mizpeh at Tell es-Sdfiyeh, about
7% miles N.W. of Beit Jibrin, ‘‘a conspicuous hill
with a glittering white cliff rising like an isolated
block above the adjacent country” (PEFS, 1903,
276). Many identify this site with Gath, but the
name and character of the place point rather to
identification with Mizpeh, the Blanche Guarde or
Alba Specula of the Middle Ages.

(4) BPA, ha-micgpdh; Maconpa, Massémd,
Macdé, Masphd): A town in the territory of Ben-
jamin (Josh 18 26). Hither came the men of
Israel to deal with the Benjamites after the outrage
on the Levite’s coucubine (Jgs 20 1.38; 21 1.5.8).
At Mizpah, Samuel gathered his countrymen.
While there erying to God in their distress, they
were attacked by the Philis, whom they defeated
with great slaughter (18 7 5, etc). Here also
Saul, the son of Kish, was chosen king, after which
Samuel told the people the “manner of the king-
dom” (10 17, etc). Mizpah was fortified by Asa,
king of Judah, with materials which Baasha, king
of Israel, had used to fortify Ramah (1 K 15 22;
2 Ch 16 6). When Nebuchadnezzar captured
Jerus and made Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam,
governor of the remnant of the people left in the
land of Judah, the governor’s residence was fixed
at Mizpah (2 K 26 23). Here he was joined by
Jeremiah, whom Nebuzaradan, captain of the Bab
guard, had set free. At Mizpah, Ishmacl, son of
Nathaniah, treacherously slew Gedaliah and many
who were with him. Two days later he murdered
a company of pilgrims, throwing their dead bodies
into the great cistern which Asa had made when


2069


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mitylene
Moab, Moabites


strengthening the place against possible attack by
Baasha of Samaria. He then made prisoners of the
people, including the king’s daughters, and at-
tempted +o convey them away to the Ammonites,
an attempt that was frustrated by Johanan, son
of Kareah (Jer 40, 41). Mizpah was the scene of


Mizpah.


memorable assembly in a day of sore anxiety for
Judah, when Judas Maccabaeus called the warriors
of Judah together for counsel and prayer (1 Macc
3-46). From this passage we also learn that the
place was an ancient sanctuary—‘‘for in Mizpah
there was a place of prayer aforetime for Israel.”

It has been proposed to identify Mizpah with
Tell Nasbeh, a site on the watershed 8. of Bireh.
The Abbé Raboisson established the fact that Jerus
can be seen from this point. In this respect it
agrees with Maundeville’s description. “It is a
very fair and delicious place, and it is called Mt.
Joy because it gives joy to pilgrims’ hearts, for from
that place men first see Jerus.” But Jer 41 10
may be taken as decisive against this identification.
Ishmael departed to go east. From Tell Nasbeh
this would never have brought him to the great
waters that are in Gibeon (PEFS, 1898, 169, 251;
1903, 267). A more probable identification is with
Neby Samuwil, a village on high ground 43 miles
N.W. of Jerus, the traditional burying-place of
Samuel. It is 2,935 ft. above sea-level, and 500 ft.
higher than the surrounding land. Here the pil-
grims coming up by way of Beth-horon from Jaffa,
the ancient route, first saw the Holy City. The
mosque of the village was formerly a church, dating
from Crusading times; and here the tomb of Samuel
is shown. If this is the ancient Mizpah, a very
slight détour to the N. would bring Ishmael to the
great waters that are in Gibeon, el-J7% (Gibeon)
being only a mile and a quarter distant.

(5) (ANTA FBLA, migpeh mo’ abh, “Mizpeh of
Moab”; Macy, Maséphd): A town in Moab to
which David took his parents for safety during
Saul’s pursuit of him (1 § 22 3). It is possibly
to be identified with Kir-moab, the modern Kerak,
whither David would naturally go to Interview the
king. But there is no certainty. Possibly we should
read ‘“‘Mizpah”’ instead of ‘the hold” in ver 5.

(6) In 2 Ch 20 24, probably we should read
“Mizpah” instead of “watch-tower”: ha-micpeh
la-midhbar would then point to a Mizpeh of the
Wilderness to be sought in the district of Tekoa
(ver 20). W. Ewina

MIZPAR, miz’par. See Misprar.

MIZRAIM, miz’ri-im (B7130, migraytm) :
(1) A son of Ham, and ancestor of various peoples,


Ludim, Anamim, etc (Gen 10 6.13; 1 Ch 1 8.11).
See TaB.e or Nations.
(2) The name of Egypt. See Ecypr.


The land of Ham.—Di, hém, was another name for the
land of Egypt. It occurs only in Ps 105 23.27; 106 22;
Ps 78 51 probably refers to the land of Ham, though it
may refer to the children of Ham, The origin and
significance of this name are involved in much obscurity.
Two improbable etymologies and one probable a eal ad
for Ham as a name of Egypt have been proposed, and the
improbable ones very much urged: Q) am is often
thought to bo a Heb appropriation of the Egyp name
Koemt,” a name for the *’black land’’ as distinguished
from ‘‘deshert,’’ the red land of the desert which sur-
rounded it. This etymology is very attractive, but
poogeically very improbable to say the least. (2) Ham

as sometimes been connected directly with cn, ham, the
second son of Noah whose descendants under the name
Micraim occupied a part of Northeastern Africa. But as
there is no trace of this name among the Egyptians and no
use of it in the historical books of the OT, thiscan hardly
be said to be a probable derivation of the word. (3)
There is a third proposed etymology for Ham which con-
nects it ultimately but indirectly with Ham, the second
son of Noah. Some of the earliest sculptures yet found
in Egypt represent the god Min (Méni; cf Kopios by
Professor Petrie). This god seems also to have been
called Khem, a very exact Egyp equivalent for on , bam,
the second son of Noah and the ancestor of the Hamitic
Ree le of Egypt. That Ham the son of Noah should be

eified in the Egyp pantheon is not surprising. The
sensuality of this god Min or Khem also accords well with
the reputation for licentiousness borne by Ham the son
of Noah. These facts suggest very strongly a trace in
Egyp mythology of the actual history of the movements
of Hamitic people. (4) While the preceding division (3)

robably states the real explanation of the early name of

gypt, it still remains to be noted that the use of the
name Ham by the Psalmist may be entirely poetic. Until
it be found that the name Ham was applied to Egypt by
other writers of that period it will ever be in some
measure unlikely that the Psalmist was acquainted with
the mythological use of the name Ham in Heypt. and so,
in equal measure, probable that he meant nothing more
than to speak of the land of the descendants of Ham the
son of Noah. See also Ham, Lanp or.

M. G. Kris


MIZZAH, miz’a (PHA, mizzdh, “strong,” ‘“firm’”):
Grandson of Esau, one of the “dukes” of Edom
(Gen 36 13.17; 1 Ch 1 37).


MNASON, na’son, m’na’son (Mvdowv, Mndsén):
All that we know of Mnason is found in Acts 21 16.
(1) He accompanied Paul] and his party from Caes-
area on Paul’s last visit to Jerus; (2) he was a
Cyprian; (8) “an early disciple,” an early convert
to Christianity, and (4) the one with whom Paul’s
company was to lodge. The ‘‘Western’”’ text of this
passage is very interesting. Blass, following D,
Syr, reads, for “bringing,” etc, “And they brought
us to those with whom one should lodge, and when
we had come into a certain village we stayed with
Mnason a Cyprian, an early disciple, and having
departed thence we came to Jerus and the brethren,”
etc. Meyer-Wendt, Page and Rendell render the
accepted text, ‘‘bringing us to the house of Mnason,”’
etc. However, giving the imperf. trans of ane-
bainomen, ‘“‘we were going up” to Jerus (ver 15),
we might understand that the company lodged with
Mnason on the Ist night of their journey to Jerus,
and not at the city itself. ‘Ver 15, they set about
the journey; ver 16, they lodged with Mnason on
the introduction of the Caesarean disciples; ver
17, they came to Jerus” (Expos Gr Test., in loc.).

. F. Hunter

MOAB, mo’ab, MOABITES, md’ab-its (Moab,
INA, méd’abh, Moabite Stone, AN'O; Gr [LXX]
ModB, Madb, } Mwaetris, he Moa-
beitis, -Biris, bitis; Moabite, "A812,
"INO, mé’abhi; Moabites, N12 33,
bené mo’abh): Moab was the district
E. of the Dead Sea, extending from a point
some distance N. of it to its southern end. The
eastern boundary was indefinite, being the border
of the desert which is irregular. The length of the


1. The
Land


Moab, Moabites
Moabite Stone


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2070


territory was about 50 miles and the average width
about 30. It is a high tableland, averagmg some
3,000 ft. above the level of the Mediterranean and
4,300 ft. above that of the Dead Sea. The aspect
of the land, as one looks at it from the western side
of the Dead Sea, is that of a range of mountams


Bedawin of Moab.


with a very precipitous frontage, but the elevation
of this ridge above the interior is very slight. Deep
chasms lead down from the tableland to the Dead
Sea shore, the principal one being the gorge of the
river Arnon, which is about 1,700 ft. deep and 2 or
more miles in width at the level of the tableland,
but very narrow at the bottom and with exceedingly
precipitous banks. About 13 miles back from the
mouth of the river the gorge divides, and farther
back it subdivides, so that several valleys are
formed of diminishing depth as they approach the
desert border. These are referred to in Nu 21 14
as the ‘valleys of the Arnon.” The “valley of
Zered” (Nu 21 12), which was on the southern
border, drops down to the southern end of the Dead
Sea, and although not so long or deep as the Arnon,
is of the same nature in its lower reaches, very diffi-
cult to cross, dividing into two branches, but at a
point much nearer the sea. The stream is not so
large as the Arnon, but is quite copious, even in
summer. These gorges have such precipitous sides
that it would be very difficult for an army to cross
them, except in their upper courses near the desert
where they become shallow. The Israelites passed
them in that region, probably along the present
Hajj road and the line of-the Mecca Railway. The
tableland is fertile but lacks water. The fountains
and streams in the valleys and on the slopes toward
the Dead Sea are abundant, but the uplands are
almost destitute of flowing water. The inhabitants
supply themselves by means of cisterns, many of
which are ancient, but many of those used in an-
cient times are ruined. The population must have
been far greater formerly than now. The rainfall
is usually sufficient to mature the crops, although
the rain falls in winter only. The fertility of the
country in ancient times is indicated by the numer-
ous towns and villages known to have existed there,
mentioned in Scripture and on the M §, the latter
giving some not found elsewhere. The principal
of these were: Ar (Nu 21 15); Ataroth, Dibon,
Jazer, Nimrah, Nebo (82 3); Beth-peor (Dt 3 29);


Beth-diblaim, Bozrah, Kerioth (Jer 48 22-24);


| Kir (Isa 16 1); Medeba, Elealeh, Zoar (Isa 16


2.4.5); Kirheres (16 11); Sibmah (Josh 13 19);
in all some 45 placenames in Moab are known,
most of the towns being in ruins. Kir of Moab is
represented in the modern Kerak, the most im-
portant of all and the government center of the
district. Madeba now represents the ancient


_Medeba, and has become noted for the discovery


of a mediaeval map of Pal, in mosaic, of consider-
able archaeological value. Rabbath-moab and
Heshbon (modern Rabba and Hesbdén) are miserable
villages, and the country is subject to the raids of
the Bedawin tribes of the neighboring desert, which
discourages agriculture. But the land is still good
pasture ground for cattle and sheep, as in ancient
times (Nu 82 3.4). 7
The Moabites were of Sem stock and of kin to the
Hebrews, as is indicated by their descent from Lot,
the nephew of Abraham (Gen 19 30-
37), and by their language which is
practically the same as the Heb. This
is clear from the inscription on the M§,
a monument of Mesha, king of Moab, erected about
850 BC, and discovered among the ruins of Dibon
in 1868. It contains 34 lines of about 9 words
each, written in the old Phoen and Heb characters,
corresponding to the Siloam inscription and those
found in Phoenicia, showing that it is a dialect of
the Sem tongue prevailing in Pal. The original
inhabitants of Moab were the Emim (Dt 2 10),
“a people great... . and tall, as the Anakim.”
When these were deposed by the Moabites we do not
know. The latter are not mentioned im the Am
Tab and do not appear on the Egyp monuments
before the 14th cent. BC, when they seem to be
referred to under the name of Ruten, or Luten or
Lotan, ie. Lot (Paton, Syria and Pal); Muab
appears in a list of names on a monument of Ram-
eses II] of the XXth Dynasty. The country lay
outside the line of march of the Egyp armies, and
this accounts for the silence of its monuments in
regard to them. a
The chief deity of Moab was Chemosh (W103,
kemésh), frequently mentioned in the OT and on
the MS, where King Mesha speaks
3. Religion of building a high place in his honor
because he was saved by him from his
enemies. He represents the oppression of, Moab
by Omri as the result of the anger of Chemosh, and
Mesha made war against Israel by command of
Chemosh. He was the national god of Moab, as
Molech was of Ammon, and it is pretty certain that
he was propitiated by human sacrifices (2 K 3 27).
But he was not the only god of Moab, as is clear
from the account in Nu 26, where it is also clear
that their idolatrous worship was corrupt. They
had their Baalim like the nations around, as may
be inferred from the place-names compounded with
Baal, such as Bamoth-baal, Beth-baal-meon and
Baal-peor.
We know scarcely anything of the history of the
Moabites after the account of their origin in Gen
19 until the time of the exodus. It
4. History would seem, however, that they had
; suffered from the invasions of the
Amorites, who, under their king Sihon, had sub-
dued the northern part of Moab as far as the Arnon
(Nu 21 21-31). This conquest was no doubt a
result of the movement of the Amorites southward,
when they were pressed by the great wave of Hittite
invasion that overran Northern Syria at the end of
the 15th and the early part of the 14th cents. BC.
The Amorites were forced to seek homes in Pal,
and it would seem that a portion of them crossed the
Jordan and occupied Northern Moab, and here the
Israelites found them as they approached the


2. The
People


2071


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Moab, Moabites
Moabite Stone


Promised Land. They did not at first disturb the
Moabites in the S., but passed around on the east-
ern border (Dt 2 8.9) and came into conflict with
the Amorites in the N. (Nu 21 21-26), defeating
them and occupying the territory (vs 31-32). But
when Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab, saw what
a powerful people was settling on his border, he
made alliance with the Midianites against them and
called in the aid of Balaam, but as he could not
induce the latter to curse them he refrained from
attacking the Israelites (Nu 22, 24). The latter,
however, suffered disaster from the people of Moab
through their intercourse with them (Nu 25).
Some time before the establishment of the kingdom
in Israel the Midianites overran Moab, as would
appear from the passage in Gen 36 35, but the con-
quest was not permanent, for Moab recovered its
lost eas and became strong enough to encroach
upon Israel across the Jordan. Eglon of Moab
oppressed Israel with the aid of Ammon and Amalek
(Jgs 3 13-14), but Eglon was assassinated by Ehud,
and the Moabite yoke was cast off after 18 years.
Saul smote Moab, but did not subdue it (1 S 14
47), for we find David putting his father and mother
under the protection of the king of Moab when per-
secuted by Saul (1 8 22 3.4). But this friendship
between David and Moab did not continue. When
David became king he made war upon Moab and
completely subjugated it (2 S 8 2). On the di-
vision of the kingdom between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam the latter probably obtained possession
of Moab (1 K 12 20), but it revolted and Omri
had to reconquer it (M 8), and it was tributary to
Ahab (2 K 1 1). It revolted again in the reign of
Ahaziah (2 K 11; 3 5), and Moab and Ammon
made war on Jehoshaphat and Mt. Seir and destroyed
the latter, but they afterward fell out among them-
selves and destroyed each other (2 Ch 20). Je-
hoshaphat and Jehoram together made an expedition
into Moab and defeated the Moabites with great
slaughter (2 K 8). But Mesha, king of Moab,
was not subdued (ver 27), and afterward completely
freed his land from the dominion of Israel (M 8).
This was probably at the time when Isracl and
Judah were at war with Hazael of Damascus (2 K
8 28.29). Bands of Moabites ventured to raid the
land of Israel when weakened by the conflict with
Hazael (2 K 13 20), but Moab was probably sub-
dued again by Jeroboam II (2 K 14 25), which
may be the disaster to Moab recounted in Isa 15.
After Mesha we find a king of the name of Salamanu
and another called Chemosh-nadab, the latter being
subject to Sargon of Assyria. He revolted against
Sennacherib, in alliance with other kings of Syria
and Pal and Egypt, but was subdued by him, and
another king, Mutsuri, was subject to Esarhaddon.
These items come to us from the Assyr monuments.
When Babylon took the place of Assyria in the
suzerainty, Moab joined other tribes in urging
Judah to revolt but seems to have come to terms
with Nebuchadnezzar before Jerus was taken, as
we hear nothing of any expedition of that king
against her. On the war described in Jth, in which
Moab (1 12, ete) plays a part, see JUDITH.

At a later date Moab was overrun by the Na-
bathaean Arabs who ruled in Petra and extended
their authority on the east side of Jordan even as
far as Damascus (Jos, Ant, XIII, xv, 1,2). The
Moabites lost their identity as a nation and were
afterward confounded with the Arabs, as we see
in the statement of Jos CXIII, xiii, 5), where he

_gays that Alexander (Jannaeus) overcame the
Arabians, such as the Moabites and the Gilead-
ites. Alexander built the famous stronghold of
Machaerus in Moab, on a hill overlooking the Dead
Sea, which afterward became the scene of the im-
prisonment and tragical death of John the Baptist


(Jos, BJ, VII, vi, 2; Ant, XVIII, v, 2; Mk 6 21-
28). It was afterward destroyed by the Romans.
Kir becatne a fortress of the Crusaders under the
name of Krak (Kerak), which held out against the
Moslems until the time of Saladin, who captured
it in 1188 AD.

Lirerature.—Comms. on the pasentes in the OT
relating to Moab, and histories of Israel; Paton, Harly
History of Syria and Pal; Rawlinson, Ancient Mon-
archies, esp. Assyria and Babylonia; Conder, Heth and
Moab; A. Smith, HGHL; the Moabite Stone; Jo-
sephus.

H. Porter

MOABITE STONE: A monument erected at
Dibon (Dhiban) by Mesha, king of Moab (2 K 3
4.5), to commemorate his successful revolt from
Israel and his conquest of Israelitish territory. It
was discovered, August 19, 1868, by a German mis-


Moabite Stone.
(PEF Photo.)


sionary, Rev. V. Klein, who unfortunately took
neither copy nor squeeze of it. It was 3 ft. 10 in.
high and 2 ft. broad, with a semicircular top. The
Berlin Museum entered into negotiations for the
purchase of it, but while these were proceeding
slowly, M. Clermont-Ganneau, then dragoman of
the French consulate at Jerus, sent agents to take
squeezes and tempt the Arabs to sell it for a large
sum of money. This led to interference on the


“part of the Turkish officials, with the result that


in 1869 the Arabs lighted a fire under the Stone, and
by pouring cold water on it broke it into pieces
which they carried away as charms. M. Clermont-
Ganneau, however, succeeded in recovering a large
proportion of these, and with the help of the squeezes
was able to rewrite the greater part of the inscrip-
tion. The last and most definitive edition of the
text was published by Professors Smend and Socin
in 1886 from a comparison of the fragments of the
original (now in the Louvre) with the squeezes
(in Paris and Bale) and photographs.

The following is (with some unimportant correc-


Moabite Stone
Moladah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2072


tions) Dr. Neubauer’s tr of the inscription, based
upon Smend and Socin’s text: ‘“(1) I [am] Mesha,
son of Chemosh-melech, king of Moab, the Dibonite.
(2) My father reigned over Moab 30 years and I
reigned (3) after my father. | have made this
monument [or high place] for Chemosh at Qorhah,
a monument of salvation, (4) for he saved me from
all invaders [or kings], and let me see my desire
upon all my enemies. Omri (5) was king of Israel,
and he oppressed Moab many days, for Chemosh
was angry with his (6) land. His son [Ahab] followed
him and he also said: I will oppress Moab. In
my days [Chemosh] said: (7) I will see [my desire]
on him and his house, and Israel surely shall perish
for ever. Omri took the land of (8) Medeba [Nu
21 30], and [Israel] dwelt in it during his days and
half the days of his son, altogether 40 years. But
Chemosh [gave] it back (9) in my days. I built
Baal-Meon [Josh 13 17} and made therein the
ditches [or wells]; I built (10) Kirjathaim [Nu 32
37]. The men of Gad dwelt in the land of Ataroth
(Nu 82 3] from of old, and the king of Israel built
there (11) [the city of] Ataroth; but I made war
against the city and took it. And I slew all the
{people of] (12) the city, for the pleasure of Che-
mosh and of Moab, and I brought back from them
the Arel [S878] of Dodah [A717] and bore (13)
him before Chemosh in Qerioth [Jer 48 24]. And
I placed therein the men of Sharon and the men
(14) of Mehereth. And Chemosh said unto me:
Go, seize Nebo of Israel and (15) I went in the night
and fought against it from the break of dawn till
noon; and I took (16) it, slew all of them, 7,000
men and [boys?], women and [girls?], (17) and
female slaves, for to Ashtar-Chemosh I devoted
them. And I took from thence the Arels PORN]
(18) of Yahweh and bore them before Chemosh.
Now the king of Israel had built (19) Jahaz [Isa
15 4], and he dwelt in it while he waged war against
me, but Chemosh drove him out from before me.
And (20) I took from Moab 200 men, all chiefs, and
transported them to Jahaz which J took (21) to
add to Dibon. I built Qorhah, the Wall of the
Forests and the Wall (22) of the Ophel, and I built
its gates and I built its towers. And (23) I built
the House of Moloch, and I made sluices for the
water-ditches in the midst (24) of the city. And
there was no cistern within the city of Qorhah, and
I said to all the people: Make for (25) yourselves
every man a cistern in his house. And I dug the
canals [or conduits] for Qorhah by means of the
prisoners (26) from Israel. I built Aroer [Dt 2
36], and I made the road in Arnon. And (27) I
built Beth-Bamoth [Nu 26 19] for it was destroyed.
I built Bezer [Dt 4 43], for in rnins (28) [it was.
And all the chiefs?] of Dibon were 50, for all Dibon
is loyal, and I (29) placed 100 [chiefs?] in the cities
which I added to the land; I built (30) [Beth]-
Medelbla [Nu 21 30] and Beth-diblathaim [Jer
48 22], and Beth-Baal-Meon [Jer 48 23], and
transported the shepherds [?] (31)... . [with]
the flock[s] of the land. Now in Horonaim [Isa
15 5] there dwelt [the children ?] .... (82) ....
fand] Chemosh said unto me: Go down, make war
upon Horonaim. So I went down [and made war
(33) upon the city, and took it, and) Chemosh
dwelt in it during my days. And f went up [?] from
thence; Imade.... (64)... AndI... 2”
The Bib. character of the language of the inscrip-
tion will be noticed as well as the use of “forty”
to signify an indefinite period of time. As in
Israel, no goddess seems to have been worshipped
in Moab, since the goddess Ashtoreth is deprived
of the feminine suffix, and is identified with the
male Chemosh (Ashtar-Chemosh). Dodah appears
to have been a female divinity worshipped by the


side of Yahweh; the root of the name is the same as
that. of David and the Carthaginian Dido. The
Arels were “the champions” of the deity (Assyr
qurart), tr? “lion-like men’ in AV (2 S 23 20; cf
Isa 83 7). There was an Ophel in the Moabite
capital as well as at Jerus.

The alphabet of the inscription is an early form
of the Phoenician, and resembles that of the earliest
Gr inscriptions. The words are divided from one
another by dots, and the curved forms of some of
the letters (6, &, 1, m, n) presuppose writing with
ink upon papyrus, parchment or potsherds.

The revolt of Mesha took place after Ahab’s
death (2 K 3 5). At the battle of Qarqar in 854
BC, when the Syrian kings were defeated by
Shalmaneser II, no mention is made of Moab, as it
was included in Israel. It would seem from the
inscription, however, that Medeba had already been
restored to Mesha, perhaps in return for the regular
payment of his tribute of 100,000 lambs and 100,000
rams with their wool (2 K 3 4).


Lirerature.—Clermont-Ganneau, La_stéle de Mésa,
1870; Ginsburg, Moabite Stone, 1871; R. Smend and
A. Socin, Die Inschrifit des Kénigs Mesa von Moab, 1886;
A. Neubauer in Records of the Past, 2d ser., li, 1889;
Lidzbarski, Handbuch der nordsemitischen Epigraphik,


1898, 4-83, 415.
A. H. Sayce


MOABITESS, md’ab-it-es, mé-ab-i’tes (TPANTS ,
mo dbhiyah): A woman, or in pl. women, of Moab.
The term is applied to Ruth (1 22; 2 2.6.21; 4
5.10); to some of Solomon’s wives (1 K 11 1);
and to Shimrith, whose son shared in the murder of
King Joash (2 Ch 24 26). See Moas.


MOADIAH, mé-a-di’a. See Maapran.


MOCHMOR, mok’mur, THE BROOK (6 xel-
pappos Moxpotp, ho cheimarrhos Mochmotr): The
torrent bed in a valley on which stood Chusi, not
far from Ekrebel (Jth 7 18). The latter may be
identified with ‘Akrabeh, E. of Nablus. Wéddy
Makhfariyeh runs to the 8. of ‘Akrabeh, and prob-
ably represents the ancient Mochmur.


MOCK, mok, MOCKER, mok’ér, MOCKING,
mok’ing (D0, hathal, 39D, la'agh, guralto,
empaizd): To mock is the tr of hathal, ‘‘to play
upon,” “mock,” “deride” (Jgs 16 10.13.15; 1 K
18 27, “Elijah mocked them”; Job 13 9 bis, RV
“deceiveth,” “deceive,” m “mocketh,” “mock”);
of la@‘agh, “to stammer” or “babblein mimicry,” “to
mock’’ or “scorn” (2 Ch 30 10; Neh 41; Job
11 3; 21 3; Prov 1 26; 17 5; 30 17; Jer 20 7).
Other words are ¢ahak, ‘to laugh,” etc (Gen 19 14;
219; 39 14.17); kalas, “to call out,” or “ery
after,” “to scoff” or “mock at’? (2 K 2 23; Ezk
22 5); sdhak, “to laugh,” “mock” (Job 39 22;
Lam 1 7); lie, “to scorn” (Prov 14 9); s¢hdk,
“langhter,” “derision” (Job 12 4); empaizd, “to
treat as a child,” “mock” (Mt 2 16; 20 19; 27
29.31.41; Lk 14 29, etc); diachleudzd, “to mock,”
‘Vaugh,” ete (Acts 2 13; 17 32); muktérizd, “to
sneer at,” “mock,” lit. ‘to turn up the nose” (Gal
6 7, “God is not mocked,” “will not let himself
be mocked”); ércyehdw, epigeldd, “laugh” (Job 2 8;
1 Macc 7 34; cf 2 Macc 7 39; 8 17).

Mocker, hdthilim, ‘‘deceivers,’’ “mockers’’ (Job
17 2); lée (Prov 201; Isa 28 22 AV); Ia‘égh,
“stammering,” “mocking” (Ps 35 16; cf Isa 28 11):
sdhak (Jer 16 17); empatktés, ‘a mocker,” “scoffer,”
Meee as children” (Jude ver 18; ef 2 Pet


Mocking is the tr of kallasah, ‘‘mocking,”’ ‘‘ derision”
(Ezk 22 4); of empaigmés’' (LXX for kalléséh) (He
11 36; Wisd 12 25; Ecclus 27 28, ‘tmockéry";: 2
Macc 7 7, ‘‘mocking-stock,” RV ‘the mocking"; ver


2073


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Moabite Stone
Moladah


10, “‘made a mocking-stock” [empaizd]); of paxos, mékos
{Ecclus 33 6). ‘

For “mocked of’ Job 12 4) RV_has “a laughing-stock
to”; for ‘mockers’’ (Isa 28 22), ERV ‘'scorner,” ARV

scoffer''; for ‘‘the mockers” (Jer 15 17), “them that
made merry”; for ‘‘scorneth’’ (Prov 19 28), ‘ mocketh
at”; for ‘As one man mocketh another, do ye so mock
him ies (Job 18 9), ‘As one deceivetha man will ye deceive
him?" (m ‘'mocketh,"’ ‘tmock''); "mock" for “laugh"’
(Job 9 23); for ‘‘ There shall come in the last days scoffers”’
QQ Pet 3 3), ‘In the last days [m “Gr in the last of the
days*'] mockers shall come with mockery” (empaigmoné
em patktat).


W. L. Waker
MODAD, BOOK OF ELDAD AND. See
Expap anp Mopap, Boor or.


MODERATELY, mod‘érat-li (MpIRD, lige-
dhakah) : “Moderately” is the AV tr of ligedhakah,
“righteousness” (Joel 2 23, “for he hath given you
the former rain moderately,” m “according to right-
eousness,” RV “in just measure,” m “in [or for]
righteousness”). In Phil 4 5 AV, t6e pieikés is tr?
moderation: “Let your moderation be known
unto all men. The Lord is at hand,” RV “forbear-
ance,” m “or gentleness’; ef 2 Cor 101. The
proper meaning of this word has been the subject
of considerable discussion; epietkeia is tr? “clem-
ency” (Acts 24 4), “gentleness” (of Christ) (2 Cor
10 1); epietkés is “gentle” (1 Tim 3 3; Tit 3 2;
Jas 3.17; 1 Pet 2 18).

Trench says (Synonyms of the NT, 151): “It expresses
exactly that moderation which recognizes the impossi-
bility cleaving to formal law, of anticipating and_pro-
viding for all cases that will emerge and present them-
selves to it for decision; which, with this, recognizes the
danger that ever waits upon the assertion of legal rights,
lest they should be pushed into moral wrongs, lest the
‘summum jus’ should ia practice prove the
injuria,’ which therefore, pushes not its own rights to
the uttermost, but going back in part or in the whole
from these, rectifies and redresses the injustices of jus-
tice. It is thus more truly just than strict justice would
have been; no Latin word exactly and adequately ren-
dersit; clementia sets forth one side of it, aequitas another,
and perhaps modestia (by which the Vulg tres it in 2 Cor
10 1) a third; but the word is wanting which should set
forth all these excellences reconciled in a single and higher
one.'’ Its archetype and pattern, he points out, is found
in God, who does not stand upon or assert strict rights in
His relations to men.


Lightfoot has “forbearance”: “Let your gentle and
forbearing spirit be recognized by all men. The
judgment is drawing nigh.” Hastings prefers ‘‘con-
siderateness” or “sweet reasonableness” (HDB, III,
413); “‘Gentleness’ and ‘forbearance’ are too passive.
The ‘considerateness’ of the Bible, whether applied
to God or man, is an active virtue. It is the Spirit
of the Messiah Himself, who will not break the
bruised reed nor quench the smoking flax, and it is
the spirit of every follower who realizes that ‘the
Lord is at hand.’”’ The want of this ‘‘considerate-
ness” too often mars our religious life and spoils its
influence. W. L. WALKER


MODERATION, mod-ér-a’shun (76 émuerkés, £6
epieikés): The word occurs once in AV, Phil 4 5.


MODIN, mé’din (Mo8éav, Modéein, Mobelv,
-Maédein, Mo8eetp,, Modeeim, and other forms; in the
Talm it is called DIVA, madhi'tm, and MPT ,
madhtuh (Neubauer, Géographie du Talm, 99]):
This place owes its interest to the part it played in
the history of the Maccabees. It was the ancestral
home of their family (i Mace 2 17.70). Hither
Mattathias, a priest of the sons of Joarib, retired
when he had seen with a burning heart ‘‘the blas-
phemies that were committed in Judah and in
Jerus” under the orders of Antiochus Epiphanes.
But the king’s officer followed him, and by offers
of the king’s friendship and great rewards sought
to seduce the people into idolatry. This only fed
the indignation of Mattathias, and when a Jew
went forward to sacrifice, Mattathias slew him on


‘summa


the altar together with the king’s officer. From
such a step there could be no going back. Thus
began the patriotic enterprise which, led by the old
priest’s heroic sons, was destined to make illustrious
the closing days of the nation’s life (1 Macc 2 1 ff;
Ant, VI, 1, 2; BJ, I, i, 3). Mattathias, his wife
and sons were all buried in Modin (1 Macc 2 70;
919; 18 25-30; Ant, XII, xi, 2; XIII, vi, 6).
Near Modin Judas pitched his camp, whence
issuing by night with the watchword ‘Victory is
God’s,” he and a chosen band of warriors over-
whelmed the army of Antiochus Eupator (2 Mace
13 14). In Modin Judas and John, the sons of
Simon, slept before the battle in which they defeated
Cendebaeus (1 Mace 16 4).


Of the impressive monument erected by Simon over
the tombs of his parents and brethren Stanley (Hist of the
Jewish Church, I1f, 318) glves the following account: ‘It
was a square structure surrounded by colonnades of
monolith pillars, of which the front and back were of
white polished stone. Seven pyramids were erected by
Simon on the summit, for the father and mother and four
brothers who now lay there, with the seventh for him-
self when his time should come. On _ the faces of the
monuments were bas-reliefs, representing the accoutre-
ments of sword and spear and shield ‘for an eternal
memorial’ of their many battles. There were also
sculptures of ships—no doubt to record their interest in
that long seaboard of the Phili coast, which they were the
first to use for their country’s good. A monument at
once so Jewish in idea and so gentile in execution was
worthy of the combination of patriotic fervor and high
puilosopiic enlargement of soul which raised the Macca-

can heroes so high above their age.’ Gunérin (La
Samarie, I], 401; Galtlée, I, 47) thought he had dis-
covered the remains of this monument at Khirbet el-
Gharbéwi near Medyeh, in 1870. In this, however, he
was mistaken, the remains being of Christian origin.


Various identifications have been proposed.
S6ba, about 6 miles W. of Jerus, was for a time gen-
erally accepted. Robinson (BAR, III, 151f) sug-
gested Latran. There is now a consensus of opin-
ion in favor of el-Medyeh, a village to the E. of
Wédy Mulaki, 13 miles W. of Bethel. It occupies
a strong position in the hills 6 miles E. of Lydda,
thus meeting the condition of Onom which places
it near Lydda. The identification was suggested
by Dr. Sandreczki of Jerus in 1869. From el-
Medyeh itself the sea is not visible; but to the 8S.
rises a rocky height, er-Rds, which commands a wide
view, including the plain and the sea. The latter
is 16 miles distant. If the monument of Simon
stood on er-Réas, which from the rock cuttings seems
not improbable, it would be seen very clearly by
overlooking from the sea, esp. toward sunset (1 Mace
13 29). About 4 mile W. of el-Medyeh are tombs
known as Kubir el- Yehtd, one bearing the name
of Sheikh el-Gharbaéwi, whose name attaches to the
ruins. This is the tomb referred to above.

W. Ewina

MOETH, md’eth (Mod), Moaéth): Called “son of
Sabannus,” one of the Levites to whom, with the
priest Mermoth, the silver and gold brought by
Ezra from Babylon were committed (1 Esd 8 68)
=‘Noadiah” of Ezr 8 33, but there styled “son |
of Binnui.”


MOLADAH, mol’a-da, mé-la’da (MTDO, ma-
ladhah; Mwdo5é6, Méladd): A place in the far south
(Negebh) of Judah, toward Edom (Josh 15 26),
reckoned to Simeon (19 2; 1 Ch 4 28). It was
repeopled after the captivity (Neh 11 26). It is
mentioned always in close proximity to Beersheba.
Moladah is probably identical with Malatha, a
city in Idumaea to which Agrippa at one time with-
drew himself (Jos, Ant, XVIII, vi, 2). The site
of this latter city has by Robinson and others been
considered to be the ruins and wells of Teil el-Mith,
some 13 miles to the E. of Beersheba and some 7
miles 8.W. of Arad. The chief difficulty is the
statement of Eusebius and Jerome that Malatha


Mole
Momdis


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2074


was “by Jattir,” ie. ‘Air; if this is correct the
Tell el-Milh is impossible, as it is 10 miles from
‘Attir, and we have no light at all on the site. See
Satt, City or. For Tell el-Milh see PEF, III,
415-16, Sh XXV. E. W. G. MastTERMAN


MOLE, mil ({1J newin, tinshemeth, AV “mole,”
RV “chameleon”; LXX dowédak, aspdlax=ord-
Nat, spdlax, “mole,” Vulg talpa, ‘‘mole” [Lev 11


30]; [2] 72h, holedh, EV “weasel”; LXX yo,


o>
galé, “weasel” or “pole-cat’; cf Arab. AAS ,
khuld, “mole-rat? [Lev 11 29]; [3] MMB IN,
hdphar-pérsth, EV “moles”; from “BM, haphar,


“to dig’’; cf Arab. ye, hafar, “to dig,” and TB,
perah, “mole” or “rat,” for WIND, p’érdh, from
“NB, pdar, “to dig”; cf Arab. HL, fa’rat, or
oe Ge

8 La, fdrai, “rat,” “mouse,” from ye, jwar,


“to dig’; LXX rots patalows, tois mataiois, “vain,
idle, or profane persons” [Isa 2 20]): (1) Tin-
shemeth is the last of 8 unclean “creeping things”
in Lev 11 29.30. The word occurs also in Lev 11
in 18 and Dt 14 16, tr? AV “swan,” RV “horned
owl,” LXX ropuplwv, porphurion, “coot” or “heron.”
See CHamMELEON. (2) Hoéledh is the first in the
same list. The word occurs nowhere else, and is
tr4 “weasel” in EV, but comparison with the Arab.
khuld has led to the suggestion that “mole-rat”
would be a better tr. See Wiaseu. (3) In Isa
2 20, “In that day men shall cast away their idols

. . tothe moles and to the bats,” héphar-pérath,
variously written as one word or two, is tr4 “moles”
in EV, but has given rise to much conjecture.

The European “mole,” Talpa europea, is exten-
sively distributed in the temperate parts of Europe
and Asia, but is absent from Syria and Pal, its place
being taken by the mole-rat, Spalax typhius. The
true mole belongs to the Insectivora, and feeds on
earth-worms and insect larvae, but in making its
tunnels and nests, it incidentally injures gardens
and lawns. The mole-rat belongs to the Rodentia,
and has teeth of the same general type as those of a
rat or squirrel, large, chisel-shaped incisors behind
which is a large vacant space, no canines, and prae-
molars and molars with grinding surfaces. It is
larger than the mole, but of the same color, and,
like the mole, is blind. It makes tunnels much
like those of the mole. It is herbivorous and has
been observed to seize growing plants and draw
them down into its hole. In one of its burrows a
central chamber has been found filled with entire
plants of the Rummus or chick-pea, and two side
chambers containing pods plucked from the plants
in the central chamber. While the mole digs with
its powerful and peculiarly shaped front feet, the
mole-rat digs with its nose, its feet being normal in
shape. See Lizarp. ALFRED Ey Day


MOLECH, mo'lek, MOLOCH, mé’lok (7220,
ha-molekh, always with the art., except in 1 K 11 7;
LXX 6 Modcx, ho Moléch, sometimes also Modxép,
Molchém, Medxor, Melchél; Vulg Moloch):

1, The Name

2. The Worship in OT History

3. The Worship in the Prophets

4. Nature of the Worship

5. Origin and Extent of the Worship
LivERATURE

The name of a heathen divinity whose worship
figures largely in the later history of the kingdom of
Judah. As the national god of the Ammonites, he
is known as ““Mileom” (1 K 11 5.7), or “Malcam”
(“Malean’” is an alternative reading in 2 § 12


30.31; cf Jer 49 1.3; Zeph 1 5, where RVm reads
“their king”). The use of Bacsdre’s, basilets, and
dpxwv, drchon, as a tr of the name by
1. The the LXX suggests that it may have
Name been originally the Heb word for
“king,” melekh. Molech is obtained
from melekh by the substitution of the vowel points
of Heb bésheth, signifying “shame.” From the
obscure and difficult passage, Am 6 26, RV has
removed “your Moloch” and given “your id
but LXX had here tr4 “Moloch,” and from the LXX
it found its way into the Acts (7 43), the only
occurrence of the name in the NT.
In the Levitical ordinances delivered to the Israel-
ites by Moses there are stern prohibitions of Molech-
worship (Lev 18 21; 20 2-5). Par-
2. The allel to these prohibitions, although the
Worship in name of the god is not mentioned,
OT History are those of the Deuteronomic Code
where the abominations of the Canaan-
ites are forbidden, and the burning of their sons and
daughters in the fire (to Molech) is condemned as
the climax of their wickedness (Dt 12 31; 18 10-13).
The references to Malcam, and to David’s causing
the inhabitants of Rabbath Ammon to pass through
the brick kiln (2 8S 12 30.31), are not sufficiently
clear to found upon, because of the uncertainty of
the readings. Solomon, under the influence of his
idolatrous wives, built high places for Chemosh,
the abomination of Moab, and for Milcom, the
abomination of the children of Ammon. See
CuemosH. Because of this apostasy it was inti-
mated by the prophet Ahijah, that the kingdom
was to be rent out of the hand of Solomon, and ten
tribes given to Jeroboam (1 K 11 31-33). These
high places survived to the time of Josiah, who,
among his other works of religious reformation,
destroyed and defiled them, filling their places
with the bones of men (2 K 23 12-14). Molech-
worship had evidently received a great impulse from
Ahaz, who, like Ahab of Israel, was a supporter of
foreign religions (2 K 16 12 ff). He also “made
his son to pass through the fire, according to the
abominations of the nations, whom Jeh cast out
from before the children of Israel” (2 K 16 3).
His grandson Manasseh, so far from following in the
footsteps of his father Hezekiah, who had made
great reforms in the worship, reared altars for Baal,
and besides other abominations which he practised,
made his sou to pass through the fire (2 K 21 6).
The chief site of this worship, of which Ahaz and
Manasseh were the promoters, was Topheth in the
Valley of Hinnom, or, as it is also called, the Valley
of the Children, or of the Son of Hinnom, lying
to the S.W. of Jerus (see Genenna). Of Josiah’s
reformation it is said that “he defiled Tophcth ....
that no man might make his son or his daughter
to pass through the fire to Molech” (2 K 23 10).
Even Josiah’s thorough reformation failed to
extirpate the Molech-worship, and it revived and
continued till the destruction of Jerus,


3. The as we learn from the prophets of the
Worship time. From the beginning, the proph-
in the ets maintained against it a loud and
Prophets _ persistent protest. The testimony of


Amos (1 15; 5 26) is ambiguous, but
most of the ancient VSS for malkam, “their king,”
in the former passage, read milkom, the national
god of Ammon (see Davidson, in loc.). Isaiah was
acquainted with Topheth and its abominations
(Isa 30 33; 67 5). Over against his beautiful and
lofty description of spiritual religion, Micah sets
the exaggerated zeal of those who ask in the spirit
of the Molech-worshipper: “Shall I give my first-
born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for
the sin of my soul?” (Mic 6 6ff). That Molech-
worship had increased in the interval may account


2075


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mole
Momdis


for the frequency and the clearness of the references
to it in the later Prophets. In Jer we find the
passing of sons and daughters through the fire to
Molech associated with the building of “the high
places of Baal, which are in the Valley of the Son
of Hinnom” (82 35; cf 7 31 ff; 19 5 ff). In his
oracle against the children of Ammon, the same
prophet, denouncing evil against their land, pre-
dicts (almost in the very words of Amos above)
that Maleam shall go into captivity, his priests and
his princes together (49 1.3). Ezekiel, speaking
to the exiles in Babylon, refers to the practice of
causing children to pass through the fire to heathen
divinities as long established, and proclaims the
wrath of God against it (Ezk 16 20f; 20 26.31;
23 37). That this prophet regarded the practice
as among the “statutes that were not good, and
ordinances wherein they should not live’ (20 25)
given by God to His people, by way of deception
and judicial punishment, as some hold, is highly
improbable and_ inconsistent with the whole
prophetic attitude toward it. Zephaniah, who
prophesied to the men who saw the overthrow of the
kingdom of Judah, denounces God’s judgments
upon the worshippers of false gods (Zeph 1 5f).
He does not directly charge his countrymen with
having forsaken Jeh for Malcam, but blames them,
because worshipping Him they also swear to Mal-
cam, like those Assyr colonists in Samaria who
feared Jeh_and served their own gods, or like those
of whom Ezekiel elsewhere speaks who, the same
day on which they had slain their children to their
idols, entered the sanctuary of Jeh to profane it
(Ezk 23 39). The captivity in Babylon put an
end to Molech-worsbip, since it weaned the people
from all their idolatries. We do not hear of it in
the post-exilic Prophets, and, in the great historical
psalm. of Israel’s rebelliousness and God’s deliver-
ances (Ps 106), it is only referred to in retrospect
(vs 37.38).
When we come to consider the nature of this
worship it is remarkable how few details are given
regarding it in Scripture. The place
4. The where it was practised from the days
Nature of of Ahaz and Manasseh was the Valley
the Worship of Hinnom where Topheth stood, a
huge altar-pyre for the burning of the
sacrificial victims. There is no evidence connecting
the worship with the temple in Jerus. Ezekiel’s
vision of sun-worshippers in the temple is purely
ideal (Ezk 8). A priesthood is spoken of as attached
to the services (Jer 49 3; cf Zeph 1 4.5), The viec-
tims offered to the divinity were not burnt alive,
but were killed as sacrifices, and then presented as
burnt offerings. “To pass through the fire” has
been taken to mean a lustration or purification of
the child by fire, not involving death. But the
prophets clearly speak of slaughter and sacrifice,
and of high places built to burn the children in the
fire as burnt offerings (Jer 19 5; Ezk 16 20.21).


The popular conception, molded for Eng. readers
largely by Milton's ‘‘ Moloch, horrid king” as described
in Paradise Lost, Book I, is derived from the accounts

iven in late Lat and Gr writers, esp. the account which

iodorus Siculus gives in his History of the Carthaginian
Kronos or Moloch. The image of Moloch was a human
figure with a bull's head and ontstretched arms, ready
to receive the children destined for sacrifice. The image
of metal was heated red hot by a fire kindled within, and
the children laid on its arms rolled off into the fiery pit
below. In order to drown the cries of the victims, fiutes
were played, and drums were beaten; and mothers stood
by without tears or sobs, to give the impresslon of the
voluntary character of the offering (see Rawlinson’s
Phoenicia, 113 f, for fuller details).


On the question of the origin of this worship there
is great variety of views. Of a non-Sem origin
there is no evidence; and there is no trace of
human sacrifices in the old Bab religion. That it


prevailed widely among Sem peoples is clear. While
Mileom or Maleam is peculiarly the national god

of the Ammonites, as is Chemosh of
5. Origin the Moabites, the name Molech or
aud Extent Melech was recognized among the
of the Phoenicians, the Philis, the Aramaeans,
Worship and other Sem pcoples, as a name for

the divinity they worshipped from a
very early time. That it was common among the
Canaanites when the Israclites entered the land
is evident from the fact that it was among the
abominations from which they were to keep them-
selves free. That it was identical at first with the
worship of Jeh, or that the prophets and the best
men of the nation ever regarded it as the national
worship of Israel, is a modern theory which does
not appear to the present writer to have been sub-
stantiated. It has been inferred from Abraham’s
readiness to offer up Isaac at the command of God,
from the story of Jephthah and his daughter, and
even from the sacrifice of Hiel the Bethelite (1 K
16 34), that human sacrifice to Jeh was an original
custom in Israel, and that therefore the God of
Israel was no other than Moloch, or at all events a
deity of similar character. But these incidents are
surely too slender a foundation to support such a
theory. “The fundamental idea of the heathen
rite was the same as that which lay at the founda~
tion of Heb ordinance: the best to God; but by pre-
senting to us this story of the offering of Isaac, and
by presenting it in this precise form, the writer
simply teaches the truth, tanght by all the prophets,
that to obey is better than sacrifice—in other words
that the God worshipped in Abraham’s time was
a God who did not delight in destroying life, but
in saving and sanctifying it’? (Robertson, arly
Religion of Israel, 254). While there is no ground
for identifying Jeh with Moloch, there are good
grounds for seeing a community of origin between
Moloch and Baal. The name, the worship, and
the general characteristics are so similar that it is
natural to assign them a common place of origin
in Phoenicia. The fact that Moloch-worship
reached the climax of its abominable cruelty in the
Phoen colonies of which Carthage was the center
shows that it had found among that people a soil
suited to its peculiar genius.


Lirerature.—Wolf Baudissin, ‘‘Moloch” iu PRE;
Moore, Moloch" in HB; Rohertson, Harly Re-
ligton of Israel, 241-65; Robertson Smith, Religion of the
pone 352 ff; Buchanan Gray, Hebrew Proper Names,


T. Nicou
MOLI, mdi.


MOLID, mi'lid (72%, mélidh): A Indahite
(1 Ch 2 29).

MOLLIFY, mol’i-fi (from J2%, rakhakh, “to be
soft”): ‘‘To make soft,” used in modern Eng. only
figuratively, as “His anger was mollified.” EV,
however, uses the word lit. in its two occurrences:
Isa 1 6, “wounds, and bruises... . neither
bound up, neither mollified with oil”; Wisd 16 12,
“mollifying plaister.’’ Neither occurrence of the
word is changed by RV.


See Moour.


MOLOCH, mG‘lok: A deity of the Ammonites,
like the planet Saturn, a representative of the sun-
god in the particular aspect of a god of time. See
Astro.ocy, 8; Mourcs.


MOLTEN, mil’t’n, IMAGE. See Imaczs,
MOLTEN SEA. See Laver.


MOMDIS, mom'dis (A, MopSels, Momdets, B,
Mopfetos, Momdeios): One of those who had taken


Moment
Money


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2076


“strange wives’ (1 Esd 9 34)=‘Maadai” in Ezr
10 34.


MOMENT, mé’ment (239, regha', “a wink”;
&ropos, diomos, “an atom,” otryph, stigmé, ‘a
point,” rapaurixa, parautika, “immediately,” “forth-
with”): “Moment” is not used in Scripture for a
division of time, but for an instant of time, as the
wink or twinkling of the eye (Ex 33 5; Nu 16 21.
45; Lam 4 6; 1 Cor 15 52), or for a short period
of time (Job 20 5; Ps 30 5; Isa 26 20; 2 Cor
4.17). The division of the hour into sixty minutes
was certainly known in Babylonia, and the Jews
were made acquainted with it, at least during the
captivity, but they do not seem to have adopted it
very extensively. H. PorTER


MONEY, mun’i: Various terms are used for
money in the Bible, but the most common are the
Heb 592, keseph, and Gr dpytprov, argirion, both
meaning silver. We find also MQ WP, Isiiah,
rendered by LXX “lambs,” probably referring to
money in a particular form; x@Akés, chalkés, is
used for money in Mt 10 9; Mk 6 8; 12 41. It
was the name of asmall coin of Agrippa IT (Madden,
Coins of the Jews); xptipa, chréma, “price,” is
rendered money in Acts 4 37; 8 18.20; 24 26;
képna, kérma, “piece,’’ ie. piece of money (Jn 2
15); 8l8paxpov, didrachmon, ‘tribute money” (Mt
17 24AV, RV “half-shekel”); kfivoos, kénsos,
“census,” “tribute money” (Mt 22 19).

Gold and silver were the common medium of
exchange in Syria and Pal in the earliest times of

which we have any historical record.
1. Material The period of mere barter had passed
and Form before Abraham. The close connec-

tion of the country with the two great
civilized centers of antiquity, Egypt and Babylonia,
had led to the introduction of a currency for the
purposes of trade. We have abundant evidence of
the use of these metals in the Bib. records, and we
know from the monuments that they were used as
money before the time of Abraham. The patriarch
came back from his visit to Egypt “rich in cattle,
in silver, and in gold” (Gen 13 2). There was no
system of coinage, but they had these metals cast
in a convenient form for use in exchange, such as
bars or rings, the latter being a common form and
often represented or mentioned on the monuments
of Egypt. In Babylonia the more common form
seems to have been the former, such as the bar, or
wedge, that Achan found in the sack of Jericho
(Josh 7 21). This might indicate that the pieces
were too large for ordinary use, but we have indi-
cations of the use of small portions also (2 K 12 9;
Job 42 11). But the pieces were not so accurately
divided as to pass for money without weighing, as
we see in the case of the transaction between Abra-
ham and the children of Heth for the purchase of
the field of Machpelah (Gen 23). This transaction
indicates also the common use of silver as currency,
_ for it was “current money with the merchant,” and
earlier than this we have mention of the use of
silver by Abraham as money: “He that is born in
thy house and he that is bought with thy money”
(Gen 17 18).

Jewels of silver and gold were probably made
to conform to the shekel weight, so that they might
be used for money in case of necessity. Thus
Abraham's servant gave to Rebecca a gold ring of
half a shekel weight and bracelets of ten shekels
weight (Gen 24 22). The bundles of money car-
ried by the sons of Jacob to Egpyt for the purchase
of corn (Gen 42 35) were probably silver rings tied
together in bundles. The Heb for “talent,’’ kikkar,
signifies something round or circular, suggesting a


ring of this weight to be used as money. The
ordinary term for money was keseph, “silver,” and
this word preceded by a numeral always refers to
money, either with or without “shekel,” which we
are probably to supply where it is not expressed
after the numeral, at least wherever value is in-
volved, as the shekel (shekel) was the standard of
value as well as of weight (see WEIGHTS AND Mzas-
vurREs). ‘Thus the value of the field of Ephron was
in shekels, as was also the estimation of offerings
for sacred purposes (Lev 5 15; 27, passim).
Solomon purchased chariots at 600 (shekels) each
and horses at 150 (1 K 10 29). Large sums were
expressed in talents, which were a multiple of the
shekel. Thus Menahem gave Pul 1,000 talents
of silver (2 K 15 19), which was made up by the
exaction of 50 shekels from each rich man. Heze-
kiah paid the war indemnity to Sennacherib with
300 talents of silver and 30 of gold (2 K 18 14).
The Assyr account gives 800 talents of silver, and
the discrepancy may not be an error in the Heb
text, as some would explain it, but probably a differ-
ent kind of talent (see Madden, Coins of the Jews,
4). Solomon’s revenue is stated in talents (1 K 10
14), and the amount (666 of gold) indicates that
money was abundant, for this was in addition to
what he obtained from the vassal states and by
trade. His partnership with the Phoenicians in
commerce brought him large amounts of the pre-
cious metals, so that silver was said to have been
as plentiful in Jerus as stones (1 K 10 27).

Besides the forms of rings and bars, in which the
precious metals were cast for commercial use, some
other forms were perhaps current. Thus the term
k¢sitah has been referred to as used for money, and
the LXX tr has “lambs.” It is used in Gen 33
19; Josh 24 32; Job 42 11, and the LXX render-
ing is supposed to indicate a.piece in the form of a
lamb or stamped with a lamb, used at first as a
weight, later the same weight of the precious metals
being used for money. We are familiar with lion
weights and weights in the form of bulls and geese
from the monuments, and it would not be strange
to find them in the form of sheep. K‘stidh is cog-
nate with the Arab. kasat, which means ‘“‘to di-
vide exactly” or “justly,” and the noun kist means
“a portion” or “a measure.”

Another word joined with silver in monetary use
is ’dghorah (VIN), the term being tr4 “a piece of
silver” in 1S 2 36. ’‘Aghorah is cognate with the

oe cs


Arab. ujrat (By), “a wage,’


? and it would seem
that the piece of silver in this passage might refer
to the same usage.

Another word used in a similar way is ra¢, from
radcac, “‘to break in pieces,’’ hence ra¢ is “‘a piece”
or “fragment of silver’ used as money. These


| terms were in use before the introduction of coined


money and continued after coins became common.
After the exile we begin to find references to
coined money. It was invented in Lydia or per-
haps in Aegina. Herodotus assigns

2. Coined the invention to the Lydians (i.94).
Money The earliest Lydian coins were struck
by Gyges in the 7th cent. BC. These
coins were of electrum and elliptical in form,
smooth on the reverse but deeply stamped with
incuse impressions on the obverse. They were
called staters, but were of two standards; one for
commercial use with the Babylonians, weighing
about 164.4 grains, and the other of 224 grains (see
Madden, op. cit.). Later, gold was coined, and, by
the time of Croesus, gold and silver. The Persians
adopted the Lydian type, and coined both gold and
silver darics, the name being derived from Darius
Hystaspis (521-485 BC) who is reputed to have


2077


introduced the system into his empire. But the
staters of Lydia were current there under Cyrus

(Madden, op. cit.), and it was perhaps with these
that the Jews first became acquainted in Babylon.
Ezra states (2 69) that “they [the Jews] gave after
their ability into the treasury of the work three-
score and one thousand darics [RV] of gold, and
five thousand pounds of silver.’ The term here
rendered “‘daric” is dark*mdnim, and this word is
used in three passages in Neh (7 70-72), and
*ddharkonim occurs in 1 Ch 29 7 and Ear 8 27.
Both are of the same origin as the Gr drachma,
probably, though some derive hoth from Darius (a
Phoen inscription from the Piraeus tells us that
dark*mon corresponds to drachma). At all events
they refer to the gold coins which we know as darics.
The weight of the daric was 130 grains, though
double darics were struck.

_ Besides the gold daric there was a silver coin
circulating in Persia that must have been known to
the Jews. This was the sfglos («tydos), supposed
to be referred to in Neh 6 15, where it is tr4
“shekel.”’ These were the so-called silver darics,
20 of which were equivalent to the gold daric.
Besides these Persian coins the Jews must have
used others derived from their intercourse with the
Phoen cities, which were allowed to strike coins
under the suzerainty of the Persians. These coins
were of both silver and bronze, the suzerain not
permitting them to coin gold. We have abundant
examples of these coins and trade must have made
them familiar to the Jews.

The issues of Aradus, Sidon and Tyre were esp.
noteworthy, and were of various types and sizes
suited to the commercial transactions of the Phoeni-
cians. The Tyrian traders were established in


Coin of Aradus.
Ob.; Head of Dagon.
Rev.; Phoenician galley and above Les with a numeral for date.


Jerus as early as the time of Nehemiah (13 16), and
their coins date back to about that period. Among
the finest specimens we have of early coinage are
the tetradrachms of Tyre and the double shekels
or staters of Sidon. The latter represent the Pers
king, on the obverse, as he rides in his chariot,
driven by his charioteer and followed by an attend-
ant. On the reverse isa Phoen galley. The weight


Coin of Sidon.


Ob.: King in his chariot with charioteer.
Rev.;: Phoenician galley.


of these coins is from 380 to 480 grains, and they
are assigned to the 4th and 5th cents. BC. From
Tyre we have a tetradrachm which corresponds to
the shekel of the Phoen standard of about 220

ains, which represents, on the obverse, the god
Melkarth, the Tyrian Hercules, riding on a sea-


horse, and, beneath, a dolphin. The reverse bears


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Moment
Money


an owl with the Egyp crook and a flail, symbols of
Osiris. The early coins of Aradus bear, on the
obverse, the head of Baal or Dagon, and on the
reverse a galley, above which is the legend M.A.
xy in Phoen letters followed by adate. The legend
signifies “(Melek Aradus,” i.e. “king of Aradus.” _
When Alexander overthrew the Pers empire in
331 BC, a new coinage, on the Attic standard,
was introduced, and the silver drachms and tetra-
drachms struck by him circulated in large numbers,


Coin of Alexander Struck at ‘Accho (Ptolemais).


Rev. has Zeus on his throne with mint mark 4© for Accho,


as is attested by the large number of examples
still in existence. After his death, these coins, the
tetradrachms esp., continued to be struck in the
provinces, with his name and type, in his honor.
We have examples of these struck at Aradus, Tyre,
Sidon, Damascus and Acre, bearing the mint marks
of these towns. They bear on the obverse the
head of Alexander as Hercules, and, on the reverse,
Zeus seated on his throne holding an eagle in the
extended right hand and a scepter in the left. The
legend is BAZEIAEM= AAEZANAPOY, BASI-
LEOS ALEXANDROV, or AAEZANAPOY,
ALEXANDROU, only, with various symbols of
the towns or districts where they were struck,
together with mint marks.

The successors of Alexander established kingdoms
with a coinage of their own, such as the Ptolemies
in Egypt and the Seleucids in Syria, and these
coins, as well as those of Alexander, circulated


Coin of Antiochus IV of Syria.
Ob.: Head of Antiochus diademed.
Rey.; BAZIAEQS ANTIOXOY OEOY ENI®ANOYS NIKHGO.
POY ; Zeus seated on his throne holding victory in his right hand
and a scepter in his left.


among the Jews. The Ptolemies of Egypt con-
trolled Pal for about a century after Alexander,
and struck coins, not only in Egypt, but in some of
the Phoen towns, esp. at Acre, which was, from that
time, known as Ptolemais. Their coins were based
upon the Phoen standard. But the Seleucid kings
of Syria had the most influence in Phoenicia and
Pal, and their monetary issues are very various and
widely distributed, bearing the names and types
of the kings, and the symbols and mint marks of
the different towns where they were struck, and are
on the Alexandrine or Attic standard in contrast
to those of the Ptolemies. They are both silver
and bronze, gold being struck in the capital,
Antioch, usually. The coins of Antiochus IV,
Epiphanes, are esp. interesting on account of his
connection with Jewish affairs. It was he who
made the futile attempt to hellenize the Jews, which
led to the revolt that resulted, under his successors,


Money


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2078


in the independence of the country of Syrian con-
trol, and the institution of a native coinage in the
time of the Maccabees.

The struggle caused by the persecution of An-
tiochus commenced in 165 BC and continued more
than 20 years. Judas, the son
of Mattathias, defeated Antio-
chus, who died in 164, but the
war was continued by his succes-
sors until dynastic dissensions
among them led to treaties with
the Jews to gain their support.
At last Simon, who espoused
the cause of Demetrius II, ob-
tained from him, as a reward,


Coin of Ptol
the right to rule Judaea under Megeae
the title of high priest, with rey. (WTOAE)MAIOY
ZQTHPOS around the


practical independence, 142-143
BC. Later Antiochus VII, his
successor, confirmed Simon in his
position and added some privi- “
leges, and among them the right to com money
(188-139 BC). Both silver and bronze coins exist
ascribed to Simon, but some numismatists have re-
cently doubted this, and have assigned them to
another Simon in the time of the first revolt of the
Jews under the Romans. The coins in question
are the shekels and half-shekels with the legends,
in Heb, shekel yisra’a and y*rtishalém kedhdshah
(‘Jerusalem the holy”), bearing dates ranging from
the Ist to the 5th year, as well as bronze pieces of
the 4th (see illustrations).

The reason for denying the ascription of these
coins to Simon the Maccabee is the difficulty in
finding room for the years indicated in his reign
which closed in 135 BC. He received the com-
mission to coin in 139-138, which would allow only
4 years for his coinage, whereas we have coins of the
5th year. Moreover, no shekels and half-shekels
of any of the Maccabees later than Simon have
come to light, which is, at least, singular since we
should have supposed that all would have coined
them as long as they remained independent, esp.
since they coined in bronze, examples of the latter
being quite abundant. The fact also that they
bore the title of king, while Simon was high priest
only, would seem to have furnished an additional
reason for claiming the prerogative of coinage in
silver as well as bronze. But this argument is
negative only, and such coins may have existed
but have not come to light, and there are reasons
which seem to the present writer sufficient to assign
them to Simon the Maccabee. In the first place,
the chronological difficulty is removed if we con-
sider that Simon was practically independent for
three or four years before he obtained the explicit
commission to coin money. We learn from Jos
(Ant, XII, vi, 7) and from 1 Macc (13 41.42)
that in the 170th year of the Seleucid era, that is,
143-142 BC, the Jews began to use the era of Simon
in their contracts and public records. Now it
would not have been strange if Simon, seeing the
anarchy that prevailed in the kingdom of Syria,
should have assumed some prerogatives of an in-
dependent ruler before they were distinctly granted
to him, and among them that of coining money.
If he had commenced in the latter part of 139 BC,
he would have been able to strike coins of the 5th
year before he died, and this would satisfy the con-
ditions (see Madden’s Jewish Coinage). There is
a difficulty quite as great in attributing these coins
to Simon of the first revolt under the Romans.
That broke out in 66 AD, and was suppressed by
the taking of Jerusin 70. This would allow a date
of the 5th year, but it is hardly supposable that in
the terrible distress and anarchy that prevailed in
the city during that last year any silver coins would


margin. Eagle standing.
To the left mint mark


| = (Ptolemais).


have been struck. There is another fact bearing
upon this question which is worthy of notice. The
coins of the first revolt bear personal appellations,
such as “EHleazar the priest,’’ and “Simon,” while
those assigned to Simon the Maccabee bear no
personal designation whatever. This is significant,
for it is not likely that Eleazar and Simon would
have commenced coining silver shekels and _half-
shekels with their names inscribed upon them in the
1st year of their reign and then have omitted them
on later issues. Another point which has some
force is this: We find mention, in the NT, of money-
changers in connection with the temple, whose
husiness it was to change the current coin, which
was Rom or Gr, and bore heathen types and legends,
for Jewish coins, which the strict Pharisaic rules
then in force required from worshippers paying
money into the temple treasury. It is inferred
that they could furnish the shekels and half-shekels
required for the yearly dues from every adult male
(cf Mt 17 24-27). Now the only shekels and
half-shekels bearing Jewish emblems and legends,
at that time, must have been those issued by the
Maccabean princes, that is, such as we have under
discussion. In view of these facts the Maccabean
origin of these pieces seems probahle.

The shekels under discussion have on one side
a cup, or chalice (supposed to represent the pot of
manna), with the legend in Heb around the margin,
Sei Spu, shekel yisr@’él, with a
letter above the cup indicating the
year of thereign. The reverse bears
the sprig of a plant (conjectured to
be Aaron’s rod) having three buds
or fruits, and on the margin the
legend, MUIpm Dewi, yerasha-
lém ha-kedhoshah, “Jerusalem the
holy.” The half-shekel has the
same type, but the reverse bears the legend,


2p LM, dct shekel (half-shekel). The letters
indicating the year have a W (shenath, ‘“year’’)


Half-Shekel &, Year 1, 141(?) BC.


prefixed, except for the first. This also omits the 4
from k‘dhdshah and the second 7 from y*rushalém.
The term “holy” for Jerus is found in Isa 48 2 and
other passages of the OT, and is still preserved in
the Arab. kudus by which the city is known today
in Syria.

Copper, or bronze, half- and quarter-shekels are
also attributed to Simon, bearing date of the 4th
year. The obverse of the half-shekel has two


Shekel yw), Year 4, 138-7 (?) BC.


bundles of thick-leaved branches with a citron
between, and on the reverse a palm tree with two
baskets filled with fruit. The legend on the obverse
is "2 VIAN MW. shenath ’arba* hdci, “the fourth


2079


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Money


year a half,” and on the reverse, JZ mbsad, li-ghe-
’ullath ¢tyon, ‘the redemption of Zion.” The quarter-
shekel has a similar type, except that the obverse
lacks the baskets and the reverse has the citron
only. The legend has Y"34, r*bhi', “quarter,”
instead of “half.” Another type is a cup with a
margin of jewels on the obverse and a single bunch
of branches with two citrons on the reverse.

The palm is a very common type on the coins of
Judaea and a very appropriate one, since it is
grown there. Jericho was called the city of palms.
The branches of
trees in bundles
illustrate the
custom of carry-
ing branches at
the Feast of
Tabernacles and
the erection of
booths made of
branches for use
during this feast (see Lev 23 40). The baskets
of fruit may refer to the offerings of first-fruits
(Dt 26 2). One of the above series of coins pub-
lished by Madden bears the countermark of an
elephant, which was a symbol adopted by the
Seleucid kings, and this is an evidence of its early
date. But whatever doubts there may be as to the
coins of Simon, there can be none as to those of his
successor, John Hyrcanus, who reigned 135-106
BC, since they bear his name. They are all of
bronze and bear the following legend with a great
number of variations, "3TM Son yon PAM
aT, “Johanan the high priest and senate of
the Jews.” The reverse has a two-branched cor-
nucopia with a poppy head rising from the center.
There is some doubt as to the meaning of the word
hebher ("37) in the above. It is commonly ren-
dered ‘“‘senate,” taking it in the sense it seems to
bear in Hos 6 9, “a
company” or “band,”’
here the company of
elders representing the
people. Judas Aristo-
bulus (106-105 BC)
issued similar coins
with Heb legends, but
with the accession of Alexander Jannaeus (105-78
BC) we find bilingual inscriptions on the coins,
Heb and Gr. The obverse bears the words
qoan INI, yhdnathan ha-melekh, ‘“Jehona-
than the king,” and the reverse, BASZIAEQ=
AAEZANAPOY, BASILEOS ALEXANDROU,
“King Alexander.’ Most of his coins, however, bear
Heb inscriptions only. All are of copper or bronze,
like those of Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, and are of
the denomination known to usin the NT as “mites,”

eighing from 25 to 35 grains. ;
Dene the Romans took possession of Pal in 63
BC, the independent rule of the Hasmoneans came
to an end, but Pompey confirmed
John Hyrcanus as governor of
Judaea under the title of high
priest. Dissensions between him
and other members of his family
called for interference_ several
times on the part of the Romans.
Hyrcanus was again confirmed by
Julius Caesar in 47 and continued
in authority until 40. It is un-
certain what coins he issued, but
whatever they were, they bore the
type found on those of Alexander Jannaeus. In 40
BC, the Parthians temporarily overthrew the Rom
authority in Syria and Pal, and set Antigonus on the
throne of the latter, and he reigned until 37. The


One-fourth Shekel but without
rebta.


Mite of John Hyrcanus.


Rev. of a Coin of
Antigonus
(Bronze).


coins he issued bore bilingual inscriptions like the
bilinguals of Alexander. He calls himself Antigonus
in Gr, and Mattathias in Heb, the type being a
wreath on the obverse and a double cornucopia on
the reverse, though some have it single. They are
much heavier coins than the preceding issues. The
legends are: obverse, BACIAEWC ANTIFONOY,
BASILEOS ANTIGONOU, “of King Antigonus’’;
reverse (DY TTR DTA POM ns, maitihyah
ha-kohén gadhdl ha-y*h(tidhim), “Mattathias the
high priest of the Jews.”

The Hasmonean dynasty ended with Antigonus
and that of the Herads followed. Herod the Great
was the first to at-
tain the title of
king, and his coins
are numerous and
bear only Grlegends
and are all of
bronze. The earli-
est have the type
of a helmet with
cheek pieces on_the obverse and_ the legend:
BACIAE@C HPQAOY, BASILEOS HRODOU,
and in the field to the left [ (year 3), and on the
right the monogram f. The reverse has a Mace-
donian shield with rays. The coin here illustrated
is another type: arude tripod on the obverse, and a
cross within a wreath on the reverse, the legend
being the same as given above.

Herod Archelaus, who reigned fram 4 BC to 6 AD,
issued coins with the title of ethnarch, the only
coins of Pal to bear this title. They are all of small
size and some of them have the type of a galley,
indicating his sovereignty over some of the coast
cities, such as Caesarea and Joppa.

The coins of Herod Antipas (4 BC-40 AD) bear
the title of tetrarch, many of them being struck at
Tiberias, which he founded on the Sea of Galilee
and named after the emperor Tiberius. The fol-
lowing is an example: obverse HP. TETP(H-


PQAOY TETPAXOY), HER. TETR(HERODOU


TETRACHOU), with the type of a palm branch;
reverse, TIBEPIAC, TIBERIAS, within a wreath.


Others have a palm


tree entire with the
Amicus Rufus, 13-14 AD.


Coin of the Herods.


date A[ and AA: 33


and 34 of his reign,
29-30 AD. There are
coins of Herod Philip,
4 BC-34 AD, thoug
somewhat rare, but
those of Agrippa, 37-44 AD, are numerous, con-
sidering the shortness of his reign. The most com-
mon type is a small coin (‘mite’) with an um-
brella having a tassel-like
border, on the obverse, and
three ears of wheat on one
stalk on the reverse. The
legend reads: Bastleds
Agrippa, and the date is LS
(year 6). Larger coins of
Agrippa bear the head of
the emperor (Caligula or
Claudius) with the title of
Sebast6s (Augustus) in Gr.

Agrippa II was the last
of the Herodian line to
strike coins (48-100 AD). They were issued under
Nero, whose head they sometimes bear with his
name as well as that of Agrippa. They are all of
the denomination of the mite (leplén).

In 6 AD, Judaea was made a Rom province and
was governed by procurators, and their coins are
numerous, being issued during the reigns of Augus-


Coin of Agrippa.


Money
Mordecai


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2080


tus, Tiberius, Claudius and Nero. They are all
small and bear on the obverse the legends: KAI-
CAPOC (Caesar), or IOYAIA (Julia), or the em-
peror’s name joined with Caesar. The coins of the
Jews struck during the first and second revolts, 66—
70 AD, and 132-135
AD, have already
been alluded to with
the difficulty of dis-
tinguishing them,
and some have been
described. They all
have the types com-
mon to the purely
Jewish issues; the
date palm, the vine, bunches of fruit, the laurel or
olive wreath, the cup or chalice, the lyre and a
temple with columns. Types of animals or men
they regarded as forbidden by their law. Most of
them are bronze, but some are silver shekels and
half-shekels, dated in the Ist, 2d and 3d years, if
we assign those of higher date to
Simon the Maccabee. Those of
the 1st year bear thename of Ele-
azar the priest, on the obverse,
and on thereverse the date “‘first

ear of the redemption of Israel,”’

wit mbox mms mit, she-
nath ’ahath li-gh’ullath yisr@ él.
Others bear the name of Simon
and some that of “Simon Ns?’
Israel” (“Simon Prince of
Israel”). The coins of the 2d
and 3d years are rare. They |
have the type of the cup and vine leaf, or temple
and lulabh. Those supposed to belong to the
second revolt bear the name of Simon without
N°si’ Israel, and are therefore assigned to Simon
Bar-Cochba. The example here given has the
type of the temple on the obverse with what is


Chalkous of Pontius Pilate,
26-36 AD.


Roman Coin_Com-
memorating Victory
over the Jews.


Shekel, Simon Bar-Cochba.


thought to be a representation of the “beautiful
gate,” between the columns, and a star above.
The name Simon is on the margin, the first two
letters on the right of the temple and the others on
the left. The legend of the reverse is: MIM?
oo , “hérath yrashalém (“the deliverance of
Jerus’’).


Denarius of Tiberius.
“Penny’’ AV, ‘Shilling’ RV.


Some of the coins struck by the Romans to com-
memorate their victory over the Jews were struck
in Pal and some at Rome, and all bear the head of
the Rom emperor on the obverse, but the reverse
often exhibits Judaea as a weeping captive woman,
seated at the foot of a palm tree or of a Rom stand-


ard bearing a trophy. The legend is sometimes
Judaea capta and sometimes Judaea devicta. The
example given has the inscription in Gr: IOYAIA2
EAAQKYIAS, JOUDIAS EALOKUIAS, Judaea
capta.

There are coins of Agrippa IT
(the “king Agrippa” of Acts 25,
26), struck in the reign of Ves-
pasian, with his name and title
on the obverse and with a deity
on the reverse, holding ears of
wheat in the right hand and a
cornucopia in the left. The in-
scription reads:


ETOY KeBA £TOU KSBA
APPI TTTTA AGRI PPA


(year 26, King Agrippa) in two lines.

After the revolt of Bar-Cochba and the final sub-
jugation of the Jews by Hadrian, Jerus was made
a Rom colony and the name was changed to Aelia
Capitolina. A series of coins was struck, having


Rev. of a Coin of
Aelia Capitolina.
Type: a colonist driving


a yoke of oxen; Roman
standard behind.


Coin of Tyre.


Ob.: Melkarth ona sea-horse. Rev.; The owl and flail.

this title, which continued until the reign of Vale-
rianus, 253-260 AD. These coins were all of copper
or bronze, but silver pieces were in circulation,
struck at Rome or at some of the more favored
towns in Syria, such as Antioch. These were


Tetradrachm of Augustus Struck at Antioch (RV Stater).


denarii and tetradrachms, the former being about
one-fourth the weight of the latter which were
known as staters (Mt 17 27). The piece referred
to was the amount of tribute for two persons, and
as the amount paid by one was the half-shekel (ver
24), this piece must have been the equivalent of the
shekel or tetradrachm. H. Porter


MONEY-CHANGERS, chan’jérs (kod\AvBirrfs,
kollubistés, from «éAdvPos, kéllubos, ‘a small coin,”
so “a money-changer,” or “banker” [Mt 21 12;
Mk 11 15; “changers” in Jn 2 15; cf ver 14,
where Keppatirtis, kermatistés, “a dealer in small
bits,” or “change,” is also rendered “changers”];
cf tparetirns, trapezités, ‘one who sits at a table,”
“a, money-changer,” “a banker” or “broker”; one
who both exchanges money for a small fee and pays
interest on deposits [Mt 25 27, AV “exchangers,”
ARV “bankers’]): The profession of money-
changer in Pal was made necessary by the law re-
quiring every male Israelite who had reached the age
of 20 years to pay into the treasury of the sanctuary
a half-shekel at every numbering of the people,
an offering to Jeh, not even the poor being exempt.
It seems to have become an annual tax, and was to
be paid in the regular Jewish half-shekel (Ex 30
11-15). Since the Jews, coming up to the feasts,


2081


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Money
Mordecai


would need to exchange the various coins in com-
mon circulation for this Jewish piece, there were
money-changers who exacted a premium for the
exchange. This fee was a kollubos (about 31 cents
in U.S. money), hence the name kollubistés. The
Jews of Christ’s day came from many parts of the
world, and the business of exchanging forcign coins
for various purposes became a lucrative one, the
exchangers exacting whatever fee they might.
Because of their greed and impiety, Jesus drove
them from the courts of the temple. ;
Epwarp BacBy PoutaRD

MONEY, CURRENT, kur’ent (729, ‘abhér,
“passing,” Gen 23 16; 2 K 12 4 [Heb 5]): The
text and tr in 2 K 12 4 are uncertain and difficult.
See RVm. The reference is probably not to a
money standard, but to a poll tax which was levied
in addition to the free-will offering. Gen 23 16
implies the existence of a standard shekel and also
prebably the use of the precious metals in stamped

ars or ingots of an approximately fixed weight or
value, a primitive coinage. CH presupposes these
pieces, and records in cuneiform writing discovered
in Cappadocia indicate that shekel pieces with a
seal stamp were in use in Asia Minor in the time of
Hammurabi (Sayce, Contemporary Review, August,
1907, XCII, 259 ff). The existence of these pieces
did not do away with the custom of weighing money,
a practice which obtained in Israel down to the
time of the exile (Jer 32 10)

Wa ter R. BerreripcE

MONEY, LOVE OF (¢tAapyvpla, philarguria,
1 Tim 6 10, lit. “love of silver”; cf corresponding
“lovers of money” [Lk 16 14; 2 Tim 3 2], equiva-
lent to ‘“avarice’): The vice that seeks to retain
and hoard all that is acquired (Trench, Synonymes
of the NT, xxiv); described as “a root of all kinds of
evil.” See also CoveTousngss.


MONEY, SIN. See Sin Money; Sin OFFERING.
SEA


MONSTER, mon’stér.
Monster.


MONTH, munth (WIM, hadhesh, MV, yerah;
piv, mén): Hédhesh is strictly the “new moon,”
the appearance of which marked the beginning of
the month, commonly indicated by ré’sh ha-hddhesh.
Yerah is derived from ydaré*h, ‘‘moon,” which comes
from the vb. that means ‘‘to wander,” “to make a
circuit.” Thus the month was lunar, the period
of the moon’s circuit. The Gr mén also meant
“moon,” from the Sanskrit ma, “to: measure,” the
Lat mensis and our “moon” being derived from the
game root (see CALENDAR; TIME; ASTRONOMY).

Hédhesh, or rather r6’sh ha-hédhesh, was observe
as a festival (1 S 20 5.18.24; Isa 1 14). :

H. Porter

MONTHLY, munth’li, PROGNOSTICATORS,

prog-nos’'ti-ka-térz. See Asrroioey, I, 6.


MONUMENT, mon’t-ment (Isa 65 4 AV).
VAULT.


MOOLI, m6’é-li (A, MooAl, Mooli, B, Moodel,
Moolet; AV Moli): Son of Merari and grandson of
Levi (1 Esd 8 47)=“Mahli” in Ezr 8 18 (see Ex
6 16.19).


MOON, moon (0°, yaréh; meaning obscure
—probably ‘wanderer’; by some given as ‘‘pale-
ness’; oeAfvy, seléné): The moon was very early
worshipped by the nations of the Far East as a
divinity or the representative of one or more deities.
These deities were both masculine and feminine.
In Assyria and Babylonia the most common name


See Dracon;


See


for the moon-god was Sin or Sen. In Babylonia
he was also called Aku and Nannara. In Egypt
the moon was representative of several deities, all
masculine. The chief of these was Thoth the god
of knowledge, so called because the moon was the
measurer of time. Babylonia has, also, Aa, the
goddess of the moon, as the consort of the sun,
while her equivalent was known in Phoenicia as
Ashtaroth-karnaim. This personification and wor-
ship of the moon among the nations who were
neighbors to Pal was but part of an elaborate
Nature-worship found among these people. Nor
was this worship always separated from Pal by
geographical lines. It crept into the thought and
customs of the Hebrews and in a sense affected their
religious conceptions and ceremonies. They fell
into the habit of making direct homage to sun,
moon and stars, as is evidenced by Job 31 26.27;
Jer 44 17, and even Isa 3 18 (see CrEscENts).
Moses seems to have forewarned his people against
the danger of this form of worship (Dt 4 19).

The actual worship of the moon and the idolatry
consequent thereon seems to have touched the He-
brews, though this is disputed by some. It would
seem difficult to explain 2 K 21 3 upon any other
supposition, and in 2 K 23 4.5 we have a clear
statement that Josiah put down the worship of the
moon among the people and silenced the priests
of this form of worship.

Certain forms of the adoration of the moon, or
superstitious fear of baneful influences as coming
from the moon, still abound in some sections of the


‘world. In fact in nearly all sections modified forms


of old superstitions still hold sway and yield but
slowly to scientific knowledge.

The eclipses of the moon were naturally given a
religious significance inasmuch as the Heb knowl-
edge of them did not rise much above awe and
wonder (Isa 13 10; Joel 2 31; Mt 24 29; Mk 13
24). Other passages causing interference with the
constancy of the moon to foreshadow great events
can be found in Jer 13 16; Ezk 82 7.8; Rev 8 12.
An interesting passage and most difficult of inter-
pretation is Rev 12 1. It is frequently interpreted
as a revelation in symbolism of the glory of the
church clothed with the light and radiating the truth
of God. See also Astronomy; ASTROLOGY.

C. E. Screnx

MOON, NEW. See Asrroxoey, I, 6; AsTRON-
omy, I, 3, (1); Fasts anv Frasts.


MOOSSIAS, mié-os’i-as (B, Mooooelas, Moos-
seias, A, Mods Zlas, Mods Sias; AV Moosias, mo-
6-si’as): One of those who had taken a “‘strange
wife” (1 Esd 9 31)=“‘Maaseiah” in Ezr 10 30.


MOPH, mof.
MORALITY, mé-ral’i-ti. See Ernics.


MORASHTITE, mié-rash’tit CMWATAN, ha-
morashit; AV Morasthite, mé-ras’thit): Gentilic
designation of the prophet Micah (Jer 26 18; Mic
11). See also MorEsHETH-GATH.


MORDECAI, mér’dé-ki, mér-dé-ka’i (377A,
mord*khay; MapSoxaios, Mardochatos): An Israel-
ite of the tribe of Benjamin, whose fate it has been
to occupy a distinguished place in the annals of his
people. His great-grandfather, Kish, had been
carried to Babylon along with Jeconiah, king of
Judah (Est 2 5-6). For nearly 60 years before
the scenes narrated in Est, in which Mordecai
was greatly concerned, took place, the way to Pal
had been open to the Israelites; but neither his
father, Jair, nor afterward himself chose to return


See Mempuis.


Moreh, Hill of
Moses


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2082


to the ancient heritage. This seems to have been
the case also with the rest of his house, as it was
with the vast majority of the Israelitish people;
for his uncle died in Persia leaving his motherless
daughter, Hadassah, to the care of Mordecai.
Employed in the royal palace at Susa, he attracted,
through the timely discovery of a plot to assassi-
nate the king, the favorable notice of Xerxes, and in
a short time became the grand vizier of the Pers
empire. He has been believed by many to have
been the author of the Book of Est; and in the ear-
liest known notice of the Feast of Purim, outside
of the book just mentioned, that festival is closely
associated with his name. It is called “the day of
Mordecai” (2 Macc 15 36). The apocryphal ad-
ditions to Est expatiate upon his greatness, and
are eloquent of the deep impression which his per-
sonality and power had made upon the Jewish
people. Lord Arthur Hervey has suggested the
identification of Mordecai with Matacas, or Natacas,
the powerful favorite and minister of Xerxes who
is spoken of by Ctesias, the Gr historian. Few
have done more to earn a nation’s lasting gratitude
than Mordecai, to whom, under God, the Jewish
people owe their preservation. JoHNn UrnquHartT


MOREH, mo're, HILL OF (M71AN MP3,
gibh‘ath ha-moreh, “hill of the teacher”; B, TaBaa-
Oapwpd, Gabaathamérd, A, tod Bwopod rot "ABdp, tov
bomot to% Abér): The Heb méreh is derived from
the vb. yarah, ‘‘to teach,” ‘to direct,”’ and indicates
one who directs, or gives oracular answers. We
might therefore read “hill of. the teacher,” the
height being associated with such a person who had
his seat here. The hill is named only in describing
the position of the Midianites before Gideon’s
attack (Jgs 7 1). If the identification of the Well
of Harod with ‘ Ain Jaldd is correct, Gideon must
have occupied the slopes to the E. of Jezreel. The
Midianite camp was in the valley of Jezreel (6 33).
The Heb text in 7 1, which has probably suffered
some corruption, seems to mean that the Midian-
ites lay N. of the position held by Gideon, their lines
running from the hill of Moreh in the plain. The
hill can hardly have been other than Jebel ed-Duhy,
often called Little Hermon, which rises boldly from
the northern edge of the vale of Jezreel, with
Shunem (Sédlam) lying at its western foot. Moore
(“Judges,” ICC, 200) would lay the scene in the
neighborhood of Shechem, but there is no good
reason to doubt the accuracy of the tradition which
places it at the eastern end of the plain of Es-
draelon. W. Ewine


MOREH, OAK OF (77 FOR, ’aldn mareh,
“terebinth of the teacher’; thy Spiv thy ipndrty,
tén drin tén hupsélén; AV Plain of Moreh): It
seems probable that the place here intended may
be the same as that mentioned in Dt 11 30 (éloné
méoreh, ‘‘terebinths of Moreh,” AV “plains,” RV
“oaks,” RVm “terebinths’). Both are defined
as near to Shechem. The position cannot be identi-
fied today. The tree or trees were evidently a place
of resort for those who wished to consult a moreh.
See Moreu, Hitt or. To this day in Pal trees
are often regarded with a certain religious awe as
the habitation of spirits. Isolated terebinths
receive much veneration. The present writer has
often seen such trees with multitudinous rags of all
colors attached to them by the peasantry as evi-
dence of their homage. See Mronenim.

W. Ewine

MORESHETH-GATH, mid’resh-eth-gath, mé-
resh’eth-gath (M3 MW, moresheth gath, ‘‘inherit-
ance or possession of Gath”; LXX kAnpovoplas Ted,
kléronomias Géth): A place mentioned only in Mic


114. It must have been in the vicinity of Gath
as the meaning of the name would indicate, and
was the home of the prophet Micah (Mic 1 1;
Jer 26 18). It was probably in the vicinity of
Mareshah (Mic 1 15). Jerome, in his preface to
his work on Micah, places it a little to the EK. of
Eleutheropolis (Beit Jibrin), and it would be natural
to find it there if the latter place was Gath as some
think. Robinson (BR, IJ, 68) found ruins of a
village between one and two miles E. of Bett Jibrin.
It must have been among the foot-hills of Judah
between the hill country and the Phili plain on
the route from Jerus to Lachish, Gaza and Egypt.
Mareshah was certainly in that region, and the
prophecy of Micah mentions towns and villages in
the Shephelah and the Phili country as though
they were familiar to him (see HGHL and G. A.
Smith, “Micah,” in his Minor Prophets).
H. PorTER

MORIAH, mé-ri’a, LAND OF (780 PRR,
’ereg ha-moriyah; els thy yiv thy imdjy, eis ten
gén tén hupsélén): Abraham was directed by God
to take his son Isaac, to go into the Jand of Moriah,
and there to offer him for a burnt offering (Gen 22
2) upon a mountain which God would show him.
This land is mentioned only here, and there is little
to guide us in trying to identify it. A late writer
(2 Ch 3 1) applies the name of Moriah to the
mount on which Solomon’s Temple was built,
possibly associating it with the sacrifice of Isaac.
A similar association with this mountain may have
been in the mind of the writer of Gen 22 (see ver
14), who, of course, wrote long after the events de-
scribed (Driver). But in ver 2 no special mountain
is indicated.

Abraham journeyed from the land of the Philis,
and on the 3d day he saw the place afar off (ver 4).
This naturally suggests some prominent mountain
farther N. than Jerus. The description could
hardly apply to Jerus in any case, as it could not be
seen “afar off” by one approaching either from the
S. or the W. The Samaritans lay the scene of
sacrifice on Mt. Grrizm (q.v.).

Instead of ‘Moriah’ in this passage Pesh reads
“Amorites.” This suggests a possible emendation
of the text, which, if it be accepted, furnishes a more
definite idea of the land within which that mem-
orable scene was enacted. Both Jerus and Gerizim,
however, lay within the boundaries of the land of
the Amorites. No doubt the enmity existing be-
tween the Jews and the Samaritans led them each
to glorify their own holy places to the detriment
of those of their rivals. Little stress can therefore
be laid upon their identifications. With our present
knowledge we must be content to leave the question
open. Ewina


MORNING, mér’ning: There are several Heb
and Gr words which are rendered “morning,” the
most common in Heb being “Zl, baker, which
occurs 180+. It properly means “‘the breaking
forth of the light,” “the dawn,’’ as in Gen 19 27;
Jgs 19 8.25.27. Another word with the same
meaning is "IW, shahar (Gen 19 15; Neh 4 21;
Isa 68 8). “WW, mishhar (‘womb of the m.,”
Ps 110 3) is a poetical term derived from the same
root. See Hinp or THe Mornine. MI), ndghah,
N32, naghha’ (Dnl 6 19 [Heb 20]), mean “bright-
ness.” DDWM, hashkém, comes from D°DWM, hish-
kim, “to load an animal” (for a journey), and as
the nomads are accustomed to do this early in the
morning it came to mean early morning (1 8 17
16). See Betmes.

In the NT ép6pos, 6rthros, is properly ‘“‘dawn,” and
is used for early morning (Jn 8 2; Acts 6 21), and


2083


wpwta, préia, signifies the same (Mt 271). zpwt,
prot, “early,” is an advb. and means early in the m.
(Mk 1 35). M.asan adj. is ép@pcrés, orthrinds (Rev
22 16), or mpwivés, prdinds (1 Esd 1 11; 6 50; Rev
2 28; 22 16). H. Porter


MORNING WATCH ("pan miaty, ’ash-
moreth ha-boker [Ex 14 24; 1S 11 11]; in Jth 12
5 for heothiné phulaké; cf Sir 56 6; 1 Macc 6 30):
The last portion of the night (see Watca).


MORNING, WINGS OF. See Astronomy, I, 4.


MORROW, mor’s, TOMORROW, t06-mor’s:
Two words are used in the OT in this meaning:
“p2, boker, which properly means “dawn,” or
“morning,” and “7A, mahar, properly the same, but
used for the next morning and hence “tomorrow,”
like the Ger. morgen. The derivative MA, mo-
horath, is “the following day,” “all the next day,”
esp. after yom (“day”), but usually coupled with
a noun following, as in Lev 28 11, mohérath ha-
shabbath, ‘day after the Sabbath.” It is also used
adverbially for ‘on the morrow,” as in Gen 19 34.

In the Gr of the NT we find atpiov, avirion (Mt
6 34, etc), commonly used, but ¢és, hezxés, also
occurs (Acts 25 17 AV, where RV renders more
exactly “the next day”); ématpiov, eparirion, is ‘on
the morrow” (Acts 10 9.23.24). H. Porter


MORROW AFTER THE SABBATH (m0),
mohorath, or DINO, mohdrathdm, “the morrow,”
or “tomorrow,” “the day following”; MBWO N7n"a,
mohérath ha-shabbath, ‘the day after the Sabbath,”
i.e. the first day of the week): The first day of the
week was designated for the formal offering of the
first-fruits in the form of wave-sheaves (Lev 23 11),
and of the wave-loaves 50 days later (Lev 23 16.
17). This recognition of an after-Sabbath during
festive periods has its counterpart in the later
ecclesiastical practice of celebrating not only Easter
Sunday, but also Easter Monday, etc, and un-
doubtedly was a factor in establishing the custom
which transferred the sanctity of the Sabbath to
the first day of the week after the resurrection of
Our Lord. Frank E. Hirsca


MORSEL, mér’sel (Bpdets, brdsis): Found only
in He 12 16 AV, “For one morsel of meat [RV
“mess of meat’’] sold his birthright,” lit. “for one
eating,” i.e. one meal. The Great Bible (Cran-
mer’s) has ‘for one mease of meat.”


MORTAL, mér’tal, MORTALITY, mor-tal’i-ti
(Ovyrés, thndiéds, To Ovynrév, 16 thnétén): The mean-
ing is “subject to death” (Rom 6 12; 8 11; 1 Cor
15 53.54; in 2 Cor 6 4 RV has “what is mortal’).
In Job 4 17, the Heb word is ’éndsh, “mortal man.”
See IMMORTAL.


MORTAR, mér’tér (IQTA, medhokhah [Nu 11
8], WAS, makhtésh [Prov 27 22)): A hollowed
stone or vessel in which grain or other substance
was pounded or beaten with a pestle. The Ierael-
ites used a mortar in which to beat the manna in the
wilderness (Nu 11 8), and Prov 27 22 declares,
“Though thou shouldst bray a fool in a mortar with
a pestle... . yet will not his foolishness depart
from him,” ie. it is inherent and ineradicable.
Some have supposed an allusion to an oriental mode
of punishment by pounding the criminal to death
in a mortar, but this is unlikely. In illustration of
Prov 27 22 such proverbs are quoted as ‘Though
you beat that loose woman in a mortar, she will not
leave her ways.” See also Bray. For “mortar”
(AV “morter’’) see BrrumEn. JAMES ORR


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Moreh, Hill of
Moses


MORTGAGE, mér’gij (279, ‘arabh): To give
or be security as a part of bartering, give pledges,
become surety. In time of great need for food,
“Some also there were that said, We are mortgaging
[AV “have mortgaged”’] our fields,” etc (Neh 6 3).
See Surety.


MORTIFY, mér’ti-fi (Rom 8 13 AV and ERV,
Gavaréw, thanatéd, ERVm “make to die,” and Col
3 5, vexpéa, nekréd, ERVm “make dead”): This
sense of mortify is obsolete in modern Eng., and
ARV in both places substitutes “put to death,”
with great advantage. The context in both pas-
sages goes to the heart of St. Paul’s doctrine of the
union of the believer with Christ. This union has

iven the soul a new life, flowing (through the

irit) from Christ in the heavenly world, so that
the remnants of the old corrupt life-principle are
now dangerous excrescences. Hence they are to be
destroyed, just as a surgeon removes the remnants
of a diseased condition after the reéstablishment of
healthy circulation. The interpreter must guard
against weakening St. Paul’s language into some
such phrase as “subdue all that is inconsistent with
the highest ideals,” for St. Paul views the union
with Christ as an intensely real, quasi-physical re-
lation. Burton Scott Hasron


MOSERAH, mé-sé'ra, mO’sé-ri (TOTO, mé-
sarah, bond”): Perhaps Moser with Hé locale, “to
Moser” (Dt 10 6). See Mosrrora.


MOSEROTH, mé-séroth, m6’sé-roth, roth
(FINO, masérath, “bonds’”’): A desert camp of the
Israelites between Hashmonah and Bene-jaakan (Nu
33 30.31). It is probably the same as Moserah
(Dt 10 6), though in that passage the name follows
Bene-jaakan. There Aaron died and was buried.
See Wanverines or Israzt.


MOSES, m6’zez, md’ziz (NWA, masheh; Egyp més,
“drawn out,” “born”; LXX Moves], Mousé[s]):
The great Heb national hero, leader, author, law-
giver and prophet.


I, Lira
1. Son of Levi
2. Foundling Prince
3. Friend of the People
4. Refuge in Midian
5. Leader of Israel
TI, Work anp CHARracTER
1. The Author
2. The Lawgiver
3. The Prophet
LITERATURE


The traditional view of the Jewish church and of
the Christian church, that M. was a person and
that the narrative with which his life-story is inter-
woven is real history, is in the main sustained by
commentators and critics of all classes.


It is needless to mention the old writers among whom
these questions were hardly under discussion. Among
the advocates of the current radical criticism may he
mentioned Stade and Renan, who minimize the his-
toricity of the Bible narrative at this point. Renan
thinks the narrative ‘‘may be very probable.” Ewald,
Wellhausen, Robertson Smith, and Driver, while find-
ing many flaws in the story, make much generally of the
historicity of the narrative. i

The critical analysis of the Pent divides this life-story
of M. into three main parts, J, E, and P, with a fourth,
D, made up mainly from the others. Also some small
portions here and there are given to R, esp. the account
of Aaron’s part in the plagues of Egypt, where his pres-
ence in a J-document ls very troublesome for the analyti-
caltheory. Itis unnecessary to encumber this biograph
with constant cross-references to the strange story of M.
pieced together out of the rearranged fragments into
which the critical analysis of the Pent breaks up the
Jt is recognized that there are difficulties
in the story of M._ In what ancient life-story are there
not difficulties? If we can conceive of the ancients
being obliged to ponder over a modern life-story, we can
easily believe that they would have still more difficulty
with it. But it seems to very many that the critical


narrative.


Moses


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2084


analysis creates more difficulties in the narrative than
it relieves. It is a little thing to explain by such analy-
sis some apparent discrepancy between two laws or two
events or two similar incidents which we do not clearly
understand. It is a far greater thing so to confuse, by
rearranging, a beautiful, well-articulated biography that
it becomes disconnected—indeed, in parts, scarcely makes
sense,


The biographical narrative of the Heb national
hero, M., is a continuous thread of history in the
Pent. That story in all its simplicity and sym-
metry, but with acknowledgment of its difficulties
as they arise, is here to be followed.

I. Life.—The recorded story of Moses’ life falls
naturally into five rather unequal parts: “And

there went a man of the house of Levi,
1. Son of — and took to wife a daughter of Levi”
Levi (Ex 2 1). The son of Levi born of
that union became the greatest man
among mere men in the whole history of the world.
How far he was removed in genealogy from Levi
it is impossible to kuow.

The genealogical lists (Gen 46 11; Ex 6 16-20; Nu
3 14-28; 26 57-59; 1 Ch 6 1-8) show only 4 genera-
tions from Levi to M., while the account given of the
numbers of Israel at the exodus (Ex 12 37; 38 26;
Nu 1 46; 11 21) imperatively demand at least 10 or
12 generations. The males alone of the sons of Kohath
“from a month old and upward" numbered at Sinai
8,600 (Nu 3 27.28). Itis evident that the extract from
the genealogy here, as in many other places (1 Ch 23

51; 26 24; Har 7 1-5; § 1.2; cf 1 Ch 6 8-14; Mt
1 1-17; Lk 8 23-38) is not complete, but follows the
common method of giving important heads of families.
The statement concerning Jochehed: ‘‘ And she bare unto
Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister"
(Nu 26 59) really creates no difficulty, as it is likewise
said of Zilpah, after the mention of her grandsons, ‘‘ And
these she bare unto Jacob" (Gen 46 17.18; cf 46 24.25).

The names of the immediate father and mother
of M, are not certainly known. The mother “saw
him that he was a goodly child” (Ex 2 2). Sothey
defied the commandment of the king (Ex 1 22), and
for 3 months hid him instead of throwing him into
the river.

The time soon came when it was impossible
longer to hide the child (Jos, Ant, II, ix, 3-6).

The mother resolved upon a plan
2. Found- which was at once a pathetic imitation
ling Prince of obedience to the commandment of

the king, an adroit appeal to womanly
sympathy, and, if it succeeded, a subtle scheme to
bring the cruelty of the king home to his own atten-
tion. Her faith succeeded. She tock an ark of
bulrushes (Ex 23.4; cf Ark or Butrususs),
daubed it with bitumen mixed with the sticky slime
of the river, placed in this floating vessel the child
of her love and faith, and put it into the river at a
place among the sedge in the shallow water where
the royal ladies from the palace would be likely to
come down to bathe. A sister, probably Miriam,
stood afar off to watch (Ex 2 3.4). The daughter
of Pharaoh came down with her great ladies to the
river (Ex 2 5-10). The princess saw the ark
among the sedge and sent a maid to fetch it. The
expectation of the mother was not disappointed.
The womanly sympathy of the princess was touched.
She resolved to save this child by adopting him.
Through the intervention of the watching sister,
he was given to his own mother to be nursed (Ex
27-9). ‘And the child grew, and she brought
him unto Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her
son” (Ex 2 10). Thus he would receive her family
name. ;

Royal family names In Egypt then were usually com-
pounded of some expression of reverence or faith or sub-
mission and the name of a god, e.g. “loved of,"' ‘chosen
of," ‘born of,” Thoth, Ptah, Ra or Amon. At this
period of Egyp history, ‘‘born of’ (Egyp mes, “drawn
out’’) was joined sometimes to Ah, the name of the
moon-god, making Ahmes, or Thoth, the scribe-god, so


Thothmes, but usually with Ra, the_sun-god, giving
Rames, usually anglicized Rameses or Ramoses.


It was the time of the Ramesside dynasty, and
the king on the throne was Rameses II. Thus the
foundling adopted by Pharaoch’s daughter would
have the family name Mes or Moses. That it
would be joined in the Egyp to the name of the sun-
god Ra is practically certain. His name at court
would be Ramoses. But to the oriental mind a
name must mean something. The usual meaning
of this royal name was that the child was “born of”
a princess through the intervention of the god Ra.
But this child was not “born of” the princess, 50
falling back upon the primary meaning of the word,
“drawn out,” she said, “because I drew him out of
the water” (Ex 2 10). Thus Moses received his
name. Pharaoh’s daughter may have been the
eldest daughter of Rameses II, but rere probably
was the daughter and eldest child of Seti Merenptah
I, and sister of the king on the throne. She would
be lineal heir to the crown but debarred by her sex.
Instead, she bore the title ‘“Pharaoh’s Daughter,”
and, according to Egyp custom, retained the right
to the crown for her first-born son. A not improb-
able tradition (Jos, Ant, II, ix, 7) relates that she
had no natural son, and Moses thus became heir
to the throne, not with the right to supplant the
reigning Pharaoh, but to supersede any of his sons.

Very little is known of Moses’ youth and early
manhoed at the court of Pharaoh. He would cer-
tainly be educated as a prince, whose right it
probably was to be initiated into the mysteries.
Thus he was “instructed in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians’ (Acts 7 22), included in which, accord-
ing to many Egyptologists, was the doctrine of one
Supreme God.

Many curious things, whose value is doubtful, are
told of M. by Jos and other ancient writers (Jos, Ant,
Ii, lx, 3; xi; CAp, I, 31; cf DB; for Mohammedan
legends, see Palmer, The Desert of the Exodus, Appen-
dix; for rabbinical legends, see Jew Enc). Some of these
traditions are not incredible but lack authentication.
Others are absurd. Egyptologists have searched with


very indifferent success for some notice of the great
Hebrew at the Egyp court.


But the faith of which the Ep. to the He
speaks (He 11 23-28) was at work. Moses “refused
to be called the son of Pharaoh’s
3. Friend daughter’ (Ex 2 11-14; Acts 7 24).
of the Whether he did so in word, by definite
People renunciation, or by his espousal of the
cause of the slave against the oppress-
ive policy of Pharaoh is of little importance. In
either case he became practically a traitor, and
greatly imperiled his throne rights and probably his
civil rights as well. Duriag some intervention to
ameliorate the condition of the state slaves, an
altercation arose aud he slew an Egyptian (Ex 2
11.12). Thus his constructive treason became an
overt act. Discovering through the ungrateful
reproaches of his own kinsmen (Acts 7 25) that hia
act was known, he quickly made decision, “choosing
rather to share ill treatment with the people of
God,” casting in his lot with slaves of the empire,
rather than “to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season,”’ amid the riotous living of the young princes
at the Egyp court; “accounting the reproach of
Christ” his humiliation, being accounted a nobody
(“Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?”)
as “greater riches than the treasures of Egypt”.
(He 11 25.26; Acts 7 25-28). He thought to be a
nobody and do right better than to be a tyrant and
rule Egypt.

M. fled, “not fearing the wrath of the king” (He
11 27), not cringing before it or submitting to it,
but defying it and braving all that it
could bring upon him, degradation
from his high position, deprivation
of the privileges and comforts of the
Egyp court. He went out a poor wanderer (Ex


4. Refuge
in Midian


2085


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Moses


215). We are told nothing of the escape and the
Journcy, how he eluded the vigilance of the court
guards and of the frontier-line of sentinels. The
friend of slaves is strangely safe while within thcir
territory. At last he reached the Sinaitic province
of the empire and hid himself away among its
mountain fastnesses (Ex 2 15). The romance of
the well and the shepherdesses and the grateful
father and the future wife is all quite in accord with
the simplicity of desert life (Ex 2 16-22). The
“Egyptian” saw the rude, selfish herdsmen of the
desert imposing upon the helpless shepherd girls,
and, partly by the authority of a manly man, partly,
doubtless, by the authority of his Egyp appearance
in an age when “Egypt” was a word with which to
frighten men in all that part of the world, he com-
pelled them to give way. The “Egyptian” was
called, thanked, given a home and eventually a
wife. There in Midian, while the anguish of Israel
continued under the taskmastcr’s lash, and the
weakening of Israel’s strength by the destruction
of the male children went on, with what more or
less rigor we know not, M. was left by Providence
‘to mellow and mature, that the haughty, impetuous
prince, “instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyp-
tians,” might be transformed into the wise, well-
poised, masterful leader, statesman, lawgiver, poet
and prophet. God usually prepares His great ones
in the countryside or about some of the quiet
places of earth, farthest away from the busy haunts
of men and nearest to the “secret place of the Most
High.” David keeping his father’s flocks, Elijah
on the mountain slopes of Gilcad, the Baptist in
the wilderness of Judaea, Jesus in the shop of a
Galilean carpenter; so M. a shepherd in the Bedouin
country, in the “waste, howling wilderness.”

(1) The commission.—One day Moses led the flocks
to “the back of the wilderness” (Ex 3 1-12; see

Burnine BusH)., M.received his com-
5. Leader
of Israel sion ever given to a mere man (Ex 3
10)—a commission to a solitary man,
and he a refugee—to go back home and deliver
his kinsmen from a dreadful slavery at the hand of
the most powerful nation on earth. Let not those
who halt and stumble over the little difficulties of
most ordinary lives think hardly of the faltering of
Moses’ faith before such a task (Ex 3 11-13; 4
1.10-13). ‘Thus shalt thou say unto the children
of Israel, Y Am bath sent me unto you” (Ex 3 14),
was the encouragement God gave him. He gave
him also Aaron for a spokesman (Ex 4 14-16), the
return to the Mount of God as a sign (Ex 3 12),
and the rod of power for working wonders (Ex
417).

One of the curious necessities into which the critical
analysis drives its advocates is the opinion concerning
Aaron that ‘‘he scarcely seems to have heen a brother
and almost equal partner of Moses, perhaps not even a
priest’’ (Bennett, HDB, III,441). Interesting and curious
speculations have been instituted concerning the way
in which Israel and esp. Pharaoh were to understand the
message, ‘I AM hath sent me unto you” (Ex 3 13.14;
ct 6 3).. They were evidently expected to understand
this message. Were they to so do by translating or by
transliterating it into Egyptian? Some day Egyp-
tologists may be able to answer positively, but not yet.

With the signs for identification (Ex 4 1-10), M.
was ready for his mission. He went down from
the “holy ground” to obey the high summons and
fulfil the great commission (Ex 4 18-23). After
the perplexing controversy with his wife, a contro-
versy of stormy el Bee 4 24-26), he seems to
have left his family to his father-in-law’s care while
he went to respond to the call of God (Ex 18 6).
He met Aaron, his brother, at the Mount of God
(Ex 4 27.28), and together they returned to Egypt
to collect the elders of Israel (Ex 4 29-31), who
were easily won over to the scheme of emancipa-


mission, the most appalling commis- |


tion. Was ever a slave people not ready to listen
to plans for freedom?

(2) The conflict with Pharaoh—The next move
was the bold request to the king to allow the people


’ to go into the wilderness to hold a feast unto Jeh


(Ex 5 1). How did Moses gain admittance past
the jealous guards of an Egyp court to the presence
of the Pharach himself? And why was not the
former traitorous refugee at once arrested? Egyp-
tology affords a not too distinct answer. Rameses
II was dead (Ex 4 19); Merenptah II was on the
throne with an insecure tenure, for the times were
troublous. Did some remember the “son of
Pharaoh’s daughter” who, had he remained loyal,
would have been the Pharaoh? Probablyso. Thus
he would gain admittance, and thus, too, in the
precarious condition of the throne, it might well
not be safe to molest him. The original form of
the request made to the king, with some slight
modification, was continued throughout (Ex 8 27;
10 9), though God promised that the Egyptians
should thrust them out altogether when the end
should come, and it was so (Ex 11 1; 12 31.33.39).
Yet Pharaoh remembered the form of their request
and bestirred himself when it was reported that
they had indeed gone “from serving’ them (Ex
14 5). The request for temporary departure upon
which the contest was made put Pharaoh’s call to
duty in the easiest form and thus, also, his obsti-
nacy appears as the greater heinousness. Then
came the challenge of Pharaoh in his contemptuous
demand, “Who is Jeh?” (Ex 6 2), and Moses’
prompt acceptance of the challenge, in the begin-
ning of the long series of plagues (see PLacuzs)
(Ex 8 1 ff; 12 29-36; 14 31; cf Lamb, Miracle
of Science). Pharaoh, having made the issue, was
justly required to afford full presentation of it.
So Pharaoh’s heart was “hardened” (Ex 4 21;
7 3.18; 9 12.35; 10 1; 14 8; see Puacugs) until
the vindication of Jeh as God of all the earth was
complete. This proving of Jeh was so conducted
that the gods of Egypt were shown to be of no avail
against Him, but that He is God of all the earth,
and until the faith of the people of Israel was con-
firmed (Ex 14 31).

(8) Institution of the Passover —It was now time
for the next step in revelation (Ex 12; 13 1-16).
At the burning bush God had declared His purpose
to be a savionr, not a destroyer. In this contest
in Egypt, His absolute sovereignty was being es-
tablished; and now the method of deliverance by
Him, that He might not: be a destroyer, was to be
revealed. M. called together the elders (Ex 12
21-28) and instituted the Passover feast. As God
always in revelation chooses the known and the
familiar—the tree, the bow, circumcision, baptism,
and the Supper—by which to convey the unknown,
so the Passover was a combination of the household
feast with the widespread idea of safety through
blood-sacrifice, which, however it may have come
into the world, was not new at that time. Some
think there is evidence of an old Sem festival at
that season which was utilized for the institution of
the Passover. ;

The lamb was chosen and its use was kept up
(Ex 12 3-6). On the appointed night it was killed
and “roasted with fire” and eaten with bitter herhs
(Ex 12 8), while they all stood ready girded, with
their shoeg on their feet and their staff in hand (Ex
12 11). They ate in safety and in hope, because
the blood of the lamb was on the door (Ex 12 23).
That night the firstborn of Egypt were slain.
Among the Egyptians “‘there was not a house where
there was not one dead” (Ex 12 30), from the house
of the maid-servant, who sat with her handmill
before her, to the palace of the king that “sat ou the
throne,” and even among the cattle in the pasture


Moses


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2086


If the plague was employed as the agency of the
angel of Jeh, as some think, its pecuharity is that
it takes the strongest and the bést and culminates
in one great stunning blow and then immediately
subsides (see PLacurs). Who can tell the horror
of that night when the Israelites were thrust out
of the terror-stricken land (Ex 12 39)?

As they went out, they “asked,” after the fashion
of departing servants in the East, and God gave
them favor in the sight of the over-awed Egyptians
that they lavished gifts upon them in extravagance.
Thus “they despoiled the Egyptians” (Ex 12 36).
“Moreover the man Moses was very great in the
land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants,
and in the sight of the people” (Ex 11 3; 12 35.36).

(4) The exodus.—‘‘At the end of 430 years, even
the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts
of Jeh went out from the land of Egypt” (Ex 12
41). The great oppressor was Rameses II, and the
culmination and the revolution came, most prob-
ably, in connection with the building of Pithom
and Raamses, as these are the works of Israel men-
tioned in the Bible narrative (Ex 1 11). Rameses
said that he built Pithom at the “mouth of the
east” (Budge, Hist of Exodus, V, 123). All efforts
to overthrow that statement have failed and for
the present, at least, it must stand. Israel built
Pithom, Rameses built Pithom; there is a syn-
chronism that cannot in the present knowledge of
Egyp history even be doubted, much less separated.
The troublous times which came to Egypt with the
beginning of the reign of Merenptah II afforded the
psychological moment for the return of the “son of
Pharaoh’s daughter’ and his access to the royal
court. The presence and power of Jeh vindicated
His claim to be the Lord of all the earth, and
Merenptah let the children of Israel go.

A little later when Israel turned back from the border
of Khar (Pal) into the wilderness and disappeared, and
Merenptah's affairs were somewhat settled in the empire,
he set up the usual boastful tablet claiming as his own
many of the victories of his royal ancestors, added a
few which he himself could truly boast, and inserted, near
the end, an exultation over Israel's discomfiture, ac-
counting himself as having finally won the victory:

““Tehennu is devastation, Kheta peace, the Canaan


the prisoner of all ills; :
“ Asgalon led out, taken with Gezer, Yenoamam made


beer ie : F
“The People of Israel is ruined, his posterity is not;
Khar is become as the widows of Egypt.”

The synchronisms of this period are well established
and_must stand until, if it should ever be, other facts
of Egyp history shall be obtained to change them.
Yet it is impossible to determine with certainty the pre-
cise event from which the descent into Egypt should be
reckoned, or to fix the date BC of M., Rameses and
Meron pial: and the building of Pithom, and so, like-
wise, the date of the exodus and of all the patriarchal
movements. The ancients were more concerned about
the order of events, their perspective and their syn-
chronisms than ahout any epochal date. For the present
we must be content with these chronological uncer-
tainties. Astronomical science may sometimes fix the
epochal dates for these events; otherwise there is little
likelihood that they will ever be known.


They went out from Succoth (Egyp ‘‘Thuku,”
Budge, History of Egypt, V, 122, 129), carrying the
bones of Joseph with them as he had commanded
(Ex 13 19; Gen 50 25). The northeast route
was the direct. way to the promised land, but it was
guarded. Pithom itself was built at “the mouth
of the East,” as a part of the great frontier defences
(Budge, op. cit., V, 123). ‘The “wall” on this
frontier was well guarded (Ex 14), and attempts
might be made to stop them. So they went not
“by the way of the land of the Philis . . . . lest
peradventure the people repent when they see war”
(Ex 13 17). The Lord Himself took the leader-
ship and went ahead of the host of Israel in a pillar
of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night (Ex 13
21). He led them by “the way of the wilderness
by the Red Sea” (Ex 18 18). They pitched before


“14 16-21).


Pi-hahiroth, over against Baal-zephon between
Migdol and the sea (Ex 14 2). Not one of these
places has been positively identified. But the
journeys before and after the crossing, the time,
and the configuration of the land and the coast-line
of the sea, together with all the necessities imposed
by the narrative, are best met by a crossing near
the modern town of Suez (Naville, Route of the
Exodus; Palmer, The Desert of the Exodus), where
Ras ‘Ataka comes down to the sea, upon whose
heights a migdhol or ‘‘watch-tower,”’ as the southern
outpost of the eastern line of Egyp defences, would
most probably be erected.

Word was carried from the frontier to Pharaoh,
probably at Tanis, that the Israelites had ‘‘fled”
(Ex 14 5), had taken the impassioned thrusting
out by the frenzied people of Egypt in good faith
and had gone never toreturn. Pharaoh took imme-
diate steps to arrest and bring back the fugitives.
The troops at hand (Ex 14 6) and the chariot
corps, including 600 “chosen chariots,” were sent
at once in pursuit, Pharaoh going out in person at
least to start the expedition (Ex 14 6.7). The
Israelites seemed to be “entangled in the land,” .
and, since “the wilderness [had] shut them in” (Ex
14 3), must easily fall a prey to the Egyp army.
The Israelites, terror-stricken, cried to M. God
answered and commanded the pillar of cloud to
turn back from its place before the host of Israel
and stand between them and the approaching Egyp-
tians, so that while the Egyptians were in the dark-
ness Israel had the light (Ex 14 19.20). The
mountain came down on their right, the sea on the
left to meet the foot of the mountain in front of them;
the Egyptians were hastening on after them and
the pillar of cloud and fire was their rearward. M.
with the rod of God stood at the head of the fleeing
host. Then God wrought. M. stretched out the
rod of God over the sea and ‘“Jeh caused the sea
to go back by a strong east wind all the night’’ (2x
A pathway was before them and the
sea on the right hand, and on the left was a “wall
unto them,” and they passed through (Ex 14 21.22).
Such heaping up of the waters by the wind is well
known and sometimes amounts to 7 or 8 ft. in Lake
Erie (Wright, Scientific Confirmations of the OT,
106). No clearer statement could possibly be
made of the means used and of the miraculous
timing of God’s providence with the obedience of
the people to His command to M. The host of
Israel passed over on the hard, sandy bottom of the
sea. The Egyptians coming up in the dark and
finding it impossible to tell exactly where the coast-
line had been on this beach, and where the point
of safety would lie when the wind should abate and
the tide come in again, impetuously rushed on after
the fleeing slaves. Inthe morning, Jeh looked forth
and troubled the Egyptians “and took off their
chariot wheels, and they drove them heavily” (Ex
14 24.25). The wind had abated, the tide was
returning and the infiltration that goes before the
tide made the beach like a quicksand. The Egyp-
tians found that they had gone too far and tried
to escape (Ex 14 27), but it was too late. The
rushing tide caught them (Ex 14 28). When the
day had come, “horse and rider” were but the sub-
ject of a minstrel’s song of triumph (Ex 15 1-19;
Ps 106 9-12) which Miriam led with her timbrel
(Ex 15 20). The Bible does not say, and there is
no reason to believe, that Pharaoh led the Egyp
hosts in person further than at the setting off and
for the giving of gencral direction to the campaign
(Ex 16 4). Pharaoh and his host were over-
thrown in the Red Sea (Ps 136 15). So Napoleon
and his host were overthrown at Waterloo, but
Napoleon lived to die at St. Helena. And Mc-
renptah lived to crect his boastful inscription con-


2087


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Moses


cerning the failure of Israel, when turned back from
Kadesh-barnea, and their disappearance in the
wilderness of Paran. His mummy, identified by
the lamented Professor Groff, lies among the royal
mummies in the Cairo Museum. Thus at the Red
Sea was wrought the final victory of Jeh over
Pharach; and the people believed (Ex 14 31).

(5) Special providences—Now proceeded that
long course of special providences, miraculous
timing of events, and multiplying of natural agen-
cies which began with the crossing of the Red Sea
and ended only when they ‘‘did eat of the fruit of the
land” (Josh 6 12). God promised freedom from
the diseases of the Egyptians (Ex 15 26) at the
bitter waters of Marah, on the condition of obedi-
ence. M. was directed to a tree, the wood of which
should counteract the alkaline character of the
water (Ex 15 23-25). A little later they were at
Elim (Wédy Gharandel, in present-day geography),
where were ‘‘twelve springs of water and three score
and ten palm trees” (Ex 15 27). The enumera-
tion of the trees signifies nothing but their scarcity,
and is understood by everyone who has traveled
in that desert and counted, again and again, every
little clump of trees that has appeared. The course
of least resistance here is to turn a little to the right
and come out again at the Red Sea in order to pass
around the point of the plateau into the wilderness
of Sin. This is the course travel takes now, and it
took the same course then (Ex 16 1). Here
Israel] murmured (Ex 16 2), and every traveler
who crosses this blistering, dusty, wearisome,
hungry wilderness joins in the murmuring, and
wishes, at least a little, that he had stayed in the
land of Egypt (Ex 16 3). Provisions brought
from Egypt were about exhausted and the land
supplied but little. Judging from the complaints
of the people about the barrenness of the land, it
was not much different then from what it is now
(Nu 20 1-6). Now special providential provision
began. “At even... . the quails came up, and
covered the camp,” and in the morning, after the
dew, the manna was found (Ex 16 4-36; see Manna;
QualLs). ‘

At Rephidim was the first of the instances when
Moses was called upon to help the people to some
water. He smote the rock with the rod of God,
and there came forth an abundant supply of water
(Ex 17 1-6). There is plenty of water in the
wady near this point now. The Amalekites, con-
sidering the events immediately following, had
probably shut the Israelites off from the springs, 50
God opened some hidden source in the mountain
side. Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel”
(Ex 17 8). Whether the hand which M. lifted
up during the battle was his own hand or a sym-
‘bolical hand (Ex 17 9-12), thought to have been
carried in battle then, as sometimes even yet by
the Bedouin, is of no importance. It was in either
case a hand stretched up to God in prayer and alle-
giance, and the battle with Amalek, then as now,
fluctuates according as the hand is lifted up or
lowered (Ex 17 8-16). , ;

Here Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, met him and
brought his wife and children to him (Ex 18 5.6;
cf Nu 10 29). Asacrificial feast was held with the
distinguished guest (Ex 18 7-12). In the wise
counsel of this great desert-priest we see one of the
many natural sources of supply for Moses legal
lore and statesmanship. A suggestion of Jethro
gave rise to one of the wisest and most far-reaching
elements in the civil institutions of Israel, the elab-
orate system of civil courts (Ex_18 13-26).

(6) Receiving the Law—At Sinai M. reached the
pinnacle of his career, though perhaps not the pin-
nacle of his faith. (For a discussion of the location
of Sinai, see Sinai; Exopvus.) It is useless to


speculate about the nature of the flames in the
thesphane by fire at Sinai. Some say there was a
thunderstorm (HDB); others think a volcanic erup-
tion. The time, the stages of the journey, the de-
scription of the way, the topography of this place,
esp. its admirable adaptahility to be the cathedral
of Jeh upon earth, and, above all, the collocation of
all the events of the narrative along this route to
this spot and to no other—all these exercise an
overwhelming influence upon one (cf Palmer, The
Desert of the Exodus). If they do not conclusively
prove, they convincingly persuade, that here the
greatest event between Creation and Calvary took
lace.
Here the people assembled. ‘‘And Mount Sinai,
the whole of it, smoked,” and above appeared the
glory of God. Bounds were set about the mountain
to keep the people back (Ex 19 12.13). God was
upon the mountain: ‘Under his feet as it were a
paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the
very heaven for clearness” (Ex 19 16-19; 24 10.
16.17), ‘and God spake all these words” (Ex 20
1-17). Back over the summit of the plain between
these two mountain ridges in front, the people fled
in terror to the place “afar off’’ (Ex 20 18), and
somewhere about the foot of this mountain a little
later the tabernacle of grace was sect up (Ex 40 17).
At this place the affairs of M. mounted up to such
a pinnacle of greatness in the religious history of
the world as none other among men has attained
unto. He gave formal announcement of the perfect
law of God as a rule of life, and the redeeming
mercy of God as the hope through repentance for a
world of sinners that ‘fall short.” Other men have
sought God and taught men to seek God, some by
the works of the Law and some by the way of pro-
paesoy, but where else in the history of the world
as any one man caught sight of both great truths
and given them out?

M. gathered the people together to make the
covenant (Ex 24 1-8), and the nobles of Israel ate
a covenant meal there before God (Ex 24 11).
God called M. again to the mountain with the elders
of Israel (Ex 24 12). There M. was with God,
fasting 40 days (Ex 34 28). Joshua probably ac-
companied M. into the mount (Ex 24 13). There
God gave directions concerning the plan of the
tabernacle: ‘See .... that thou make all things
according to the pattern that was showed thee in
the mount” (He 8 5-12, summing up Ex 25 40;
26 30; 27 8). This was the statement of the
architect to the builder. We can only learn what
the pattern was by studying the tabernacle (see
TaBERNACLE). It was an Egyp plan (cf Buble
Student, January, 1902). While M. was engaged
in his study of the things of the tabernacle on the
mount, the people grew restless and appealed to
Aaron (Ex 32 1). In weakness Aaron yielded to
them and made them a golden calf and they said,
“These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee
up out of the land of Egypt” (82 2-6; cf Catr,
GoupEN). This was probably, like the later calf-
worship at Bethel and Dan, ancient Sem bull-
worship and a violation of the second command-
ment: (20 5; cf Bible Student, August, 1902). The
judgment of God was swift and terrible (82 7-35),
and Levi was made the Divine agent (82 25-29).
Here first the “tent of meeting’ comes into promi-
nence as the official headquarters of the leader of
Israel (83 7-11). Henceforth independent and
distinct from the tabernacle, though on account
of the similarity of names liable to be confused with
that building, it holds its place and purpose all
through the wanderings to the plain of Moab by
Jordan (Dt 31 14). M.is given a vision of God to
strengthen his own faith (Ex 33 12-23; 84 1-35).
On his return from communion with God, he had


Moses


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2088


such glory within that it shone out through his face
to the terror of the multitude, an adumbration of
that other and more glorious transfiguration at
which M. should also appear, and that reflection
of it which is sometimes seen in the life of many
aa persons (Mt 17 1-13; Mk 9 2-10; Lk 9
8-36).


Rationalistic attempts to account for the phenomena
at Sinai have been frequent, but usually along certain
lines. The favorite hypothesis is that of volcanic action.
God has often used natural agencies in His revelation
and in His miracles, and there is no necessary obstacle
to His doing so here. But there are two seemingly in-
superable difficulties in the way of this naturalistic ex-
Pinte uOn one, that since geologic time this has not

een a volcanic region; the other, that volcanic erup-
tions are not conducive to literary inspiration. It is
almost impossible to get a sane account from the be-
holders of an eruption, much less has it a tendency to
result in the greatest literature, the most perfect code of
laws and the profoundest statesmanship in the world.
The human mind can easily helieve that God could so
speak from Sinai and direct the preparation of such works
of wisdom as the Book of the Covenant. Not many
will be able to think that M. could do so during a vol-
canic eruption at Sinai. For it must be kept in mind
that the historical character of the narrative at this point,
and the Mosaic authorship of the Book of the Covenant,
are generally admitted by those who put forward this
naturalistic explanation.


(7) Uncertainties of history —From this time on
to the end of Moses’ life, the materials are scant,
there are long stretches of silence, and a biographer
may well hesitate. The tabernacle was set up at
the foot of the “mountain of the law’? (Ex 40 17—
19), and the world from that day to this has been
able to find a mercy-seat at the foot of the mountain
of the law. Nadab and Abihu presumptuously
offered strange fire and were smitten (Lev 10 1-7).
The people were numbered (Nu 1 1 ff). The Pass-
over was kept (Nu 9 1-5).

(8) Journey to Canaan resumed—The journey
to Canaan began again (Nu 10 11-13). From
this time until near the close of the life of M. the
events associated with his name belong for the most
part to the story of the wanderings in the wilder-
ness and other subjects, rather than to a biography
of M. (cf WannErinas; Aaron; Miriam; Josuva;
Cates; Brazen SERPENT, etc). The subjects and
references are as follows:

The March (Nu 2 10-18; 9 15-23)
The Complaining (Nu 11 1-3)

The Lusting (Nu 11 4-6.18-35)
The Prophets (Nu 11 16)

Leprosy of Miriam (Nu 12 1-16)

(9) The border of the land.—
Kadesh-barnea (Nu 18 3-26)

The aries (Dt 1 22; Nu 18 2.21; 23 27.28-33; 14 1-38)
The Plagues (Nu 14 36.37.4045)

(10) The wanderings.—

Korah, Dathan and Abiram (Nu 16 1-35)

The Plague (Nu 16 41-50; 17)

Death of Miriam (Nu 20 1)

Sin of M. and Aaron (Nu 20 2-13; Ps 106 32)
Unfriendliness of Edom (Nu 20 14-21)

Death of Aaron (Nu 20 22-29)

Arad (Nu 21 1-3)

Compassing of Edom (Nu 21 4)

Murmuring (Nu 21 5-7)

Brazen Serpent (Nu 21 8.9; Jn 3 14)

(11) Edom.—

The Jordan (Nu 2] 10-20)

Sihon (Nu 21 21-32)

Og (Nu 21 33-35)

Balak and Balaam (Nu 22 4; 24 25)
Pollution of the People (Nu _ 25 6-15)
Numbering of the People (Nu 26)
Joshua Chosen (Nu 27 15-23)
Midianites Punished (Nu 31)


(12) Tribes east of Jordan (Nu 32).

(13) Moses’ final acts—M. was now ready for
the final instruction of the people. They were
assembled and a great farewell address was given
(Dt 1—80 20). Joshua was formally inducted into
office (Dt 31 1-8), and to the priests was delivered
a written copy of this last announcement of the
Law now adapted to the progress made during 40
years (Dt 31 9-13; cf 81 24-29). M. then called


Joshua into the tabernacle for a final charge (Dt
31 14-23), gave to the assembled elders of the
people ‘the words of this song’ (Dt 31 30; 382
1-43) and blessed the people (Dt 33). And then
M., who “by faith” had triumphed in Egypt, had
been the great revelator at Sinai, had turned back
to walk with the people of little faith for 40 years,
reached the greatest triumph of his faith, when,
from the top of Nebo, the towering pinnacle of
Pisgah, he lifted up his eyes to the goodly land of
promise and gave way to Joshua to lead the people
in (Dt 84). And there M. died and was buried,
“but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this
day” (Dt 34 5.6), ‘“‘and Moses was a hundred and
twenty years old when he died” (Dt 34 7).

This biography of M. is the binding-thread of the
Pent from the beginning of Ex to the end of Dt,
without disastrous breaks or disturbing repetitions.
There are, indeed, silences, but they occur where
nothing great or important in the narrative is to
be expected. And there are, in the eyes of some,
repetitions, so-called doublets, but they do not seem
to be any more real than may be expected in any
biography that is only incidental to the main pur-
pose of the writer. No man can break apart this
narrative of the books without putting into con-
fusion this life-story; the one cannot be treated as
independent of the other; any more than the narra-
tive of the Eng. Commonwealth and the story of
Cromwell, or the story of the American Revolution
and the career of Washington.

Later references to M. as leader, lawgiver and prophet
run all through the Bible; only the most important will
be mentioned: Josh § 30-35; 24 5; 1S 12 6-8; 1 Ch
23 14-17; Ps 77 20; 99 6; 105; 106; Isa 63 11.12;
rhe 15 1; Dnl 9 11-13; Hos 12 13; Mic 6 4; Mal


The place held by M. in the NT is as unique as
in the OT, though far less prominent. Indeed, he
holds the same place, though presented in a differ-
ent light. In ihe OT he is the type of the Prophet
to be raised up “like unto” him. It is the time of
types, and M., the type, is most conspicuous. In
the NT the Prophet “like unto Moses” has come.
He now stands out the greatest One in human his-
tory, while M., the type, fades away in the shadow.
It is thus he appears in Christ’s remarkable refer-
ence to him: “He wrote of me” (Jn 5 46). The
principal thing which M. wrote specifically of Christ
is this passage: “Jeh thy God will raise up unto
thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy breth-
ren, like unto me” (Dt 18 15.18f). Again in the
Ep. to the He, which is the formal passing over
from the types of the OT to the fulfilment in the
NT, Jesus is made to stand out as the Moses of the
new dispensation (He 3; 12 24-29). Other most
important NT references to M. are Mt 17 3; Mk
94; Lk 9 30; Jn 117.45; 814; Rom 6 14;
Jude ver 9; Rev 16 3.

I. Work and Character.—So little is known of
the private life of M. that his personal character
can scarcely be separated from the part which he
bore in public affairs. It is the work he wrought
for Israel and for mankind which fixes his place
among the great ones of earth. The life which we
have just sketched as the life of the leader of Israel
is also the life of the author, the lawgiver, and the
prophet.

_ Itis not within the province of this art. to discuss
in full the great critical controversies concerning

the authorship of M. which have been
1. The summed up against him thus: “It
Author is doubtful whether we can regard M.
as an author in the literary sense’’
(HDB, III, 446; see PentaTEUcH; DrvTERONoMY).
It will only be in place here to present a brief state-
ment of the evidence in the case for M. There


2089


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Moses


is no longer any question concerning the literary
character of the age in which M. lived. That M.
might have written is indisputable. But did he
write, and how much? What evidence bears at
these points?

(1) “Moses wrote.”—The idea of writing or of
writings is found 60 t in the Pent. It is definitely
recorded in writing purporting to be by M. 7 t that
M. wrote or was commanded to write (Ex 17 14;
34 27; 39 30; Nu 17 2.3; Dt 10 4; 31 24) and
frequently of others in his times (Dt 6 9; 27 3;
31 19; Josh 8 32). Joshua at the great convo-
cation at Shechem for the taking of the covenant
wrote ‘these words in the book of the law of God”’
(Josh 24 26). Thus is declared the existence of
such a book but 25 years after the death of M. (cf
Bible Student, 1901, 269-74). It is thus clearly
asserted by the Scriptures as a fact that M. in the
wilderness a little after the exodus was “‘writing”’
“books.”

(2) Moses’ library—There are many library
marks in the Pent, even in those portions which by
nearly all, even the most radical, critics are allowed
to be probably the writings of M. The Pent as a
whole has such library marks all over it.

On the one hand this is entirely consistent with
the known literary character of the age in which
M. lived. One who was “instructed in all the wis-
dom of the Egyptians’ might have had in his pos-
session Egyp records. And the author of this art.
is of that class to whom Professor Clay refers, who
believe “that Hebraic (or Amoraic) literature, as
well as Aramaic, has a great antiquity prior to the
1st millennium BC” (Clay, Amurru, 32).

On the other hand, the use of a library to the
extent indicated by the abiding marks upon the
Pent does not in the least militate against the claim
of M. for authorship of the same. The real library
marks, aside from the passages which are assigned
by the critics to go with them, are far less numerous
and narrower in scope than in Gibbon or in Kurtz.
The use of a library no more necessarily endangers
authorship in the one case than in the other.

(3) The Moses-tradition.—A tradition from the
beginning universally held, and for a long time and
without inherent absurdity, has very great weight.
Such has been the M.-tradition of authorship.
Since M. is believed to have been such a person
living in such an age and under such circumstances
as might suitably provide the situation and the
occasion for such historical records, so that common
sense does not question whether he could have
written “a” Pent, but only whether he did write
“the” Pent which we have, it is easier to believe
the tradition concerning his authorship than to
believe that such a tradition arose with nothing so
known concerning his ability and circumstances.
But such a tradition did arise concerning M. It
existed in the days of Josiah. Without it, by no
possibility could the people have been persuaded
to receive with authority a book purporting to be
by him. The question of the truthfulness of the
claim of actually finding the Book of the Law alto-

ether aside, there must have been such a national
hea as M. known to the people and believed in by
them, as well as a confident belief in an age of lit-
erature reaching back to his days, else the Book of
the Law would not bave been received by the people
as from Archaeology does not supply actual
literary material from Israe] much earlier than the
time of Josiah, but the material shows a method
of writing and a literary advancement of the people
which reaches far back for its origin, and which goes
far to justify the tradition in Josiah’s day. More-
over, to the present time, there is no archaeological
evidence to cast doubt upon that tradition.

(4) The Pent in the Northern Kingdom.—The


evidence of the Pent in the Northern Kingdom
before the fall of Samaria is very strong—this
entirely aside from any evidence from the Sam
Pent. Although some few insist upon an early
date for that book, it is better to omit it altogether
from this argument, as the time of its composition
is not absolutely known and is probably not very
far from the close of the Bab exile of Judah. But
the prophets supply indubitable evidence of the
Pent in the Northern Kingdom (Hos 1 10; 4 6;
8 1.13; 9 11; 12 9; Am 6 21.22; 8 5; cf Green,
Higher Criticism and the Pent, 56-58).


(5) Evidence for the Mosaic age.—Beyond the limit to
which historical evidence reaches concerning the Mosalc
authorship of the Pent, internal evidence for the Mosaic
age as the time of its composition carries us back to the
very daysofM. Egyp words In the Pent attest its com-
positlon in the Mosaic age, not because they are Egyp
words, for it is quite supposable that later authors might
have known Egyp words, but because they are Egyp words
of such marked peculiarities in meaning and history andof
such absolutely accurate use in the Pent, that their em-

loyment by later authors in such a way is incredible.
‘he list of such words is a long one. Only a few can be
mentioned here. For a complete list the authorities
cited must be consulted. There is aN, ye'ér, for the
streams of Egypt; AMR ‘aha, for the marshy pasture
lands along the Nile; (WY, shésh, tor the “fine white


linen"' of the priests; ‘‘the land of Rameses "' for a local
district in lower Egypt; 27D MIDE. caphenath pa'-
né*h, Joseph's Egyp name, and PON, ‘as°nath, the name


i)
of Joseph's Egyp wife, and many other Egyp words (see
Lieblein, in PSBA, May, 1898, 202-10; also The Buble
Student, 1901, 36-40).

(6) The obscurtty of the doctrine of the resurrection in
the Pent.—This obscurity has been urged against the
Mosaic authorship of the Pent. Because of the popular
belief concerning the doctrine of the resurrection among
the Egyptians, this objection to the Mosaic authorship
of the Pent becomes the most forcible of all the objec-
tions urged by critics. If the Pent was written by M.
when Israel had just come out of Egypt, why did he
leave the doctrine of the resurrection in such obscurity ?
The answer is very simple. The so-called Egyp doc-
trine of the resurrection was not a doctrine of resurrec-
tion at all, but a doctrine of resuscitation. The essentlal
idea of resurrection, as it runs through Scripture fro
the first glimpse of it until the declaration of Paul: ‘It
is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. If
there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual body"
(1 Cor 15 35-45), is almost absolutely_beyond the
Egyp vision of the future life. With the Egyptians the
risen body was to live the same old life on ‘‘oxen, geese,
bread, beer, wine and all good things’’ (cf for abundant
illustration Maspero's Guide to Cairo Museum). The
omission of the doctrine of the resurrection from the
Pent at the later date assigned by criticism is very hard
to acconnt for. In view of some passages from the Pss
and the Prophets, it appears mie icable (Job 19 25-27;
Ps 16 10; 49 15; Isa 26 19; Ezk 37; Dnl 12 2). The
gross materialism of the Egyp doctrine of the rising
from the dead makes the obscurity of the doctrine of the
resurrection in the Pent in Moses’ day perecily natural.
Any direct mention of the subject at that time among a
people just come out of Egypt would have carried at
once into Israel's religion the materialism of the Egyp
conception of the future life. The only way Ph which the
people could be weaned away from these Egyp ideas
was by beginning, as the Pent does, with more spiritual
ideas of God, of the other world and of worship. The
obscurity of the doctrine of the resurrection in the Pent,
so far from being against the Mosaic authorship, is a
very cogent reason for believing the Pent to have come
from that age, as the only known time when such an
omission is reasonably explicable. Lord, in his lectures,
though not an Egyptologist, caught sight of this truth
which later work of Egyptologists has made clear ( Moses,
45). Warburton had a less clear vision of it (see Divine
Legation).


(7) The unity of the Pent.—Unity in the Pent,
abstractly considered, cannot be indicative of a
particular time for its composition. Manifestly,
unity can be given a book at any time. There is
indisputably a certain appearance of unity in nar-
rative in the Pent, and when this unity is examined
somewhat carefully, it is found to have such pecul-
iarity as does pony to the Mosaic age for author-
ship. The making of books which have running
through them such a narrative as is contained in the
Pent which, esp. from the end of Gen, is entangled


Moses
Moth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2090


and interwoven with dates and routes and topo-
graphical notes, the history of experiences, all so
accurately given that in large part to this day the
route and the places intended can be identified, all
this, no matter when the books were written, cer-
tainly calls for special conditions of authorship.
A narrative which so provides for all the exigencies
of desert life and so anticipates the life to which
Israel looked forward, exhibits a realism which calls
for very special familiarity with all the circum-
stances. And when the narrative adds to all this
the life of a man without breaks or repetitions ad-
verse to the purpose of a biography, and running
through from beginning to end, and not a haphazard,
unsymmetrical man such as might result from the
piecing together of fragments, but a colossal and
symmetrical man, the foremost man of the world
until a greater than M. should appear, it demands
to be written near the time and place of the events
narrated. That a work of fiction, struck off at one
time by one hand, might meet all these requirements
at a later date, no one can doubt, but a scrap-book,
even though made up of facts, cannot do so. In
fact, the scraps culled out by the analysis of the
Pent do not make a connected life-story at all, but
three fragmentary and disconnected stories, and
turn a biography, which is the binding-thread of
the books, into what is little better than non-
sense.

The unity of the Law, which also can be well
sustained, is to the same effect as the unity of the
narrative in certifying the narrative near to the
time and place of the events narrated. The dis-
cussion of the unity of the Law, which involves
nearly the whole critical controversy of the day,
would be too much of a digression for an article on
M. (see Law; Leviticus; Drureronomy; also
Green, Higher Criticism and the Pent; Orr, POT;
Wiener, Bib. Sac., 1909-10).

Neither criticism nor archaeology has yet pro-
duced the kind or degree of evidence which ration-
alism demands for the Mosaic authorship of the
Pent. No trace has yet heen found either of the
broken tablets at Mt. Sinai or of the autograph copy
of the Law of the Lord “by the hand of Moses”
brought out of the house of the Lord in the days of
Josiah. Nor are these things likely to be found,
nor anything else that will certify authorship like
a transcription of the records in the copyright
office. Such evidence is not reasonably demanded.
The foregoing indications point very strongly to
the production of the Pent in the Mosaic age by
someone as familiar with the circumstances and
as near the heart of the nation as M. was. That
here and there a few slight additions may have
been made and that, perhaps, a few explanations
made by scribes may have slipped into the text
from the margin are not unlikely (Nu 12 3; Dt 34),
but this does not affect the general claim of author-
ship.

Ps 90 is also attributed to M., though attempts have
been made to discredit his authorship here also (De-
litzsch, Comm. on the Pss). There are those who perhaps


still hold to the Mosaic authorship of the Book of Job.
But that view was never more than a speculation.


The character of M. as lawgiver is scarcely

separable from that of M. as author, but calls for
some separate consideration.

2. The (1) The extent of the Mosaic element
Lawgiver in the Pent legislation has been so
variously estimated that for any ade-
quate idea of the discussion the reader must consult
not only other articles (Law; Boox or THE Covz-
NANT; PENTATEUCH)but special workson this subject.
In accord with the reasons presented above for the
authorship of the Pent in Mosaic times, the great
statesman seems most naturally the author of the


laws so interwoven with his life and leadership.
M. first gave laws concerning the Passover (Ex 13).
At Sinai, after the startling revelation from the
summit of the mountain, it is most reasonable that
M. should gather the people together to covenant
with God, and should record that event in the short
code of laws known as the Book of the Covenant
(Ex 24 7). This code contains the Moral Law
(Ex 20 1-17) as fundamental, the constitution of
the theocracy and of all ethical living. This is
followed by a brief code suitable to their present
condition and immediate prospects (Ex 20 24-26;
21-23). Considering the expectations of both leader
and people that they would immediately proceed
to the promised land and take possession, it is
quite in order that there should be laws concerning
vineyards and olive orchards (Ex 23 11), and har-
vests (Ex 23 10-16) and the first-fruits (Ex 23 19).
Upon the completion of the tabernacle, a priest-
code became a necessity. Accordingly, such a code
follows with great minutiae of directions. This
part of the Law is composed almost entirely of “laws
of procedure’? intended primarily for the priests,
that they might know their own duties and give oral
instruction to the people, and probably was never
meant for the whole people except in the most gen-
eral way. When Israel was turned back into the
wilderness, these two codes were quite sufficient
for the simple life of the wanderings. ‘But Israel
developed. The rabble became a nation. Forty
years of life under law, under the operation of the
Book of the Covenant in the moralities of life, the
PC in their religious exercises, and the brief statutes
of Lev for the simple life of the desert, prepared the
people for a more elaborate code as they entered
the promised land with its more complex life. Ac-
cordingly, in Dt that code was recorded and left
for the guidance of the people. That these various
codes contain some things not now understood is
not at all surprising. It would be surprising if
they did not. Would not Orientals of today find
some things in Western laws quite incomprehen-
sible without explanation? ‘

That some few items of law may have been added
at a later time, as some items of history were added
to the narrative, isnot at all unreasonable, and does
in no way invalidate the claim of M. as the law-
giver, any more than later French legislation has
ees the Corsican’s claim to the Napoleonic

ode.


The essential value of the Mosaic legislation is heyond
comparison. Some of the laws of M., relating as they
did to passing prohlems, have themselves passed away;
some of them were definitely abrogated hy Christ and
others explicitly fulfilled; but much of his legislation,
moral, industrial, social and political, is the warp and
woof of the best In the great_codes of the world to this
day. The morality of the Decalogue is unapproached
among collectlons of moral precepts. Its divinity, like
the divinity of the teachings of Jesus, lies not only in
what Jt Includes, but also in what it omits. The pre-
cepts of Tab poten: of Contucius, of Epictetus include
many things found in the Decalogue; the Decalogue
omits many things found among the maxims of these
moralists. Thus in what it excludes, as in what it in-
cludes, the perfection of the Decalogue lies.


(2) It should be emphasized that the laws of M.
were codes, not a collection of court decisions known
to lawyers as common law, but codes given ab-
stractly, not in view of any particular concrete
case, and arranged in systematic order (Wiener,
Bib. Sac., 1909-10). This is entirely in harmony
with the archaeological indications of the Mosaic
and preceding ages. The CH, given at least 5
centuries before, is one of the most orderly, method-
ical and logical codes ever constructed (Lyon,
JAOS, XXV, 254).

The career and the works and the character of
M. culminate in the prophetic office. It was as


2091


prophet that M. was essentially leader. It was as
prophet that he held the place of highest emi-
nence in the world until a greater than
3. The M. came.
Prophet (1) The statesman-prophet framed
é a civil government which illustrated the
kingdom of God upon earth. The theocracy did
not simulate any government of earth, monarchy,
republic or socialistic state. It combined the best
elements in all of these and set up the most effect-
ive checks which have ever been devised against
the evils of each.

(2) The lawgiver-prophet inculcated maxims and
laws which set the feet of the people in the way
of life, so that, while failing as a Jaw of life in a sinful
world, these precepts ever remain as a rule of con-


uct.

(3) The priest-prophet prepared and gave to
Israel a ritual of worship which most completely
typified the redemptive mercy of God and which is
so wonderfully unfolded in the Ep. to the He, as
it has been more wonderfully fulfilled in the life
and atoning death of Christ.

(4) In all the multiform activities of the prophetic
career he was a@ type of Christ, the type of Christ
whose work was a “tutor unto Christ.”

Moses’ revelation of God ever transcends the
speculations of theologians about God as a sunrise
transcends a treatise on the solar spectrum. While
the speculations are cold and lifeless, the revelation
is vital and glorious. As an analysis of Raphael’s
painting of the transfiguration belittles its im-
pression upon the beholder, while a sight of the
picture exalts that scene in the mind and heart, so
the attempts of theologians to analyze God and
bring Him within the grasp of the human mind
belittle the conception of God, dwarf it to the ca-
pacity of the human intellect, while such a vision
of Him as M. gives exalts and glorifies Him beyond
expression. Thus while theologians of every school
from Athanasius to Ritschl come and go, M. goes
on forever; while they stand cold on library shelves,
he lives warm in the hearts of men.

Such was the Heb leader, lawgiver, prophet,
poet; among mere men, “‘the foremost man of all
this world.”


LireratuRe.—Comms, on the Pent; for rabbinical
traditions, cf Lauterhach in Jew Ene; for pseudepl-
graphical books ascribed to M., see Charles, Assump-
tion of M.; for Mohammedan legends, cf DB; Ebers,
Egypten und die Bucher Mosis; for critical partition of
books of M., cf. Polychrome Bible and Bennett in HDB;
for comprehensive discussion of the critical prohlems,


cf POT.
M. G. Kytz
MOSES, ASSUMPTION, a-sump’shun, OF, See
APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE.


MOSES, SONG OF: The name given to the
song of triumph sung by Moses and the Israelites
after the crossing of the Red Sea and the destruction
of the hosts of Pharaoh (Ex 16 1-18). The sub-
limity of this noble ode is universally admitted.
In magnificent strains it celebrates the deliverance
just experienced, extolling the attributes of Jeh
revealed in the triumph (vs 1-12), then anticipates
the astonishing effects which would flow from this
deliverance in the immediate future and in after-
times (vs 18-18). There seems no reason to doubt
that at least the basis of the song—possibly the
whole—is genuinely Mosaic. In the allusions to the
guidance of the people to God’s holy habitation,
and to the terror of the surrounding peoples and
of the Canaanites (vs 13-18), it is thought that
traces are manifest of a later revision and expansion.
This, however, is by no means a necessary con-
clusion.


Driver, who In LOT, 8th ed, 30, goes with the critics
on this point, wrote more guardedly in the 1st ed (p. 27):


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Moses
Moth


'*Probably, however, the greater part of the song ls
Mosaic, and the modification or expansion is limited to
the closing vs; for the general style is antique. and the
triumphant tone which pervades it is just such as might
naturally have been inspired by the event which It
celebrates.”


The song of Moses is made the model in the
Apocalypse of ‘‘the song of Moses the servant of
God, and the song of the Lamb,” which those
standing by the sea of glass, who have “come off
victorious from the beast, and from his image, and
from the number of his name,” sing to God’s praise,
“Great and marvellous are thy works, O Lord
God, the Almighty,” etc (Rev 15 2-4). The
church having experienced a deliverance similar
to that experienced by Israel at the Red Sea, but
infinitely greater, the old song is recast, and its
terms are readapted to express both victories, the
lower and the higher, at once. JAMES ORR


MOSOLLAMON, mé-sol’a-mon.


LAMUS.


MOSOLLAMUS, mé-sol’a-mus:

(1) AV “Mosollam’” (Mosé\d\ayos, Mosdllamos),
one of the three ‘assessors’ appointed to the two
commissioners in the inquiry made about “strange
wives” (1 Esd 9 14)=‘‘Meshullam” in Ezr 10 15.

(2) AV “Mosollamon,” one of those sent by
Ezra to the captain Loddeus to obtain men who
could execute the priest’s office (1 Esd 8 44 [LXX
43])=“Meshullam” in Ezr 8 16 (B reads also Me-
coraBiv, Mesolabén, in 1 Esd 8 44).


MOST HIGH, MOST HOLY. See Gon, Namzs


OF.


See Mosot-


MOTE, mit (xdpdos, kdérphos): A minute piece
of anything dry or light, as straw, chaff, a splinter
of wood, that might enter the eye. Used by Jesus
in Mt 7 3ff; Lk 6 41f in contrast with “beam,”
to rebuke officiousness in correcting small faults of
others, while cherishing greater ones of our own.


MOTH, moth (WY, ‘ash; of Arab. kite,
‘uththat, “moth”; colloquial ers, ‘itt; 59, sas,


>
“worm’’ [Isa 51 8]; ef Arab. uy sds, “worm,”
esp. an insect larva in flesh, wood or grain; ofs,


Clothes-Moth (Tinea pellionella).
q@, Larve in case constructed out of substence on which it is feeding; b, case
eut out al the ends; ¢, caso cut open by the lerva for enlarging it; d, e, the
perfect insect.


sés, “moth” [Mt 6 19.20; Lk 12 33]; onréBpwrtos,
sétébrdtos, “moth-eaten” [Jas 5 2)):

The moths constitute the larger division of the
order Lepidoptera. Two of the points by which
they are distinguished from butterflies are that


Mother
Mule


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2092


they are generally nocturnal and that their anten-
nae are not club-shaped. Further, the larva in
many cases spins a cocoon for the protection of the
pupa or chrysalis, which is never the case with
butterflies. The Bib. references are to the clothes-
moth, i.e. various species of the genus Tinea, tiny
insects which lay their eggs in woolen clothes, upon
which the larvae later feed. As the larva feeds it
makes a cocoon of its silk together with fibers of the
cloth on which it is feeding, so that the color of the
cocoon depends upon the color of the fabric. The
adult is only indirectly harmful, as it is only in the
larval stage that the insect injures clothing. There-
fore in Isa 61 8, “For the moth [‘dsh] shall eat
them up like a garment, and the worm [sés] shall
eat them like wool,’”’ both words must refer to the
larva, the distich demanding such a word as sds
to balance ‘ash in the first half. The word “moth”
occurs 7 t in the OT, in Job, Pss, Isa and Hos, always
in figurative expressions, typifying either that which
is destructive (Job 13 28; Ps 39 11; Isa 60 9;
61 8; Hos 6 12) or that which is frail (Job 4 19;
27 18). See Insects. ALFRED Ey Day


MOTHER, muth’ér (ON, ’ém, “mother,”
“dam,” “ancestress’”; phtyp, méfér): In vain do
we look in the Scriptures for traces of


1. Her the low position which woman occu-
Position in pies in many eastern lands. A false
the OT impression has been created by her


present position in the East, esp. under
Mohammedan rule. Her place as depicted in the
Scriptures is a totally different one. Women there
move on the same social plane with men. They
often occupy leading public positions (Ex 15 20;
Jgs 44; 2 K 22 14). The love of offspring was
deeply imbedded in the heart of Heb women, and
thus motherhood was highly respected. Among
the patriarchs women, and esp. mothers, occupy
a prominent place. In Rebekah’s marriage, her
mother seems to have had equal voice with her
father and Laban, her brother (Gen 24 28.50.53.
55). Jacob “obeyed his father and his mother”
(Gen 28 7), and his mother evidently was his chief
counselor. The Law places the child under obli-
gation of honoring father and mother alike (Ex 20
12). The child that strikes father or mother or
curses either of them is punished by death (Ex 21
15.17). The same fate overtakes the habitually
disobedient (Dt 21 18-21).

In one place in the Law, the mother is even placed
before the father as the object of filial reverence
(Lev 19 3). The Psalmist depicts deepest grief
as that of one who mourneth for his mother (Ps
35 14). In the entire Book of Prov the duty
of reverence, love and obedience of sons to their
mothers is unceasingly inculeated. The greatest
comfort imaginable is that wherewith a mother
comforts her son (Isa 66 13).

And what is true of the OT is equally true of the
NT. The same high type of womanhood, the same

reverence for one’s mother is in evi-
2. Position dence in both books. The birth of
inthe NT Christ lifted motherhood to the highest

possible plane and idealized it for all
time. The last thing Jesus did on the Cross was to
bestow His mother on John “the beloved” as his
special inheritance. What woman is today, what
she is in particular in her motherhood, she owes
wholly to the position in which the Scriptures have
placed her. Sometimes the stepmother is spoken
of as the real mother (Gen 37 10). Sometimes
the grandmother or other female relative is thus
spoken of (Gen 3 20; 1 K 16 10).

Tropically the nation is spoken of as a mother
and the people are her children (Isa 50 1; Jer 50
12; Hos 2 4; 45). Large cities also are “mothers”


(2 8 20 19; cf Gal 4 26; 2 Esd 10 7), and Job
even depicts the earth as such (Job 1 21).
Henry E. Dosxer
MOTHER-IN-LAW. See Rexartionsuips,
Famity.


MOTION, md’shun: In 2 Esd 6 14, AV “mo-
tion” represents the Lat commotio, “commotion,”
“disturbance” (RV has revised entirely here). In
Rom 7 5, “the motions of sins, which were by the
law,” “motion’’ is used in the sense of “impulse,”
and “impulses”? would probably give the best tr.
But the Gr noun (ra@jyara, pathémata) is hard to
translate exactly, and RV has preferred ‘‘passions,’’
as in Gal 6 24. Sanday (ICC) paraphrases “the
impressions of sense, suggestive of sin, stimulated
into perverse activity by their legal prohibition.”
See Passion. ‘Motion’ is found also in Wisd 6 11
(AV and RVm) and 7 24 (AV and RV) in a modern
sense, Burton Scotr Easton


MOUND, mound. See Siecs, 4, (c).


MOUNT, mount, MOUNTAIN, moun’tin.
Hitz, Mount, Mounram.


MOUNT EPHRAIM. See Epuram, Mount.


MOUNT OF CONGREGATION, THE. See
Concrecation, Mount or.


MOUNT OF CORRUPTION. See
Mount or.


See


OLIVEs,


MOUNT OF OLIVES. See Onives, Mount
OF; JERUSALEM.


MOUNT OF THE AMALEKITES (“hill-country
of the Amalekites” [Jgs 12 15]): The Amalekites
are usually connected with the valley (Nu 14 25;
Jgs 7 12), but appear from this passage to have
had a settlement in the hill country of Ephraim.
See AMALEKITES.


MOUNT OF THE AMORITES (“hill-country of
the Amorites” [Dt 1 7.20.24; cf Nu 13 29; Josh
10 6, etc]): The region intended is that afterward
known as the hill country of Judah and Ephraim,
but sometimes ‘‘Amorites’” is used as a general des-
ignation for all the inhabitants of Canaan (Gen
15 16; Josh 24 8.18, etc). See Amoritzs.


MOUNT OF THE VALLEY: Zereth-shahar. is
said to be situated in or on the “mount of the
valley” (PALIT AWS, behar ha‘émek [Josh 13 19]).
Cheyne (EB, s.v.) says “i.e. on one of the moun-
tains E. of the Jordan valley (cf ver 27), and not
impossibly on that described at length in BJ, VII,
vi, 1-3.” To the N.W. of this mountain is Wady
es-Sara, wherein there may be a reminiscence of
Zereth-shahar. There is no certainty.


MOURNING, mirn’ing. See BurtaL; GRIEF.
MOUSE, mous, MICE, mis (1332, ‘akhbar;


¢
LXX pis, mis, “mouse”; cf Arab.
- 0 &


“jerboa,” not {, ’akbar, “greater”; cf also


proper noun, W252, ‘akhbdr, “Achbor” [Gen 36
38f; 1 Ch 1 49; also 2 K 22 12.14; Jer 26 22;
36 12]): The word occurs in the list of unclean
“creeping things” (Lev 11 29), in the account of the
golden mice and tumors (AV and ARVm “‘emerods’’)
sent by the Philis (1 S 6 4-18), and in the phrase,
“eating swine’s flesh, and the abomination, and the


&
A » ‘akbar,


2093 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA, Borner
mouse”’ (Isa 66 17). The cosmopolitan house- | reap their greenstufis (BT'P, II, 109). The term


mouse, Mus musculus, is doubtless the species
referred to. The jerboa or jumping mouse, Arab.
yarba‘, is eaten by the Arabs of the Syrian desert,
N.E. of Damascus. Possibly allied to ‘akhbar is the
Arab. ‘akbar (generally in pl., ‘akabir), used for the
male of the jerboa. Aurrep Evy Day


MOUTH, mowth (MB, peh, J, hekh, 73, Ta,
garon [Ps 149 6]; Aram. DR, pum, IM, tra‘ [Dnl
3 26]; crépa, stéma, 71 t, once Asyos, légos, i.e. “word
of mouth,” “speech” [Acts 15 27]; once we find the
vb. émoroplie, epistomizd, “to silence,” “to stop
the mouth” [Tit 1 11]):

In addition to frequent references to man and
animals, ‘Their food was yet in their mouths’’ (Ps

78 30); ‘And Jeh opened the mouth
1. Literal of the ass’ (Nu 22 28); “Save me
Sense from the lion’s mouth” (Ps 22 21),
ete, the term is often used in connec-
tion with inanimate things: mouth of a sack (Gen
42 27); of the earth (4 11; Nu 26 10); of a well
(29 2.3.8:10); of a cave (Josh 10 18.22.27); of
Sheol (Ps 141 7); of the abyss (Jer 48 28); of a
furnace (Aram. é*ra‘, Dn] 3 26); of idols (Ps 115 5;
135 16.17).

(1) The ‘mouth’ denotes language, speech,

deelaration (cf “lips,” “tongue,’’ whieh see): “By

the mouth of” is “by means of,” ‘on
2. Figura- the declaration of’ (Lk 1 70; Acts
tive Sense 116); “Whoso killeth any person,

the murderer shall be slain at the
mouth of witnesses” (Nu 35 30; cf Dt 17 6; Mt
18 16; He 10 28); “I will give you mouth and
wisdom” (Lk 21 15); “fool’s mouth” (Prov 18 7).
(2) “Mouth” also denotes “‘spokesman’’: ‘Te shall
be to thee a mouth” (Ex 4 16).

Numerous are the idiomatic phrases which have,
in part, been introduced into English by means of
the language of the Bible. “To put into the
mouth,” if said of God, denotes Divine inspiration
(Dt 18 18; Mic 3 5). ‘To have words put into
the mouth” means to have instructions given (Dt
3119; 28 143; Jer 19; Ex 4 11-16). ‘The
fruit of the mouth” (Prov 18 20) is synonymical
with wisdom, the mature utterance of the wise.
“To put one’s mouth into the dust’’ is equivalent
with humbling one’s self (Lam 3 29; cf ‘to lay
one’s horn in the dust,’’ Job 16 15). Silent sub-
mission is expressed by “laying the hand upon the
mouth” (Jgs 18 19; Job 29 9; 40 4; Mic 7 16);
ef “to refrain the lips’; see Lip. ‘To open the
mouth wide” against a person is to accuse him
wildly and often wrongfully (Ps 35 21; Isa 57 4),
otherwise “‘to open one’s mouth wide,” “to have an
enlarged mouth’? means to have great confidence
and joy in speaking or accepting good things (1 8
21; Hzk 33 22; 2 Cor 6 11; Eph 6 19). “To
gape upon one with the mouth” means to threaten
a person (Job 16 10). Divine rebuke is expressed
by the “rod of God’s mouth” (Isa 11 4), and the
Messiah declares “He hath made my mouth like
asharp sword” (Isa 49 2; cf Rev 2 16; 19 15.21).
Great anguish, sueh as dying with thirst, is ex-
pressed by “the tongue cleaving to the roof of the
mouth” (Heb hakh, Job 29 10; Ps 137 6; ef 22 15).

H. L. E. Lurerine

MOWING, mo’ing, MOWN GRASS (74, géz,
“s shearing,” “eut grass’): In Ps 72 6 the good
king’s rule is said to be “‘like rain upon the mown
grass,” to start the new growth (cf 2 8 23 4; Hos
6 3). “The king’s mowings” (Am 7 1) were the
portion of the spring herbage taken as tribute by
the kings of Israel to feed their horses (ef 188
15 ff; 185). ‘After the king’s mowings” would
denote the time when everybody else might turn to


“mower” (AXP, Adgar, “to dock off,” “shorten’’)
in Ps 129 7 AV is rendered “reaper” in RV, and
in Jas 6 4 RV has “mow’’ for dudw, amdé (AV
“reap’”’). See Harvest; REapine.
; M. O. Evans

MOZA, m6’za (ME, mocah):

(1) Son of Caleb and Ephah (1 Ch 2 46).
wey descendant of Saul (1 Ch 8 36.37; 9

43).


MOZAH, mo'za (MYON, ha-mocgah; B, "Apart,
Amoké, A, ?Apood, Amésd): A town in the terri-
tory of Benjamin named after Mizpeh and Che-
phirah (Josh 18 26). It may be represented by
the modern Beit Mizzeh, the heavy ¢ of the Heb
passing into the light z of the Arab., a not unusual
change. The name means “place of hard stone.”
The village lies to the N. of Kuléniyeh (possibly
Emmaus), about 4 miles N.W. of Jerus.


MUFFLER, muf’lér (129, r*‘alah): The name
given to an article of woman’s dress in Isa 3 19.
It describes a veil more elaborate and costly than
the ordinary. A cognate word in the sense of
“véiled’”’ is applied in the Mish (Shabbath, vi.6) to
Jewesses from Arabia. See Dress.


MULBERRY, mul/ber-i, TREES (D°ND3, b+
kh@im; LXX amon, dpioi, “pear trees’ [2 S 5 23f;
1 Ch 14 144, m “balsam-trees”; Ps 84 6, AV
“Baea,” m “mulberry trees,’’ RV ‘weeping,’ m
“balsam-trees’’): Aceording to Arab. writers the
Baea tree is similar to the balsam (Balsamodendron
opobalsamum), and grows near Mecca; no such tree
is, however, known in Pal. The name may, in Heb,
have been applied to some species of ACActIA (q.v.).
The idea of ‘‘weeping”’ implied in the root, both in
Heb and Arab., may be explained by the exudation
ofgum. ‘The sound of marching in the tops of the
mulberry trees” has been explained to refer to the
quivering of the leaves of poplars, but there is not
mueh to support this view bee Popuar). The tr
“mulberry trees” is, however, even more improb-
able, as this tree, though very plentiful today, had
not been introdueed into Pal in OT times.

Mulberry («épor, méron [1 Macc 6 34]): The
Syrians at Bathzacharias “to the end they might
provoke the elephants to fight, they shewed them
the blood of grapes and mulberries.” This refer-
ence must be to the deep red juice of the black mul-
berry (Morus nigra), the tat shami of Pal, a variety
cultivated all over the land for its luscious, juicy
fruit. See Sycomors. E. W. G. MasteRMan


MULCTED, mulk’ted (WI¥, ‘dnash, “to be
punished,” “fined”): ‘The simple pass on, and are
muleted” (Prov 22 3 RVm, RV “suffer for it,”
AV “are punished”’).


MULE, mil (1]8, peredh [1 K 10 25; 18 5; Ezr
2 66; Isa 66 20; Zee 14 15], the fem. NJ,
pirdah [1 K 1 33.38.44], 05°, rekhesh, “swift
steeds,” AV “mules” [Est 8 10.14], DORON,
Ghashtranim, “used in the king’s service,” AV
“camels,” RVm “mules” [Est 8 10.14], D'0,
yemim, “hot springs,” AV “mules” [Gen 36 24];
fplovos, hémtonos, “‘half-ass,” “mule” [1 Esd 5 43;
Jth 16 11)): Mules are mentioned as riding animals
for princes (2 8 13 29; 18 9; 1 K 1 33.38.44); in
the tribute brought to Solomon (2 Ch 9 24); as
beasts of burden (2 K 6 17; 1 Ch 12 40); horses
and mules are obtained from the “house of Togar-
mah”’ in the distant north (Ezk 27 14). The in-
junction of Ps 32 9, “Be ye not as the horse, or as


Multitude, Mixed TH INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Music


2094


the mule, which have no understanding,” need not
be understood as singling out the horse and mule
as more in need of guidance than the rest of the
brute creation, but rather as offering familiar ex-
amples to contrast with man who should use his
intelligence.

At the present day mules are used as pack animals and
for drawing freight wagons, rarely for riding. One does
not often see in Pal mules as large and fine as are common
in Europe and America. This may be because most of
the mares and many of the donkeys are small.

Autrrep Evy Day


MULTITUDE, mul’ti-ttid, MIXED, mikst. See
Minciep PEorPtie.


MUNITION, mii-nish’un. See Srees, 4, (0).


MUPPIM, mup‘im (0°, muppim): A son of
Benjamin (Gen 46 21), elsewhere called “Shup-
pim” (1 Ch 7 12.15; 26 16), “Shephupham” (Nu
26 39), and ‘Shephuphan” (1 Ch 8 5); cf sep-
arate arts. on these names.


MURDER, mir’dér (A441, haragh, “to smite,”
“destroy,” “kill,” “slay” [Ps 10 8; Hos 9 13 AV],
MZ), racah, ‘to dash to pieces,” “kill,”
esp. with premeditation [Nu 35 16
and frequently; Job 24 14; Ps 94
6; Jer 79; Hos 6 9]; ovets, phones, “criminal
homicide,” from oveta, phoned, “to kill,” “slay”;
d6vos, phénos, from * is phéno, has the same
meaning; avépwroxrévos, anthropokténos, ‘‘man-
slayer,’’ ‘‘murderer,’’ is used to designate Satan
{Jn 8 44] and him that hates his brother {1 Jn 3
15]; a matricide is designated as pntpaddas, méira-
léas [1 Tim 1 9]; cf abeAhoxrdvos, adelphokténos,
“fratricidal” [Wisd 10 3]. The pl. of bévos, phénos,
“murders,” occurs in Mt 15 19; Mk 7 21; Gal
5 21 AV; Rev 9 21; cf 2 Macc 4 3.38; 12 6):

The Heb law recognized the distinction between
wilful murder and accidental or justifiable homicide

(Nu 26 16); but in legal language no


1. Terms


2. The verbal distinction is made. Murder
Hebrew was always subject to capital punish-
Law ment (Lev 24 17; cf Gen 9 6). Even


if the criminal sought the protection of
the sanctuary, he was to be arrested before the altar,
and to be punished (Ex 21 12.14; Lev 24 17.21;
Nu 36 16.18.21.31). The Mish says that a mortal
blow intended for another than the victim is punish-
able with death; but such a provision is not found
in the Law. Nospecial mention is made of (a) child
murder; (b) parricide; or (c) taking life by poison;
but the intention of the law is clear with reference
to all these cases (Ex 21 15.17; 1 Tim 19; Mt
15 4). No punishment is mentioned for attempted
suicide (cf 1 S 31 4f; 1 K 16 18; Mt 27 5); yet
Jos says (BJ, III, viii, 5) that suicide was held crimi-
nal by the Jews (see also Ex 21 23). An animal
known to be vicious must be confined, and if it
caused the death of anyone, the animal was de-
stroyed and the owner held guilty of murder (Ex
21 29.31). The executioner, according to the
terms of the Law, was the ‘‘revenger of blood’’; but
the guilt must be previously determined by the
Levitical tribunal. Strong protection was given
by the requirement that at least two witnesses must
concur in any capital question (Nu 35 19-30; Dt
17 6-12; 19 12.17). Under the monarchy the
duty of executing justice on a murderer seems to
have been assumed to some extent by the sovereign,
who also had power to grant pardon (2 8 13 39;
14 7.11; 1 K 2 34). See Mansuayer.
Frank E. Hirscu
MURDERERS, mir'dér-érz (Acts 21 38 AV, RV
“assassins’’): Represents a word only once men-
tioned in the NT, the Gr word cixdpios, sikdrios,


Lat sicarius from sica, ‘‘a small sword,” or “dagger.”
The word describes the hired assassin, of whom
there were bands in the pay of agitators in Rome in
the last days of the Republic, who employed them
to remove surreptitiously their political opponents.
In the later days of the. Jewish commonwealth,
Judaea became infested with the same type of
ruffian, and it is natural that the Rom commandant
at Jerus should describe them by the name so well
known in the imperial city. See Assassins.
T. Nicou

MURMUR, mir’mur, MURMURINGS, mir’-
mur-ingz: The Heb word >, lun) denotes the
semi-articulated mutterings of disaffected persons.
It is used in connection with the complaints of the
Israelites in the desert against Jeh on the one hand,
and against Moses and Aaron on the other hand
(Ex 16 7.8; Nu 14 27.36; 16 11; 17 5): In three
places (Dt 1 27; Ps 106 25; Isa 29 24), “murmur”
translates a Heb word (JA), réghan) which suggests
the malicious whispering of slander.

In the NT “murmur” renders two different words,
viz. yoyyisa, gogguzd, and éuBpmdouat, embrimdo-
mai. The latter word suggests indignation and
fault-finding (Mk 14 4. AV). The former word (or
a compound of it) is generally used in connection
with the complainings of the Pharisees and scribes
(Mt 20 11; Lk 5 30; 16 2; 197). T. Lewis


MURRAIN, mur’in, mur’en, mur’an (127,
debher): This name is given to a fatal cattle-disease,
which was the fifth of the plagues of Egypt (Ex’ 9 3),
and which affected not only the flocks and herds,
but also the camels, horses and asses. The record
of its onset immediately after the plague of flies
makes it probable that it was an epizodtic, whose
germs were carried by these insects as those of
rinderpest or splenic fever may be. Cattle plagues
have in recent years been very destructive in Egypt;
many writers have given descriptions of the great
devastation wrought by the outbreak in 1842. In
this case Wittmann noted that contact with the
putrid carcasses caused severe boils, a condition
also recorded in Ex as following the murrain. The
very extensive spread of rinderpest within the last
few years in many districts of Egypt has not yet
been completely stamped out, even in spite of the
use of antitoxic serum and the most rigid isolation.
The word “murrain” is probably a variant of the
Old Fr. morine. It is used as an imprecation by
Shakespeare and other Elizabethan writers, and is
still applied by herdsmen to several forms of epi-
demic cattle sickness. Among early writers it was
used as well for fatal plagues affecting men; thus
Lydgate (1494) speaks of the people “slain by that
moreyne.” ALEX. MACALISTER


MUSE, miz, MUSING, miz’ing: The word
occurs twice in the OT, in the sense of “meditate”
(Ps 39 3, haghigh; Ps 143 5, sth); in the NT once
(Lk 3 15, dialogizomai, where RV reads “reasoned’’).


MUSHI, mi’shi (2, mishi): Son of Merari
(Ex 6 19; Nu 3 20; 1 Ch 6 19 [Heb 4]; 23 21;
24 26). There is found also the patronymic “Mush-
ites’ (Nu 3 33; 26 58).


MUSIC, mi’zik:

I. Importance

. The Sole Art Cultivated

2, A Wide Vocabulary of Musical Terms
3. Place in Social and Personal Life

4. Universal Language of Emotions

A Use in Divine Service
1
Z


. Part at Religious Reformations

THEORY or Music
. Technical Terms, ‘dlamoth, sheminith, selah
. Not Necessarily Unimpressive 7


IE.


2095


TW. Musrcan Instruments


1, Strings: kinnér, nebhel, ‘dsdr, gittith, shdlishim,
sabbekha’ :
2. Winds: ‘aghdbh, halil, nepilath, mashrokitha’,


simponyah, shophar, keren, hdgdgerah
3. Percussion: téph, megiltayim, celeclim, mena‘antim
LirnraturE
f. Its Importance.—That the Hebrews were in
ancient times, as they are at the present day, de-
voted to the study and practice of music is obvious
to every reader of the OT. The references to it
are numerous, and are fre-
quently of such a nature as
to emphasize its importance.
They occur not only in the
Psalter, where we might cx-
pect them, but in the Histori-
cal Books and the Prophets, in
narratives and in declamations
of the loftiest meaning and
most intense scriousness. And
the conclusion drawn from a
cursory glance is confirmed
by a closer study.
The place held by music in
the OT is unique. Besides
poetry, it is the
1. The Sole only art that
Art Culti- seems to have been cultivated to any
vated extent in ancient Israel. Painting is
entirely, sculpture almost entirely,
ignored. This may have been due to the pro-
hibition contained in the Second Commandment,
but the fidelity with which that was obeyed is
remarkable.
From the traces of it extant in the OT, we can
infer that the vocabulary of musical terms was far
from scanty. This is all the more sig-
2. Vocab- nificant when we consider the con-
ulary densed and preguant nature of Heb.
“Song” in our EV represents at least
half a dozen words in the original.
The events, occasions, and occupations with
which music was associated were extremely varied.
It accompanied leave-taking with
3. Place in honored guests (Gen 31 27);  cele-
Social Life brated a signal triumph over the na-
tion’s enemies (Ex 15 20); and wel-
comed conquerors returning from victory (Jgs 11
34; 18 186). It was employed to exorcise an
evil spirit (1 S 18 10), and to soothe the temper,
or excite the inspiration, of a prophet (2 K 3 15).
The words ‘‘Destroy not” in the titles of four of the
Pss (cf Isa 65 8) most probably arc the beginning
of a vintage-song, and the markedly rhythmical
character of Heb music would indicate that it
accompanied and lightened many kinds of work
requiring combined and uniform exertion. Pro-
cessions, as e.g. marriages (1 Macc 9 39) and
funerals (2 Ch 35 25), were regulated in a similar
way. The Pss headed “Songs of Degrces’’ were
probably the sacred marches sung by the pious as
‘they journeyed to and from the holy festivals at
Jerus.
It follows from this that the range of emotion
expressed by Heb music was anything but limited.
Tn addition to the passages just quoted,


4. Emo- we may mention the jeering songs
tional leveled at Job (Job 30 9). But the
Range music that could be used to interpret or


accompany the Pss with any degree of
fitness must have been capable of expressing a great
variety of moods and feclings. Not only the broadly
marked antitheses of joy and sorrow, hope and fear,
faith and doubt, but every shade and quality of
sentiment are found there. It is hardly possible
to suppose that the people who originated all that
wealth of emotional utterance should have been


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Multitude, Mixed


without a corresponding ability to invent diversi-
fied melodies, or should have been content with the
rue and colorless recitative usually attributed to
them.

This internal evidence is confirmed by other tes-
timony. The Bab tyrants demanded one of the
famous songs of Zion from their Jewish captives
(Ps 187 3), and among the presents sent by Heze-


kiah to Sennacherib there were included male and
female musicians.


In later times Lat writers attest


the influence of the East in matters musical. We

need only refer to Juvenal iii.62 ff.
By far the most important evidence of the value
attached to music by the Hebrews is afforded by
the place given to it in Divine service.


5. Place in It is true that nothing is said of it in


Divine the Pent in connection with the con-
Service secration of the tabernacle, or the in-

stitution of the various sacrifices or
festivals. But this omission proves nothing. It is


ee Arecwgrate
SS Kk


O
Sees


O85,
Ry
0


OOD
SY S505
J RRS

eg


a mene ee
BY SBN
(Srey


Lo
Soon
SRS POY NY


Three Bearded Men with Lyres (Supposed by Some
to Be Jews).


(Assyrian Sculpture in Brit. Mus.)


not perhaps atoned for by the tradition (Wisd 18
9) that at the first paschal celebration “the fathers
already led the sacred songs of praise,’ but the rest
of the history makes ample amends. In later days,
at all events, music formed an essential part of
the national worship of Jeh, and elaborate arrange-
ments were made for its correct and impressive per-
formance. These are detailed in 1 Ch. There we
are told that the whole body of the temple chorus
and orchestra numbered 4,000; that they were
trained and conducted, in 24 divisions, by the sons
of Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun; and that in each


Music


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2096


group experts and novicés were combined, so that
the former preserved the correct tradition, and the
latter were trained and fitted to take their place.
This is, no doubt, a description of the arrangements
that were carried out in the Second Temple, but it
sheds a reflex, if somewhat uncertain, light on those

adopted in the First.
We are told by the same authority that every
reformation of religion brought with it a recon-
struction of the temple chorus and


6. In Re- orchestra, and a resumption of their
ligious duties. Thus when Hezekiah purged
Reforma- the state and church of the heathen-
tions ism patronized by Ahaz, “he set the


Levites in the house of Jeh with cym-
bals, with psalteries, and with harps” (2 Ch 29 25).


6, 12; cf also 1 Ch 16 19-21). The former has
been taken to mean “in the manner of maidens,”’
i.e. soprano; the latter “on the lower octave,”’ i.e.
tenor or bass. This is plausible, but it is far from
convincing. It is hardly probable that the He-
brews had anticipated our modern division of the
scale; and the word sh¢minith or “eighth” may refer
to the number of the mode, while ‘dlamdath is also
tr? “with Elamite instruments” (Wellhausen). Of
one feature of Heb music we may be tolerably sure:
it was rendered in unison, It was destitute of har-
mony or counterpoint. For its effect it would
depend on contrast in quality of tone, on the par-
ticipation of a larger or smaller number of singers,
on antiphonal singing, so clearly indicated in many
of the Pss, and on the coloring imparted by the


=


=| S<hS


Mosicat Parry.
Men and women seated on chairs, women servants pass wine, musicians seated on the ground play, and women dance before them (Brit. Mus.).


The same thing took place under Josiah (2 Ch 84).
After the restoration—at the dedication of the
Temple (Ezr 3 10) and of the walls of Jerus (Neh
12 17)—music played a great part. In Nehemiah’s
time the descendants of the ancient choral guilds
drew together, and their maintenance was secured
to them out of the public funds in return for their
services. ;
Hf. Musical Theory.—It is disappointing after
all this to have to confess that of the nature of Heb
music we have no real knowledge. If
1. Dearth of any system of notation ever existed,
Technical it has been entirely lost. Attempts
Information have been made to derive one from the
accents, and a German organist once
wrote a book on the subject. One tune in our
hymnals has been borrowed from that source, but
it is an accident, if not worse, and the ingenuity
of the German organist was quite misdirected. We
know nothing of the scales, or tonal system of the
Heb, of their intervals or of their method of tuning
their instruments. Two terms are supposed by some
to refer to pitch, viz. ‘‘upon,” or “set to ‘Alamaéth,”
(Ps 46), and “upon,” or “set to the Sh°minitth” (Psg


orchestra. That the latter occasionally played
short passages alone has been inferred from the
term selah, a word that occurs 71 t in the Pss. It
is rendered in the LXX by didpsalmos, which either
means louder playing, forte, or, more probably, an
instrumental interlude.
Our knowledge is, therefore, very meager and
largely negative. We need not, however, suppose
that Heb music was necessarily monot- -
2. Not onous and unimpressive, or, to those
Necessarily who heard it, harsh and barbarous.
Unimpress- Music, more than any other of the
ive arts, is justified of her own children,
and a generation that has slowly
learned to enjoy Wagner and Strauss should not
rashly condemn the music of the East. No doubt
the strains that emanated from the orchestra and
chorus of the temple stimulated the religious fervor,
and satisfied the aesthetic principles of the Hebrews
of old, precisely as the rendering of Bach and
Handel excites and soothes the Christian of today.
di, Instraments.—The musical instruments em-
ployed by the Hebrews included representatives
of the three groups: string, wind, and percussion.


2097


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Music


The strings comprised the "29, kinnér, b= or
555, nébhel or nebhel; the winds: the “iW,
shophar, or TIP, keren, myzkzrn, hdcdcerah, Son,
hala, and 3939, ‘ughabh; percussion: SM, taph,
Dnbya, meciayim, DOREY, celertim, DVT.
mnaan'im Dw, shdlishim. Besides these,
we have in Dnl: REMPMW'A, mashrakitha’, NAO,
sabbkha’, TROP, p*santérin, MINEO, ‘sim-
ponyah. Further, there are Chaldacan forms of
keren and kithdra.


a punishment for sin the sound of the kinnér will
cease.

(2) Materials—We have no exact information
as to the materials of which these instruments were
made. In 2S 6 5 AV, mention is made of ‘in-
struments made of fir wood” (ERV “cypress’’), but
the text is probably corrupt, and the reading in
1 Ch 18 8 is preferable. According to 1 K 10


11f, Hiram’s flect brought from Ophir quantities
of ’almiigh (2 Ch 2 8; 9 10, ’algtm) wood, from
which, among other things, the kinndr and nebhel
were made.


Probably this was red sandal-wood.


Procession or Assyrian Musicians.
Bas-Relief from Kouyunjik, Brit. Mus.


(1) When used.—The chief of these instruments
were the kinndr and nebhel (AV, RV “the harp”
and “the psaltery” or “viol”). They

1. Strings were used to accompany vocal music.
In 1 S 10 5, Saul meets a band of
prophets singing inspired strains to the music of


Lyre Held Perpen-
dicularly.


Egyptian Lyre Held
Horizontally.


the nebhel, “drum,” “flute,” and kinnér. In the
description of the removal of the ark, we are told
that songs were sung with kinnorath, n*bhdlim, ete
(2865). Again, in various passages (1 Ch 16 16;
2 Ch 7 6, etc) we meet with the expression Alé
shir, i.e. instruments of, or suitable for accom-
panying, song. It is evident that only the flute
and strings could render melodies. The music
performed on these instruments seems to have
been mainly of a joyful nature. It entered into all
public and domestic festivities. In Ps 81 2, the
kinnor is called “pleasant,” and Isa 24 8 speaks
of the “joy” of the kinnér. Very striking is the
invocation Ps 108 2: the poet in a moment of ex-
hilaration calls upon the two klé shir to echo and
share his enthusiasm for Jeh. Only once (Isa 16
11) is the kinndr associated with Raha and
Cheyne infers from this passage “that the kinnér
was used at mourning ceremonies.” But the infer-
ence is doubtful; the prophet is merely drawing a
comparison between the trembling of the strings
of the lyre and the agitation in his own bosom.
Again, the Bab captives hang their kinnoroth on
the willows in their dejection (Ps 187 2), and the
prophets (Isa 24 8; Ezk 26 13) threaten that as


Jos (Ant, VIII, iit) includes among articles made by
Solomon for the temple n*bhalim and kinnéréth of
electrum. Whether we understand this to have
been the mixed metal so named or amber, the frame
of the instrument could not have been constructed
of it. It may have been used for ornamentation.

We have no trace of metal strings being used by
the ancients. The strings of the Heb (minnim)
may have consisted of gut. We read of sheep-gut
being employed for the purpose in the Odyssey, xxi.
407. Vegetable fiber was also spun into strings.
We need only add that bowed instruments were
quite unknown; the strings were plucked with the
fingers, or struck with a plectrum.

(a) The kinnor: The OT gives us no clue to
the form or nature of the kinnér, except that it was
portable, comparatively light, and could be played
while it was carried in processions or dances. The
earliest authority to which we can refer on the sub-
ject is the LXX. While in some of the books kin-
nor is rendered by kinnira, or kinira—evidently
a transliteration—in others it is tr’ by kithara. We


fe __sniaun oe Lo 25
Bedouins Playing on Primitive Instruments.


cannot discuss here the question of the trust-
worthiness of the LXX as an authority for Heb
antiquities, but considering the conservatism of the
East, esp. in matters of ritual, it seems at least
hasty to say offhand, as Wellhausen does, that by
the date of its production the whole tradition of
ancient music had been lost. The tr, at all events,
supplies us with an instrument of which the He-
brews could hardly have been ignorant. The


Music


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2098


kithara, which in its general outlines resembled
the lyre, consisted of a rectilinear-shaped sound
box from which rose two arms, connected above by
a crossbar; the strings ran down from the latter to
the sound-box, to which, or to a bridge on which,
they were attached.

The most ancient copy of a kithara in Egypt was found
in a grave of the XIIth Dynasty. It is carried by one of
a@ company of immigrant captive Semites, who holds it
close to his breast, striking the strings with a plectrum
held in his right hand, and plucking them with the fingers
of the left. The instrument is very primitive; it re-
sembles a schoolboy's slate with the upper three-fourths
of the slate broken out of the frame; hut it nevertheless
possesses the distinctive characteristics of the Aithara.
In a grave at Thebes of a somewhat later date, three
players are depicted, one of whom plays a kithara, also
primitiveinform, but with slendererarms. Gradually, as
time advanced, the simple board-like frame assumed a
shape more like that afterward elaborated by the Greeks.
Numerous examples have been found in Asia Minor, but
further developed, esp. as regards the sound-box. It
may be noted that, in the Assyr monuments, the kithara
is played along with the harp, as the kinnér was with the
née eb. K

The evidence furnished by Jewish coins must not be
overlooked. Those stamped with representations of
lyre-shaped_ instruments have been assigned to 142-135
BC, or to 66-70 AD. On one side we have a kithara-
like instrument of 3 or more strings, with 2 sound-box
resembling a kettle. It is true that these coins are
of a late date, and the form of the instruments shown on
them has obviously been modified by Gr taste, but so
conservative a people as the Jews would hardly be likely
to adopt an essentially foreign object for their coinage.

One objection raised by Wellhausen to the identi-
fication of the kithara with the kinnor may be noted.
Jos undoubtedly says (Ant, VII, xii) that the kin-
nura was played with a
plectrum, and in 1S 16
23 David plays the kinnér
“with his hand.” But
even if this excludes the
use of the plectrum in the
particular case, it need
not be held to disprove
the identity of kinnor and ;
kinnura. Both methods may have been in use.
In paintings discovered at Herculaneum there are
several instances of the lyre being played with
the hand; and there is no reason for supposing
that the Hebrews were restricted to one method of
showing their skill, when we know that Greeks and
Latins were not.

Since the ancient VSS, then, render kinnér by
kithara, and the kithara, though subsequently de-
veloped and beautified by the Greeks, was originally
a Sem instrument, it is exceedingly probable, as
Riehm says, “that we have to regard the ancient
Heb kinnor, which is designated a kithara, as a still
simpler form of the latterinstrument. The stringed
instruments on the Jewish coins are later, beautified
forms of the kinnér, while the Egyp modifications
represent the intermediate stage.”

() The nebhely The nebhel has been identified
with many instruments. The literal meaning of
the word, ‘‘wine-skin,”’ has suggested that it was the
bagpipe! Others have thought that it was the
lute, and this is supported by reference to the Egyp
nfr, which denotes a lute-like instrument frequently
depicted on the monuments. The derivation of
nbl from nfr is, however, now abandoned; and no
long-necked instrument has been found depicted
in the possession of a Semite. The kissar was
favored by Pfeiffer. Its resonance-box is made of
wood, and, the upper side, being covered tightly
by a skin, closely resembles a3 drum. From this
rise two arms, connected toward the top by a cross-
bar; and to the latter the strings are attached.
The kissar has, however, only 5 strings, as opposed
to 12 ascribed by Jos to the nebhel, and the sound-
box, instead of being above, as stated by the Fathers,
is situated below the strings.


Trumpets on a Coin from
Bar-Cochba.


The supposition that the nebhel was a dulcimer
is not without some justification. The dulcimer
was well known in the East. An extremely in-
teresting and important bas-relief in the palace at
Kouyunjik represents a company of 28 musicians,
of whom 11 are instrnmental-
ists and 15singers. The pro-
cession is headed by 5 men,
3 carrying harps, one a double
flute, and one a dulcimer.
Two of the harpists and the
dulcimer-player appear to be
dancing or skipping. Then
follow 6 women; 4 have
harps, one a double flute,
and one a small drum which
is fixed upright at the belt,
and is played with the fingers
of both hands. Besides the
players, we see 15 singers, 9
being children, who clap their
hands to mark the rhythm.
One of the women is holding her throat, perhaps to
produce the shrill vibrato affected by Pers and
Arabian women at the present day. The dulcimer
in this picture has been regarded by several Oriental-
ists as the nebhel. Wettstein, e.g., says ‘This in-
strument can fairly be so designated, if the state-
ment of so many witnesses is correct, that nablium
and psaltérium are one and the same thing. For
the latter corresponds to the Arab. santir, which is
derived from the Heb p*santérin, a transliteration
of the Gr psaliérion.’’ And the santir is a kind of
dulcimer.

This is not conclusive. The word psaltérion
was not always restricted to a particular instru-
ment, but sometimes embraced a whole class of
stringed instruments. Ovid also regarded the
nabla as a harp, not a dulcimer, when he said (Ars
Am. iti.329): “Learn to sweep the pleasant nabla
with both hands.” And, lastly, Jos tells us (And,
VU, xii) that the nebhel was played without a
plectrum. The tr of nebhel by psaltérion does not,
therefore, shut us up to the conclusion that it was
a dulcimer; on the contrary, it rather leads to the
belief that it was a harp.

Harps of various sizes are very numerous on the Egy
monuments. There is the large and elaborate kind wit!
a well-developed sound-box, that served also as a pedi-
ment, at its base. This could not be the nebdhel, which,
as we have seen, was easily portable. Then we have a
variety of smaller instruments that, while light and easily
carried, would scarcely have been sonorous enough for
the work assigned to the nebhel in the temple services.
Besides, the more we learn of the relations of Egypt and
Israel, the more clearly do we perceive how little the
latter was influenced by the former. But the evidence
of the Fathers, which need not be disregarded iu a matter
of this kind, is decisive against Egyp harps of every shape
and size. These have without exception the sound-box
at the base, and Augustine (on Ps 42) says expressly
that the psaltérium had its sound-box above. This is
confirmed by statements of Jerome, Isidore, and others,
who contrast two classes of instruments according to the
poate above or below of the sound-box, Jerome,

‘urther, likens the nebhel to the Gr A,

All the evidence points to the nebhel having been
the Assyr harp, of which we have numerous ex-
aroples in the ruins. We have already referred at
length to the bas-relief at Kouyunjik in which it is
played by 3 men and 4 women. It is portable,
triangular, or, roughly, delta-shaped; it has a
sound-box above that slants upward away from the
player, and a horizontal bar to which the strings are
attached about three-fourths of their length down.
The number of the strings on the Assyr harp ranges
from 16 upward, but there may quite well have been
fewer in some cases.

(c) Nebhel ‘asor: In Ps 38 2; 144 9, “‘the psaltery
of ten strings” is given as the rendering of nebhel
‘dsor; while in Ps 92 3 ‘asor is tr4 “instrument of


Assyrian Dulcimer.


2099


ten strings.’”’ No doubt, as we have just said above,
there were harps of less and greater compass—the
mention of the nurnber of strings in two or three
pee does not necessarily imply different kinds
of harps.

(d) Gitttth: The word gittith is found in the titles
of Ps 8 81, 84 It is a fem. adj. derived from
Gath, but its meaning is quite uncertain. It has
been explained to denote (i) some Gittite instru-
ment; the Tg, on Ps 8, gives “on the kithara
which was brought from Gath’’; or (ii) a melody
or march popular in Gath. The LXX renders


i
A


a


cone 2 6, Rn oe fixe


“concerning the vintage,” and may have regarded
these pss as having been sung to a popular melody.
See above.

(e) The shalishim: Shélishtm occurs in1 § 18 6,
where it is rendered “instruments of music,’”? RVm
“triangles, or three stringed instruments.” The
word seems from the context to represent a musical
instrument of some sort, but which is very uncer-
tain. Etymology points to a term involving the
number three. The smal] triangular harp, or tri-
gon, has been suggested, but it would hardly have
made its presence felt among a number of drums or
tambourines. If the shalishtm was a harp, it might
very well be the nebhel, which was also triangular.
There is no evidence that the triangle was used by
Sem people, or we might have taken it to be the
instrument referred to. If it was a percussion in-
strument, it might possibly be a three-ringed or
three-stringed sisirum.

(f) The sabb‘kha’: Among the instruments men-
tioned in Dnl 3 5.7.10 occurs the sabb%kha’, trd in
AV and RV “sackbut,” i.e. a trombone, why, it is
impossible to say. The LXX renders the word by
sambiiké, and this is an instrument frequently men-
tioned by Gr and Lat writers, Though it is no-
where described, it was no doubt a harp, probably
of high pitch. It was a favorite of dissolute women,
and we frequently see in their hands in mural pic-
tures 2 small triangular harp, possibly of a higher
range than the trigon. ’

(g) Neghinéth: The word neghinéth occurs in the
title of 6 pss, and in the sing. in two others; it is
also found elsewhere in the OT. Derived from
naghan, “to touch,” esp. to play on a stringed in-
strument (cf Ps 68 25, where the players, nagh*nim,
are contrasted with the singers, shart), it evidently
means stringed instruments in general. ,

(1) The ‘ughdbh.—The first mention of a wind
instrument occurs in Gen 4 21, where we are told


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Various Forms or Ecypt1an Hanrps.—Rosellini.


Music


that Jubal was the “father of all such as handle
the harp and pipe.” The Heb word here tr? “pipe”
is ‘dghdbh. It occurs in 3 other places:
2. Winds Job 21 12; 30 31; Ps 160 4. In the
Heb version of Dnl 3 5 it is given as
the rendering of sumpényGh, i.c. “bagpipe.” Jerome
tr* by organon. The ‘tighabh was probably a primi-
tive shepherd’s pipe or panpipe, though some take
it as a gencral term for instruments of the flute
kind, a meaning that suits all the passages cited.
(2) The halil—The hdalil is first mentioned in
1S 10 5, where it is played by members of the


band. of prophets. It was used (1 K 1 40) at
Solomon’s accession to the throne; its strains added
to the exhilaration of convivial parties (Isa 5 12),
accompanied worshippers on their joyons march
to the sanctuary (Isa 30 29), or, in turn, echoed
the feelings of mourners (Jer 48 36). In 1 Macc
3 45, one of the features of the desolation of the
temple consisted in the cessation of the sound of the


Double Pipe with Accompaniment of Clapping of Hands.
(Egyptian Fresco-Painting in Brit. Mus.)


pipe. From this we see that Ewald’s assertion
that the flute took no part in the music of the temple
is incorrect, at least for the Second Temple.

As we should pea from the simplicity of its
construction, and the commonness of its material,
the flute or pipe was the most ancient and most
widely popular of all musical instruments.

Reeds, cane, bone, afterward ivory, were the mate-
rials; it was the easiest thing in the world to drill out
the center, to pierce a few holes in the rind or bark, and,
for the mouthpiece, to compress the tuhe at one end.
The simple rustic pattern was soon improved upon. Of
course, nothing like the modern flute with its compli-
cated mechanism was ever achieved, hut, esp. on the Egyp
monuments, a variety of patterns is found. There we


Music
Mustard


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2100


see the obliquely held flute, evidently played, like the
Arab. nay, by blowing through a very slight parting
of the lips against the edge of the orifice of the tube.
Besides this, there are double flutes, which, though appar-
ently an advance on the single flute, are very ancient.
These double flutes are either of equal or unequal length,
and are connected near the mouth by a piece of leather,
or enter the frame of the mouthpiece.

Though the fintes of the East and West resembled
each other more closely than the strings, it is to
the Assyr monuments that we must turn for the
prototypes of the halal. The Greeks, as their myths
show, regarded Asia Minor as the birthplace of the
flute, and no doubt the Hebrews
brought it with them from their
Assyr home. In the Kouyunjik
bas-relief we see players per-
forming on the double flute.
It is apparently furnished with
a beaked mouthpiece, like that
of the clarinet or flageolet. We
cannot determine whether the
Israelites used the flute with a
mouthpiece, or one like the
nay; and it is futile to guess.
It is enough to say that they
had opportunities of becoming
acquainted with both kinds,
and may have adopted both.

(83) N*hiléth—Nehiloth oc-
curs only in the title of Ps 6.
The context suggests that it
is a musical term, and as we
explain n°ghinéth as a general term for strings, this
word may comprehend the wood-winds. RVm
reriders “wind instruments.”

(4) Nekebh.—In Ezk 28 13 AV, RV, n°kabhim
is rendered pipes. This tr is supported by Fetis:


(l) Ancient Egyptian, Thebes.
lind. (3) Modern Torabooka.—Descrip. de U'Egypte,
Egyptian with stick.— Wilkinson.


(2) Carried on back during march.--Rosel-
(4) Anciont


the double flute; Ambros: large flutes; and by
Jahn: the nay or Arab flute. It is now, however,
abandoned, and Jerome’s explanation that nekebh
means the “setting” of precious stones is generally
adopted...

(5) The mashrokith’ —Mashrokith@, found in
Dn! 3 5, etc, is also referred to the wood-winds.
The word is derived from shdrak, ‘‘to hiss” (cf Isa
5 26, where God hisses to summon the Gentiles).


The LXX translates stirigx, or panpipes, and this is
most probably the meaning.

(6) The simpinyah.—Samponyah (in Chald sum-
ponia) is another name for a musical instrument
found in Dnl 3 5, etc. It is generally supposed
to have been the bagpipe, an instrument that at
one time was exceedingly popular, even among
highly civilized peoples. Nero is said to have been


desirous of renown as a piper.
(7) The shéphar keren—The shdphar was a
trumpet, curved at the end like a horn (keren), and


Straight Trumpets.


(), @), Assyrian, Sculptures, Brit. Mus. (8) Egyptian, Painting at Thebes.


no doubt originally was a horn. The two words
shophar and keren are used synonymously in Josh
6 4.5, where we read shiphdar ha-ydbh‘lim and keren


ha-ydbhél. With regard to the meaning of ha-
yobhel, there is some difference of opinion. RV
renders in text “ram’s horn,” in m “jubilee.” The


former depends on a statement in the Talm that
yobhél is Arab. for “ram’s horn,” but no trace of
such a word has been found in Arabic. A suggestion
of Pfeiffer’s that yobhel does not designate the
instrument, but the manner of blowing, is advo-
cated by J. Weiss. It gives a good sense in the
passages in which yobhél occurs in connection with
shéphar or keren. Thus in Josh 6 5, we would tr,
‘when the priests blow triumph on the horn.”

The shdphaér was used in early times chiefly,
perhaps exclusively, for warlike purposes. It gave
the signal “to arms’ (Jgs 6 34; 18 13 3; 28
20 1); warned of the approach of the enemy (Am
3 6; Ezk 33 6; Jer 4 5; 6 1); was heard through-
out a battle (Am 2 2, etc); and sounded the recall
(2 8 2 28). Afterward it played an important part
in connection with religion. It was blown at the
proclamation of the Law (Ex 19 138, etc); and at
the opening of the Year of Jubilee (Lev 26 9);
heralded the approach of the Ark (28 6 15);
hailed a new king (2 8 15 10); and is propheti-
cally associated with the Divine judgment and res-
toration of the chosen people from captivity (Isa
18 3, and often).

(8) The hdgageroth—We are told (Nu 10 2 ff)
that Moses was commanded to make two silver
trumpets which should serve to summon the people
to the door of the tabernacle; give the signal for
breaking up the camp; or call to arms. These
instruments were the hédcdg*rdth, which differed
from the shdphar in that they were straight, not
curved, were always made of metal, and were only
blown by the priests. They are shown on the Arch
of Titus and on Jewish coins, and are described by
Jos (Ant, III, xti, 6). The latter says: “In length
it was not quite a yard. It was composed of a
narrow tube somewhat thicker than a flute, widened
slightly at the mouth to catch the breath, and ended
in the form of a bell, like the common trumpets.”


2101


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Music
Mustard


(1) The toph—tThe principal percussion instru-
ment, the toph, is represented in EV by “‘tabret”’
and ‘“‘timbrel,”’ two words of different


3. Percus- origin. ‘Tabret” is derived from Arab.
sion In- tanbir, the name of a sort of mandolin.
struments ‘Timbrel” comes from Lat-Gr tym-


_  panum, through the Fr. timbre, a small
tambourine. The Arabs of today possess an instru-
ment called the duf, a name that corresponds to the
Heb tiph. The duf is a circle of thin wood 11 in. in
diameter and 2 in. in depth. Over this is tightly
stretched a piece of skin,
and in the wood are 5
openings in which thin
metal disks are hung
loosely; these jingle when
the duf is struck by the
hand. The téph probably
resembled the duf.

Other drums are shown
on the Egyp and Assyr
monuments. In the
Kouyunjik bas-relief the
second last performer
beats with his hands a
small, barrel-like drum fixed at his waist. In the
OT the drum is used on festive occasions; it is not
mentioned in connection with Divineservice. It was
generally played by women, and marked the time
at dances or processions (Ex 15 20; Jgs 11 34;
18 186; Jer 314; Ps 160 4). At banquets
(Isa 24 8; 30 32; Job 21 12) and at marriages
(1 Mace 9 39) it accompanied the kinnér and
nebhel. In solemn processions it was also occasion-
ally played by men.

(2) Mciltayim, c¢eleelim—In 1 Ch 1519 we
read that “Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were ap-
pointed, with cymbals of brass to sound aloud.”
These cymbals are the m°ciltayim (in two places
celgelim). They were very popular in Egypt. A


Timbrel.


Egyptian Cymbals,
(Brit. Mus.)


pair made of copper and silver has been found in a
grave in Thebes. They are about 5 in. in diame-
ter and have handles fixed in the center. In the
Kouyunjik bas-relief we see cymbals of another
attern. These are conical, and provided with
eCRTEN -
indrical staves slightly bent at one end were also
Bee ee Egyp processions. Villoteau, quoted by J.
Weiss, describes a bas-relief in which three musicians
are seen, of whom one plays the harp, a second the


te, while a third appears to he marking
See Leeann two short rods together; this was a


method of conducting practised regularly by other
ancient nations.


(3) Mena‘an‘im.—Lastly in 2 8 6 5 we meet with
a word that occurs nowhere else, and whose mean-
ing is quite uncertain. AV translates “cornets,’
RV “castanets,” and in m “sistra.” The m*na‘an-
‘um may have been the sistrwm, an instrument
formed of two thin, longish plates, bent together


at the top so as to form an oval frame, and supplied
with a handle at the lower end. One or more bars
were fixed across this frame, and rings or disks
loosely strung on. these made a jingling noise when
the instrument was shaken. ‘This interpretation
is supported by the derivation of the word, the
Vulg, and the rabbins.


Sistra.
(2), (3) In Brit. Mus,


(1) 1n the Louvre. (4) Painting at Thebes.


Lirsrature.—Pieiffer, Uber die Musik der alten
Hebrder; Saalschutz, Form der heb. Poesie, etc; Leyrerin
RE; Riehm, Handwért. des bibl. Alterthums; Histories of
Music by Fetis, Ambros, Rowbotham, Naumann, and
Chappell; Wilkinson, Ancient Egypt; Wettstein in Del.
Comm. on Isa; Lane, Modern Egyptians; Stainer, The
Music of the Bible; Edersheim, The Temple, etc; Well-
hausen, ‘'The Pss"” in Polychrome Bible; Benzinger,
HA; Nowack, HA; J. Weiss, Die mus. Instr. des AT;
C. Engel, Music of the Most Ancient Nations; Vigoureux,
Les instruments de musique de la Bible; Driver, Joel and
Amos Cornill, Music in the OT; and the various Bible

‘icts.


James MILLar

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, mi’zi-kal in’stroo-
ments (MVTW)] MW, shiddah w*-shiddoth): “I
gat me... . musical instruments, and that of all
sorts’ (Eccl 2 8). Thus AV and ARV; ERV and
ARVm ‘concubines very many.”’ The word occurs
only here; the meaning is not certain, but it has
nothing to do with music.


MUSICIAN, mi-zish’an, CHIEF. See Asaru;
Music; PsauMs.


MUSTARD, mus’tard (clvam, sinapi [Mt 13 31;
Mk 4 31; Lk 18 19; Mt 17 20; Lk 17 6]): The
minuteness of the seed is referred to in all these
passages, while in the first three the large size of the
herb growing from it is mentioned. In Mt 13 32
it is described as “greater than the herbs, and be-
cometh a tree’ (cf Lk 13 19); in Mk 4 32 it
“becometh greater than all the herbs, and putteth
out great branches.” Several varieties of mustard
(Arab. khardal) have notably small seed, and under
favorable conditions grow in a few months into very
tall herbs—10 to 12 ft. The rapid growth of an
annual herb to such a height must always be a
striking fact. Sinapis nigra, the black mustard,
which is cultivated, S. alba, or white mustard, and
S. arvensis, or the charlock (all of N.O. Cruciferae),
would, any one of them, suit the requirements
of the parable; birds readily alight upon their
branches to eat the seed (Mt 13 32, etc), not,
be it noted, to build their nests, which is nowhere
implied. :

Among the rabbis a “grain of mustard” was a
common expression for anything very minute,


Muth-labben
Mysia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2102


which explains Our Lord’s phrase, “faith as a grain
of mustard seed” (Mt 17 20; Lk 17 6).


The suggestion that the NT references may allude to a
tall shrub Salzedora persica, which grows on the southern


Mustard (Sinapis nigra).


shores of the Dead Sea, rests solely upon the fact that
this plant is sometimes called khardal by the Arabs, but
it has no serious claim to be ie sinapt of the Bible


MasTERMAN
MUTH-LABBEN, muth-lab’en (722 NVA, math
labbén, ‘‘death of Ben,” or “of theson”’; Ps 9, title).
See Psatms.


MUTILATION, mi-ti-lé’shun.
MENTS.


See PunisH-


MUTTER, mut’ér (TW, haghah [Isa 8 19; 59
3]): An onomatopoetic word, used of the growling
of a lion (Isa 31 4), of the “mourning” of a dove
(Isa 38 14), or of the human voice, whether speak-
ing inarticulately (Isa 16 7) or articulately (Ps 37
30, ‘The mouth of the righteous talketh of wisdom’;
cf Job 27 4; Prov 8 7, etc). Hence it is only
the context that can give to haghah the meaning
“mutter.’”’ No such meaning can be gathered from
the context of Isa 59 3, and, in fact, the open
shamelessness of the sinners seems to be in point.
So the verse should be rendered, ‘Your lips have
spoken lies, your tongue wftereth wickedness.” In
Isa 8 19 haghah describes the tone of voice used by
the necromancers in uttering their formulas, ‘that
chirp and that mutter.” That this tone was sub-
dued and indistinct is quite probable. Sce Prxrp.

Burton Scotr Easton

MUZZLE, muz”! (005, hasam; updo, phimda):
According to the Deuteronomic injunction (Dt 25
4), the ox was not to be muzzled while treading the
corn, i.e. threshing. The muzzle was a guard
piped on the mouth of the oxen to prevent them

om biting or eating. The threshing ox would


have ample opportunity of feeding (cf Hos 10 11).
The Deuteronomic injunction is quite in accordance
with the humane spirit which inspires it all through.
Paul quotes this law in two places (1 Cor 99;
1 Tim 5 18) to illustrate his view that the “a-
borer is worthy of his hire.” T. Lewis


MYNDUS, min’dus (Mivios, Muindos): A city


- of Asia Minor, situated at the extreme western end


of a peninsula jutting into the sea (see Carta). It
seems that the city was independent at an early
date and that many Jews lived there, for according
to 1 Macc 15 23, it was one of the several places
to which the Rom senate, in the year 189 BC, sent
a letter in their behalf. The place was important
only because of the silver mines in its vicinity.
The mines were worked from a very early period,
even to the Middle Ages, and have therefore given
to the place the modern Turkish name, Gumushlu,
meaning a silver mine. J. BANKS


MYRA, mi‘ra (Mipa, Mira): A city of the ancient
country of Lycia abont 23 miles from the coast.
Here, according to Acts 27 6, Paul found a corn
ship from Alexandria. The city stood upon a hill
formed by the openings of two valleys. At an early
period Myra was of less importance than was the
neighboring city Patara, yet later it became a
prominent port for ships from Egypt and Cyprus,
and Theodosius II made it the capital of the prov-
ince. It was also famed as the seat of worship of an
Asiatic deity whose name is no longer known. St.
Nicholas, a bishop and the patron saint of sailors,
is said to have been buried in a church on the road
between Myra and Andraki, the port. Here an
Arab fleet was destroyed in 807. In 808 Haroun
al-Rashid, the renowned kalif of Bagdad, took the
city, and here Saewulf landed on his returh from
Jerus. Dembre is the modern name of the ruins of
Myra, which are among the most imposing in that
part of Asia Minor. The elaborate details of the
decoration of the theater are unusually well pre-
served, and the rock-hewn tombs about the city
bear many bas-reliefs and inscriptions of interest.
On the road to Andraki the monastery of St.
Nicholas may still be seen. E, J. Banxs


MYRRH, mir:

(1) (1 or WA, mor; Arab. murr): This snb-
stance is mentioned as valuable for its perfume (Ps
45 8; Prov 7 17; Cant 3 6; 4 14), and as one of
the constituents of the holy incense (Ex 30 23;
see also Cant 46; 5 1.5.13). Mor is generally
identified with the “myrrh” of commerce, the
dried gum of a species of balsam (Balsamodendron
myrrha). This is a stunted tree growing in Arabia,
having a light-gray bark; the gum resin exudes
in small tear-like drops which dry to a rich brown
or reddish-yellow, brittle substance, with a faint
though agreeable smell and a warm, bittertaste. It
is still used as medicine (Mk 16 28). On account,
however, of the references to “flowing myrrh”
(Ex 30 23) and “liquid myrrh” (Cant 5 5.13),
Schweinfurth maintains that mér was not a dried
gum but the liquid balsam of Balsamodendron opo-
balsamum. See Batsam.

Whichever view is correct, it is probable that the
cptpva, smurna, of the NT was the same. In Mt
2 11 it is brought by the ‘Wise men” of the East
as an offering to the infant Saviour; in Mk 15 23
it is offered mingled with wine as an anaesthetic to
the suffering Redeemer, and in Jn 19 39 a “mixture
of myrrh and aloes” is brought by Nicodemus to
embalm the sacred body.

(2) (ud, lot; oraxrh, stakté; tr’ “myrrh”? in
Gen 37 25, m “ladanum’”; 48 11): The fragrant


2103


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Muth-labben
Mysia


resin obtained from some species of cistus and called
in Arab. lddham, in Lat ladanum. The cistus or
“rock rose’ is exceedingly common all over the
mountains of Pal (see Borany), the usual varieties


Myrrh (Balsamodendron myrrha).


being the C. villosus with pink petals, and the C.
salviaefolius with white petals. No commerceis done
now in Pal in this substance as of old (Gen 37 25;
43 11), but it is still gathered from various species
of cistus, esp. C. creticus in the Gr Isles, where it is


-alltlh
A


‘l
\


Rock-Rose (Cistus cretensis).


collected by threshing the plants by a kind of flail
from which the sticky mass is scraped off with a
knife and rolled into small black balls. In Cyprus
at the present time the gum is collected from the
beards of the goats that browse on these shrubs,
as was done in the days of Herodotus (iii.112).

EB. W. G. MasTermMan


MYRTLE, mifr’t’! (O10, hddhas; pupolvy, mur-
sing [Isa 41 19; 55 13; Neh 8 15; Zec 1 8.10{];
also as a name in Hadassah in Est 2 7, the Jewish
form of Estaer {q.v.]): The myrtle, Myrtus com-
munis (N.O. Myrtaceae), is a very common indig-
enous shrub all over Pal. On the bare hillsides
it is a low bush, but under favorable conditions of
moisture it attains a considerable height (cf Zec
18.10). It has dark green, scented leaves, delicate
starry white flowers and dark-colored berries, which
are eaten. In ancient times it was sacred to As-
tarte. It is mentioned as one of the choice plants
of the land (Isa 41 19). “Instead of the thorn


ew ;


Ay


Myrtle (Myrtus communis).


shall come up the fir-tree; and instead of the brier
shall come up the myrtle-tree” (Isa 55 13), is one
of the prophetic pictures of God’s promised bless-
ings. It was one of the trees used in the Feast
of Tabernacles (Neh 8 15): ‘‘the branches of thick
trees” (q.v.) are interpreted in the Talm (Suk. 3
4; Yer Suk. 3, 58d) as myrtle boughs; also (id)
the “thick trees” of Neh 8 15 as “wild myrtle.”
Myrtle twigs, particularly those of the broad-
leaved variety, together with a palm branch and
twigs of willow, are still used in the ritual of the
Feast of Tabernacles. For many references to
myrtle in Jewish writings see Jew Enc, IX, 137.
E. W. G. MasTerman

MYSIA, mish’i-a (Mvola, Musia): A country in
the northwestern part of Asia Minor, which formed
an important part of the Rom province of Asia.
Though its boundaries were always vague, it may
be said to have extended on the N. to the Sea of
Marmora, on the E. to Bithynia and Phrygia, on
the S. to Lydia, and on the W. to the Hellespont.
According to some authors it included the Troad.
Its history is chiefly that of its important cities, of
which Assos, Troas, and Adramyttium on the
border of Lydia, are mentioned in the NT. When
Mysia became a part of the Rom province of Asia


Mystery


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2104


in 190 BC, its old name fell into disuse, and it was
then generally known as the Hellespontus. Ac-
cording to Acts 16 7.8, Paul passed through the
country, but without stopping to preach, until he
reached Troas on the coast, yet tradition says that
he founded churches at Poketos and Cyzicus.
Onesiphorus, who was martyred some time be-
tween 109 and 114 AD, during the proconsulate of
Adrian, is supposed to have evangelized this part of
Asia. See Expos T, IX, 495 f. E. J. Banks


MYSTERY, mis’ tér-i (uvorhpiov, mustérion; from
piotys, miustés, “one iitiated into mysteries’;
muéd, “to initiate,” mid, “to close” the lips or the
eyes; stem mu, a sound produced with closed lips;
ef Lat mutus, “dumb’’): Its usual modern meaning
(=something in itself obscure or incomprehensible,
difficult or impossible to understand) does not con-
vey the exact sense of the Gr mustérion, which
means a secret imparted only to the initiated, what is
unknown until it is revealed, whether it be easy or
hard to understand. The idea of incomprehensibility,
if implied at all, is purely accidental. The history
of the word in ancient paganism is important, and
must be considered before we examine its Bib.
usage.

In the extant classics, the sing. is found once only
(Menander, ‘Do not tell thy secret [mustérion] to

thy friend”). Butitis frequently found


1. In in the pl. éé mustéria, ‘‘the Mysteries,”
Ancient the technical term for the secret rites
Pagan and celebrations in ancient religions
Religions only known to, and practised by, those


who had been initiated. These are
among the most interesting, significant, and yet
baffling religious phenomena in the Gr-Rom
world, esp. from the 6th cent. BC onward. In
proportion as the public cults of the civic and na-
tional deities fell into disrepute, their place came
more and more to be filled by seerct cults open only
to those who voluntarily underwent elaborate pre-
liminary preparations. There was scarcely one of
the ancient deities in connection with whose wor-
ship there was not some subsidiary cult of this kind.
The most famous were the Mystcries celebrated in
Eleusis, under the patronage and control of the
Athenian state, and associated with the worship of
Demeter and her daughter Persephone. But there
were many others of a more private character than
the Eleusinian, e.g. the Orphic Mysteries, associated
with the name of Dionysus. Besides the Gr Mys-
teries, mention should be made of the Egyp cults
of Isis and Serapis, and of Pers Mithraism, which in
the 3d cent. AD was widely diffused over the whole
empire.


It is difficult in a brief paragraph to characterize the
Mysteries, so elahorate and varied were they, and so
completely foreign to the modern mind. The following
are some of their main features: (1) Their appeal was
to the emotions rather than to the intellect. Lobeck
in his famous Aglaophamus destroyed the once prevalent
view that the Mysteries enshrined some profound reli-
gieus truth or esoteric doctrine. They were rather an
attempt to find a more emotional and ecstatic expression
to religions aspiration than the public ceremonies pro-
vided. Aristotle (as quoted by Synesius) declared that
the initiated did not receive definite instruction, but
were pnt in a certain frame of mind (ob paéeiy mi deiv
GAka Tadeivy, ou mathetn ti dein alld pathetn). This
does not mean that there was no teaching, but that the
teaching was vague, suggestive and symbolic, rather
than didactic or dogmatic. (2) The chief purpose of the
rites seems to have been to secure for the votaries a
mystic union with some deity and a guaranty of a hliss-
ful immortality. The initiated was made to partake
mystically In the passing of the deity through death to
life, and this union with his saviour-god (@cds cwrip,
theés sétér) became the pledge of his own passage through
death to a happy life beyond. This was not taught as
an esoteric doctrine; it was well known to ontsiders that
the Mysteries tanght the greater blessedness of the ini-
tlated in the under-world; bunt in the actnal ceremony
the truth was vividly presented and emotionally realized.


(3) The celebrations were marked by profuse symbolism
of word and action. They were preceded by rites of
purification through which all the mystee had to pass,
The celebrations themselves were in the main a kind of
religious drama, consisting of scenic representations
illustrating the story of some deity or deities, on the
basis of the old mythologies regarded as allegories of
Nature's productive forces and of human immortality;
combined with the recital of certain mystic formulae by
the hierophant (the priest). The culminating point
was the érorreia, epopteta, or full vision, when the
hierophant revealed certain holy objects to the assembly.
(4) The cults were marked by a strict exclusiveness and
secrecy. None but the initiated could be present at the
services, and the knowledge of what was said and
done was scrupulously kept from outsiders. What they
had seen and heard was so sacred that it_was sacrilege
to divulge it to the uninitiated. (5) Yet the Mys-
teries were not secret societies, but were open to all who
chose to be initiated (except barbarians and criminals).
They thus stood in marked contrast to the old civic and
national cults, which were confined to states or cities.
They substituted the principle of initiation for the more
exclusive principle of birthright or nationality; and so
foreshadowed the disintegration of old barriers, and pre-
pared the way for the universal religion. Thus the
mystery-religions strangely combined a strict exclusive-
ness with a kind: of incipient catholicity. This brief
account will show that the Mysteries were not devoid
of noble elements. They formed ‘the serious part of

agan religion’? (Renan). But it mnst also be remem~-
Berea that they lent themselves to grave extravagances
and abuses. Esp. did they snffer from the fact that
they were withheld from the light of healthy publicity.


The religion of the OT has no Mysteries of the
above type. The ritual of Israel was one in which
the whole people partook, through


2.Inthe their representatives the priests.
OT and There was no system of ceremonial
the Apoc _initiation by which the few had privi-


leges denied to the many. God has
His secrets, but such things as He revealed belonged
to all (Dt 29 29); so far from silence being en-
joined concerning them, they were openly pro-
claimed (Dt 6 7; Neh 8 1ff). True piety alone
initiated men into confidential intercourse with
Jeh (Ps 25 14; Prov 3 32). The term “mystery”
never occurs in the Eng. OT. The Gr word musté-
rion occurs in the LXX of the OT only in Dnl, where
it is found several times as the tr of RT), raza’, “a
secret,” in reference to the king’s dream, the mean-
see which was revealed to Daniel (2 18.19.27—


In the Apoc, mustérion is still used in the sense of “a
secret"’ (a meaning practically confined to the LXX in
extant Gr); of the secrets of private life, esp. between
friends (Sir 22 22; 27 16.17.21), and of the secret
plens of a king or a state (Tob 12 7.11; Jth 2 2;

acc 13 21). The term is also used of the hidden pur-
pose or counsel of God or of Divine wisdom. ‘The
wicked ‘‘knew not the mysteries of God,’’ i.e. the secret
counsels that govern God's dealings with the godly
(Wisd 2 22); wisdom ‘‘is initiated [uters, mustis]
into the knowledge of God" (8 4), but (unlike the pagan
MTystagogues) the writer declares he ‘‘will not hide
mysteries,’’ but will ‘‘bring the knowledge of her [wis-
dom] into clear light” (6 22). Hatch maintains that
the analogy here is that of an oriental king's secrets,
known only to himself and his trnsted friends (Essays
in Bib. Gr, 58); but it is more likely that the wrlter here
hetrays the influence of the phraseology of the Gr Mys-
teries (without acquiescing in their teaching). In
another passage, at any rate, he shows acquaintance
with the secret rites of the Gentiles, viz. in 14 15.23,
where the “solemn rites'’ and ‘secret mysteries" of
idolators are referred to with ahhorrence. The term
#8 Hees oa is not used in reference to the special ritual
of Israel.


In the NT the word occurs 27 or (if we include
the doubtful reading in 1 Cor 2 1) 28 t; chiefly in
Paul (20 or 21 t), but also in one pas-

3. In the sage reported by each of the synopists,
NT and 4+ in Rev. It bears its ancient
. sense of a revealed secret, not its
modern sense of that which cannot be fathomed or
comprehended. (1) In a few passages, it has refer-
ence to a symbol, allegory or parable, which conceals
its meaning from those who look only at the literal
sense, but is the medium of revelation to those who
have the key to its interpretation (cf the rabbinic


2105


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Mystery


use of NT], raza’, and TNO, sodh, “the hidden or
mystic sense’). This meaning appears in Rev 1
20; 175.7; probably also in Eph 5 32, where
Marriage is called “a mystery,” i.e. a symbol to be
allegorically interpreted of Christ and His church.
It also seems implied in the only passage in which
the word is attributed to Our Lord, “Unto you is
given the mystery of the kingdom of God: but
unto them that are without, all things are done in
parables” (Mk 411; cf || Mt 18 11; Lk 8 10).
Here parables are spoken of as a veiled or symbolic
form of utterance which concealed the truth from
those without the kingdom, but revealed it to those
who had the key to its inner meaning (cf Mt 18 35;
Jn 16 29m). (2) By far the most common mean-
ing in the NT is that which is so characteristic of
Paul, viz. a Divine truth once hidden, but now re-
vealed in the gospel. Rom 16 25f might almost
be taken as a definition of it, “According to my
gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according
to the revelation of the mystery which hath been kept
in silence through times eternal, but now is mani-
fested” (cf Col 1 26; Eph 3 3ff). (a) It should
be noted how closely “mystery” is associated with
“revelation” (droxdduyis, apokdlupsis), as well as
with words of similar import, e.g. “‘to make known”
(Eph 19; 3 3.5.10; 6 19), “to manifest” (Col
4 3.4; Rom 16 26; 1 Tim 8 16). ‘Mystery’ and
“revelation” are in fact correlative and almost
synonymous terms. The mysteries of Christianity
are its revealed doctrines, in contrast to the wisdom
of worldly philosophy (see esp. 1 Cor 2 1-16; cf
Mt 11 25f); the point of contrast being, not that
the latter is comprehensible while the former are
obscure, but that the latter is the product of intel-
lectual research, while the former are the result of
Divine revelation and are spiritually discerned.
(6) From this it follows that Christianity has no
secret doctrines, for what was once hidden has now
been revealed. But here arises a seeming contra-
diction. On the one hand, there are passages which
seem to imply a doctrine of reserve. The mystery
revealed to some would seem to be still concealed
from others. The doctrines of Christ and of His
Kingdom are hidden from the worldly wise and the
prudent (Mt 11 25; 1 Cor 2 6 ff), and from all
who are outside the kingdom (Mt 13 11 ff and |),
and there are truths withheld even from Christians
while in an elementary stage of development (1 Cor
3 1ff; He 5 11-14). On the other hand, there
are many passages in which the truths of revelation
are said to be freely and unreservedly communicated
to all (eg. Mt 10 27; 28 19; Acts 20 20.27;
2 Cor 3. 12f; Eph 3 9, “all men”; 6 19f; Col
1 28; 1 Tim 2 4). The explanation is that the
communication is limited, not by any secrecy in the
gospel message itself or any reserve on the part of
the speaker, but by the receptive capacity of the
hearer. In the case of the carnally-minded, moral
obtuseness or worldliness makes them blind to the
light which shines on them (2 Cor 4 2-4). Inthe
case of the “babe in Christ,” the apparent reserve is
due merely to the pedagogical principle of edepne
the teaching to the progressive receptivity o the
disciple (Jn 16 12f). There is no esoteric doctrine
or intentional reserve in the NT. The strong
language in Mt 13 11-15 is due to the Heb mode
of speech by which an actual result is stated as if it
were purposive. (c) What, then, is the content of
the Christian “mystery”? In a wide sense it is the
whole gospel, God’s world-embracing purpose of
redemption through Christ (e.g. Rom 16 25; Eph
6 19; Col 22; 1 Tim 3 9). In a special sense
it is applied to some specific doctrine or aspect of
the gospel, such as the doctrine of the Cross (1 Cor
2 1.7), of the Incarnation (1 Tim 3 16), of the
indwelling of Christ as the pledge of immortality


(Col 1 27), of the temporary unbelief of the Jews
to be followed by their final restoration (Rom 11
25), of the transformation of the saints who will
live to see the Second Advent (1 Cor 15 51), and
of the inclusion of the Gentiles in the gospel sal-
vation (Eph 3 3-6). These are the Divine secrets
now at last disclosed. In direct antithesis to the
Divine mystery is the “mystery of lawlessness”
(2 Thess 2 7) culminating in the coming of the
Antichrist. Here, too, the word means a revealed
secret, only in this case the revelation belongs to
the future (ver 8), though the evil forces which are
to bring about its consummation are already silently
operative. (Besides the references in this para-
graph, the word occurs in 1 Cor 4 1; 13 2; 14 2;
Rev 10 7. It is interesting to note that the Vulg
sometimes renders mustérion by Lat sacramentum,
viz. in Eph 1 9; 3 3.9; 5 32; 1 Tim 3 16; Rev
1 20. This rendering in Eph 5 32 led to the
ecclesiastical doctrine that marriage is a “sacra-


ment.’’)
The question is now frequently discussed, how
far the NT (and esp. Paul) betrays the influence of
the heathen mystery-cults. Hatch
4, The maintains that the Pauline usage of
Pagan the word mustérion is dependent on
Mysteries the LXX, esp. on the Apoc (op. cit.),


and the NT and in this he is followed by Anrich,

who declares that the attempt to trace
an allusion to the Mysteries in the NT is wholly
unsuccessful; but Lightfoot admits a verbal de-
pendence on the pagan Mysteries (Comm. on Col


At present there is a strong tendency to attribute to
Paul far more dependence than one of phraseology only,
and to find in the Mysteries the key to the non-Jewish
side of Paulinism. A. Loisy finds affinity to the mystery-
religions in Paul’s conception of Jesus as a Saviour-God,
holding a place analogous to the deities Mithra, Osiris,
and Attis; in the place Paul assigns to baptism as the
rite of initiation; and in his transformation of the Lord's
Supuer into a symbol of mystic participation in the flesh
and blood of a celestial being and a guaranty of a share
in the blissful immortality of the risen Saviour. “In
its worship as in its belief, Christianity is a religion of
mystery” (art.in Hibbert Journal, October, 1911). Percy
Gardner traces similar analogies to the Mysteries in Paul,
though he finds in these analogies, not conscious plagiar-
ism, but ‘the parallel working of similar forces”’ (Re-
ligious Experience of Paul, chs iv, v). Kirsopp Lake
writes, ‘‘ Christianity has not borrowed from the mystery-
religions, because it was always, at least in Europe,
mystery-religion itself” (The Earlier Epp. of Paul, 215).
On the other hand, Schweitzer wholly denies the hypothe-
sis of the direct or indirect influence of the Mysteries
on Paul’s thought (Geschichte der Paulinischen Forschung).


The whole question is sub judice among scholars,
and until more evidence be forthcoming from in-
scriptions, etc, we shall perhaps vainly expect a
unanimous verdict. It can hardly be doubted that
at least the language of Paul, and perhaps to some
extent his thought, is colored by the phraseology
current among the cults. Paul had a remarkably
sympathetic and receptive mind, by no means
closed to influences from the Gr-Rom environment
of his day.


Witness his use of illustrations drawn from the athletic
festivals, the Gr theater (1 Cor 4 9) and the Rom
camp. He must have heen constantly exposed to the
contagion of the mystic societies. Tarsus was a seat
of the Mithra religion; and the chief centers of Paul's
activities, e.g. Corinth, Antioch and Ephesus, were head-
quarters of mystic religion. We are not surprised that
he should have borrowed from the vocabulary of the
Mysteries, not only the word mustérion, but peuvnuat,
memuemat, ‘'I learned the secret,” lit. “I have been
initiated’' (Phil 4 12); odpaycGecta, sphragtzesthai, “to
be sealed'' (Eph 1 13, etc); réActos, téleios, “perfect,” a
term applied in the Mysteries to the fully instructed
as opposed to novices (1 Cor 2 6.7; Col 1 28, etc) (note,
ue, e of Paul, emdrrar, epdpiai, ‘eye-witnesses,”” 2 Pet

16).


Further, the secret of Paul’s gospel among the
Gentiles lay, humanly speaking, in the fact that it


Mythology
Nabataeans


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2106


contained elements that appealed to what was best
and most vital in contemporary thought; and
doubtless the Mysteries, by transcending all lines
of mere citizenship, prepared the way for the uni-
versal religion. On the other hand, we must beware
of a too facile acceptance of this hypothesis in its
extreme form. Christianity can be adequately ex-
plained only by reference, not to what it had in
common with other religions, but to what was dis-
tinctive and original init. Paul was after alla Jew
(though a broad one), who always retained traces
of his Pharisaic training, and who viewed idolatry
with abhorrence; and the chief formative factor of
his thinking was his own profound religious expe-
rience. It is inconceivable that such a man should
so assimilate gentile modes of thought as to be com-
pletely colored by them. The characteristics which
his teaching has in common with the pagan religions
are simply a witness to the common religious wants
of mankind, and not to his indebtedness to them.


What turned these religions into Mysteries was the |


secrecy of their rites; but in the NT there are no
secret rites. The gospel ‘mystery’ (as we have
seen) is not a secret deliberately withheld from the
multitude and revealed only to a privileged religious
aristocracy, but something which was once a secret
and is sono longer. The perfect openness of Christ
and His apostles sets them in a world apart from
the mystic schools. It is true that later the Mys-


N


NAAM, na’am (DY3, na‘am): A son of Caleb
(1 Ch 4 15).


NAAMAH, na’a-ma ("O92 , na‘dmah, “‘pleasant”’;
Noepa, Noemd):

(1) Daughter of Lamech and Zillah, and sister
of Tubal-cain (Gen 4 22; cf Jos, Ant, I, ii, 2).

(2) An Ammonitish woman whom Solomon
married, and who became the mother of Rehoboam
(1 K 14 21; 2 Ch 12 13). According to an addi-
tion in LXX following 1 K 12 24, “her name was
Naaman, the daughter of Ana [Hanun] son of Na-
hash, king of the sons of Ammon” (see Benzinger,
Kénige, in loc.).


NAAMAH:
(1) One of a group of 16 lowland (Shephelah)
cities forming part of Judah’s inheritance (Josh 15


41).
(2) The home of Zophar, one of Job’s friends
(Job 2 11, etc). See Naamaruire.


NAAMAN, na’a-man (JAY, na‘dman, “pleasant-
ness”; LXX BA, Nawmdév, Neimdn; so WH in
the NT; TR, Neémdn):

(1) A successful Syrian general, high in the con-
fidence and esteem of the king of Syria, and honored
by his fellow-countrymen as their deliverer (2 K
6 1-27). Afflicted with leprosy, he heard from a
Heb slave-maid in his household of the wonder-
working powers of an Israelitish prophet. Sent
by his master with a letter couched in somewhat
peremptory terms to the king of Israel, he came
to Samaria for healmg. The king of Israel was
filled with suspicion and alarm by the demands of
the letter, and rent his clothes; but Elisha the
prophet intervened, and sent word to Naaman
that he must bathe himself seven times in the Jor-
dan. He at first haughtily resented the humil-
iation and declined the cure; but on the remon-
strance of his attendants he yielded and obtained
cleansing. At once he returned to Samaria, testi-


teries exercised a great influence on ecclesiastical
doctrine and practice, esp. on baptism and the
Eucharist (see Hatch, Hibbert Lects, ch x). But
in the NT, acts of worship are not as yet regarded
as mystic rites. The most we can say is that some
NT writers (esp. Paul) make use of expressions and
analogies derived from the mystery-religions; but,
so far as our present evidence goes, we cannot agree
that the pagan cults exercised a central or formative
influence on them.


LiteratuRE.—There is a large and growing lit. on this
subject. Its modern scientific study began with C. A.
Lobeck’s Aglaophamus(1829). The following recent works
may be specially mentioned: Gustav Anrich, Das antike
Mysterienwesen (1894); G. Wobbermin, Religtongeschicht-
liche Studien zur Frage, etc (1896); E. Hatch, Essays in
Bib. Gr (1889) and Hibbert Lects, 1888 (pub. 1890); F. B.
Jevons, AnIniro tothe History of Religion (1896); S. Chee-
tham, The Mysteries, Pagan and Christian (1897), R. Reit-
zenstein, Die hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen (1910);
P. Gardner, The Religious Experience of Paul (1911); K.
Lake, The Earlier Epp. of Paul (1911); arts. on ‘‘Mys-
tery”’ in Enc Brit, ed 9 (W. M. Ramsay), and ed 11 (L. R.
Farnell), EB (A. Jiilicher), HDB (A. Stewart), 1-vol HDB
(G. G. Findlay), DCG (R. W. Bacon); arts.on hvorjproy in
Cremer and Grimm-Thayer NT Lezicons; the comms.,
including J. B. Lightfoot on Col, J. Armitage Robinson
on Eph, H. Lietzmann on 1 Cor; 9 arts. in Ezpos on “St
Paul and the Mystery Religions’’ by Professor H. A.A.
Kennedy (April, 1912, to February, 1913).

D. Miautt Evwarps

MYTHOLOGY, mi-thol’é-ji. See Fania; Bapy-
LONIA AND ASSYRIA, RELIGION OF; GREECE, RELI-


GION OF.


fied his gratitude by the offer of large gifts to
the prophet, confessed his faith in Elisha’s God,
and sought leave to take home with him enough
of the soil of Canaan for the erection of an altar
to Jeh.

The narrative is throughout consistent and natu-
ral, admirably and accurately depicting the con-
dition of the two kingdoms at the time. The char-
acter of Naaman is at once attractive and manly.
His impulsive patriotic preference for thestreams of
his own land does not lessen the reader’s esteem for
him, and the favorable impression is deepened by
his hearty gratitude and kindness.

The Israelitish king is most probably Jehoram,
son of Ahab, and the Syrian monarch Ben-hadad II.
Jos (Ant, VIII, xv, 5) identifies Naaman with the
man who drew his bow at a venture, and gave Ahab
his death wound (1 K 22 34). There is one ref-
erence to Naaman in the NT. In Lk 4 27, Jesus,
rebuking Jewish exclusiveness, mentions “Naaman
the Syrian.”

(2) A son of Benjamin (Gen 46 21.6). Fuller
and more precise is the description of Nu 26 38.40,
where he is said to be a son of Bela and grandson of
Benjamin (see also1 Ch 8 3f). Joun A. Lens


NAAMATHITE, ni3/a-ma-thit,+ nd-am’a-thit
OM 23 , na‘démathi, “a dweller in Naaman’; 6 M[e}i-
valov Barres, ho Mlelinaton basileds): The de-
seription of Zophar, one of Job’s friends (Job
2 11; 11 1; 20 1, etc). Naamah is too com-
mon a place-name to permit of the identification
of Zophar’s home; LXX renders “king of the
Minaeans.”’


NAAMITE, na/a-mit ("AI3N, ha-na'émi, “the
Naamite’”): A family which traced its descent from
Naaman (Nu 26 40). See Naaman, (2).


NAARAH, né/a-ra (192, na'érah, “a girl’):
One of the two wives of Asbhur, father of Tekoa
(1 Ch 4 5).


M4 igphars reer
2 fe rele


ht
:


Ei
rf


bat tial a seal &
AtpuitaGredte Hi iS
' . si mt ip +} ty rT eh it
iat if ‘ au Hh bis! i H i


:
i


oa
Sere pertereett oars
psa nae cna annem Smee ta
(facet oe . ae ary
me acer ae tas aol ote


es + gE ie f
“Se qn: Bai rest 5


Tee


Ae’


a ma i
aces


Sor -, 4


Pheri
rata
miner
